PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - THIRD MEETINGWEDNESDAY , 25 JANUARY 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6983Wednesday, 25 January 20233. To evaluate the status and safety of savers’ money in the Fund;4. To examine the extent of stakeholder engagement in decision making at the Fund; 5. To inquire into any other matters incidental thereto  -She appoints the following people - if I read your name, you stand up:1. Hon. Karim Masaba (Independent, Industrial Division, Mbale City)- Member2. Hon. Kakembo Michael (NUP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso) – Member3. Hon. Rose Nantongo Fortunate (DP, Woman Representative Kyotera) – Member4. Hon. Laura Kanushu (NRM, PWD Representative) – Member5. Hon. Kankunda Amos Kibwika (NRM, Rwampara County Rwampara) – Member6. Hon. Bakkabulindi Charles (NRM, Workers Representative) – Member7. Hon. Mwine Mpaka Rwamirama (NRM, Mbarara South Division, Mbarara City) – Chairperson.”They are supposed to report back within one month. I am told the party whips were consulted; so, that is it on that point.IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 7TH SITTING - THIRD MEETINGParliament met at 2.15 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I welcome you to today’s sitting. Yesterday, we left late; we had a lot of business, but I am glad you remained here for long to ensure that we complete the business that we had.I have just received a communication from the Rt Hon. Speaker on the issue of the Select Committee to investigate the National Social Security Fund (NSSF).The terms of reference for the select committee are - if I could read it the way it has been given to me: “On Thursday, 19 January 2023, the House resolved to institute a Select Committee to inquire into the National Social Security Fund (NSSF). Below are its terms of reference: 1. To examine corporate governance structures at the National Social Security Fund;2. To examine the circumstances surrounding the appointment of the Fund’ s Managing Director;PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6984STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT [The Deputy Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRHonourable colleagues, join me in congratulating His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda and the companies in the oil and gas sector, for launching oil drilling in the Hoima Graben. We are all looking forward to this and I want to take this opportunity to thank the Parliament for playing its role. Now, the bigger role we have is oversight on this, to ensure that this oil does not turn into a curse but rather an opportunity for this country. I request the committees responsible to ensure that you do your oversight role effectively. The President launched the activities yesterday in Kikuube District. Let us continue to work together so that we can have our first oil as projected by Government in 2025. Honourable colleagues, as you may all be aware, the NRA Liberation Day will be tomorrow, 26 January. It is the date when the NRA fighters led by His Excellency, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni in 1986, won the five-year guerilla bush war that liberated Ugandans from the tyrannical regimes at the time.The theme for this year’s celebrations is, “Our Resolute Effort to Transform Uganda is a Promise We Shall Fulfill .” The venue for the official celebration will be at Kakeeka Playground, Kakumiro Town Council in Kakumiro District. His Excellency the President, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, will be the chief guest. I implore you, colleagues, to attend. It is a public holiday. Let us all go to Kakumiro to celebrate with fellow Ugandans. Colleagues, there is a record I want to correct and that is why we have the Hansard. When compiling the Hansard and tallying the votes that each one recorded, we found a small error from what I had announced here, as the Clerk had given them to me.We do not have very clear rules, which provide for correction of such in terms of the House, apart from going through the motion. I have invoked rule 228(2) of the Rules of Procedure because under rule 282(1), the Clerk is mandated to ensure that he gets a correct record of the Hansard. Then, under subrule 2, the Clerk does it on the directive of the Speaker. Therefore, basing on that, I want to correct the record to read as follows:On advice of the Clerk, after going through the Hansard and looking at how each Member voted, the official record, after combing through the Hansard, is: The “Yes” votes - 349The “No” votes - 4 The “Abstain” votes - 3. Therefore, I want that captured very well on the record.Colleagues, most of you are on social media. Today, after what we discussed here for a short time, I received a barrage of messages from very many parents regarding the issue of homosexuality. What I thought I knew, I am really shocked. To my shock, I received the news that Kasese Municipal Council attempted to pass a bylaw that recognises homosexuals and transgender people as minorities.It first came to me on social media. I did the verification, my office called the clerk and called the CAO, and we confirmed it. This was brought with the clearance of the Executive, brought by the Speaker of Kasese District.I want to make this very clear to all local governments in the country that there is no local government that can pass a bylaw that contravenes national laws; that is repugnant. (Applause)I have - and this is a very serious warning - I want the Minister of Local Government to train these people because it is embarrassing.I have gotten information that the council was being facilitated by an NGO called Human Rights Promotion Awareness Forum. They are 6985THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 JANUARY 2023going around the whole country using local governments. I am trying to access some other records that they have sent me, which I have managed to get formally. The motion was sponsored by a group coordinated by a one Bob Kyamanywa.I have the contacts and I am going to pass them on to the Minister of Internal Affairs. Luckily, the Secretary for Production in that council is the one who saved the day and said, “This council cannot pass laws that are in contravention of national rules.” This is something, which had already passed the Executive level, got space and undergone the first reading and second reading. It was moving at a terrible speed in the district. When it first appeared on social media, I took it lightly. I called my people to verify and they were saying, “save us.” Honourable member, the clerk and your people from Kasese said, “Save us, these people have a lot of money.” Honourable colleagues, I want to alert you that attempts are being made from all corners because the money from these groups seems to be a lot.In addition, this is not a simple fight; it is not for the faint-hearted. They are going to target us by all means and they will try to tarnish your name. They will try to threaten you that you will not get visas, but the main visa you have as a Ugandan is being a Ugandan. Therefore, no one should threaten you on such matters. Please, stand firm. (Applause)Minister of Local Government, please, the route they have taken – And how they brought the one of Kasese, they said they want all these people to be able to get medication; HIV/AIDS drugs in health centres. When I read the motion, it really shocked me. I would like the Minister of Internal Affairs to seriously take up this matter with this NGO and follow the due process as provided for with the NGO Board. The Minister of Local Government should formally give a statement on this matter of Kasese because as a minister, you get documents formally. They need to be laid here and we look into this. That is my communication, honourable members.2.29MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue of homosexuality is a serious one. Yesterday, I was talking about an NGO calling itself the Key Populations Consortium Uganda Limited.This NGO, at the time of registration, indicated the activities that they were supposed to do in this country and it is registered by the Uganda Registration Services Bureau. Unfortunately, it is actually involved in the promotion of homosexuality. As the Ministry of Health, we have defined what key populations are in this country and these include the boda bodas, the fisherfolk and the long distance truck drivers. We have no space for anybody who goes against the order of nature. (Applause)Mr Speaker, we will wait for the minister to bring that statement. I received that document from a concerned parent who shared it with me. I thank you for bringing up the issue of the attempt in Kasese to pass this. They are using these NGOs to reach down to the grassroots promoting health, but at the end of it, they are doing something else. I call upon colleagues to please check on what activities these people are doing in your districts. Secondly, Mr Speaker, you talked about the NRM day. I congratulate the NRM Government for attaining its 37th birthday under the selected theme. When you talk about transforming our country, we should leave no one behind. However, as the Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA), we facilitated the Markets Bill, which was passed by this House in October. We have clear rules as to how long these Bills can be with the President. This Bill was intended to help the majority of the people in the market who are women.Unfortunately, the Bill is still with the President and I want to request you that, maybe, you need to write a reminder. The last time this matter 6986STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT [Ms Opendi] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRwas raised, the Attorney-General indicated that he did not know. I plead that this matter, together with the Pensions (Amendment) Bill, be handled. We will appreciate it if those two Bills fast-tracked. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Opendi, on that issue, yesterday, I compiled a list of all the pending Bills where we have not yet received responses. I shared it with the Attorney- General who has shared it with the President. Today, he indicated to me that next week, we should be getting all these out of the way. I was already taking it up because it is a point of concern. (Applause) We need to always have timelines followed, especially those, which are Statutory. 2.33MR MOSES OKOT (FDC, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I associate myself with colleagues in their submission over today’s and yesterday’s statements. Going further in advancing the arguments, the repugnancy doctrine is very much rooted in our legal system. For any legislation to be made, it must conform to the main grand norm and that is our Constitution. A violation of the same would be a nullity.Mr Speaker, yesterday, we were informed of the anti-gay Bill that became shelved in our courts of law. We are aware that it was shelved because of lack of forum. Why is it that this Parliament is not moving ahead to create the intended forum and re-introduce the Bill to the House for enactment? We are proceeding on a wild goose chase, a fishing expedition without a legal regime that can protect all the measures that we are making in Parliament. Otherwise, we shall be doomed if we continue at the rate in which we are projecting. Thank you very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Your point is well noted, honourable. I will be giving you a response. I had allowed Kasese.2.34MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It did not occur to me that I would stand on this Floor to respond to an issue that I absolutely have no idea about. However, as a Member of the Kasese family, I take your guidance, Mr Speaker. And as a representative of Kasese community, I would like to make it crystal clear that the purported bylaw is not a position of the Kasese community or even the district.I wish the MP for Kasese Municipality was in the House, but he is together with the Committee on Health back home trying to pursue matters that relate to our community. Kasese District is a highly religious district. We are law-abiding citizens and peace-loving Ugandans. We also know that we have one Constitution that we pay allegiance to.I would like to imagine that probably, it was an oversight, but as community leaders, we do not take this lightly. We will get deep down to the community. I have not heard any one of our bishops or even the district Khadi support anything that contravenes the Constitution. I give assurance to my fellow citizens that Kasese, as part of Uganda, upholds a value system and I do not want that to define or describe the people of Kasese. I know that my district chairperson, the Resident District Commissioner, my fellow MPs and the entire Kasese leadership will dive into this. We will give you maximum cooperation to ensure that this does not become the identity of the people of Kasese. So, we completely disassociate ourselves from the events.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, when you are doing all those arrangements, you can also involve Hon. Sarah Opendi because she is the chairperson of UWOPA. 2.38THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Victoria Businge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a mother and an 6987THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 JANUARY 2023obedient citizen, I condemn the homosexuality practice because in the first place, it breaks the law and it is hurting to our upcoming generation. The testimonies of those who have gone through it are worrying and hurting. It needs a concerted effort of every citizen to fight homosexuality, which seems to be rampant. Today morning, one of the forums of Kabarole was condemning Members of Parliament who do not attend district councils. I wish to appeal to all of us to take district councils as a very important matter. I have been quarrelling because our councils, on three consecutive times, have been scheduled on a Monday, yet they know that I am not able because of the Cabinet meeting. If Members of Parliament were in this council, things would not have been what they came up with because they would advise, caution, condemn and refuse the act of passing that illegal bylaw.Colleagues, it is our responsibility to attend councils; if we are very busy, one of us should attend in order to guide and to capture what is happening in our councils.Uganda is no longer regulating the establishment of NGOs and that is why they are hiding at the grassroots where they know poverty is biting and people will appreciate because their children are given fees and some adults or upcoming youths are given what to survive on. We need active participation of police when they are tipped off. Corruption is one of the things encouraging homosexuality because even if people get reports, they keep quiet. Parliament should debate these issues and come up with something very reprimanding to deter this bad habit. Finally, the Ministry of Local Government tendered in -(Interruption)MR KABERUKA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the honourable minister is alluding to the fact that probably, if Members of Parliament were attending the councils, they could have mitigated the escalation and the stage at which that motion had reached.I grew through the ranks of the local government. Once the local governments do not take a critical position of inducting members of councils, we will have a lot of messes in those districts and lower government councils. Whenever we want to cut money, we cut the money to induct councils and therefore, most of the councils are ignorant of the laws. Madam Minister, please, take it upon yourself - and even this House - as we are processing the budget, consider induction of councils and their staff to make sure they do us a good job in the local governments. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, conclude.MS VICTORIA BUSINGE: In conclusion, that was my fourth point - that we as Minister of Local Government budgeted for induction of all the councils, but this was removed. We got a letter from Mr Ramathan Ggoobi informing us that there was no money for induction. I will lay that letter here. Members, when we are budgeting, we need support because - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Please, you are taking my time.MS VICTORIA BUSINGE: Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Local Government is willing and in the last financial year, we inducted some of your councils. Where do we get help from? We need this help so that when our budgets are set, we are given the money.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, take your seat. We shall be discussing the National Budget Framework Paper. You can raise your issues around that time. We are using one minute each on matters of national importance.2.44MR ALEX KINTU (NRM, Kagoma North County, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise under Rule 64 of the Rules of Procedure to raise a matter of national importance concerning 105 children that have died under an unqualified foreign medical worker. I will not give the 6988STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT [Mr Kintu] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRbackground, but just briefly. We have had a non-qualified medical worker in Jinja, under “Serving His Children” centre for children. There is one case of an American missionary who has been conducting a centre as medical workers with a non-qualified medical team. This charity organisation has caused a lot of –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, switch on the microphone and conclude. MR KINTU: I will go to the prayers, Mr Speaker. The prayers are;1. That the Ministry of Internal Affairs carries out a comprehensive investigation into this.2. That the Ministry of Health takes this as a serious concern to save – because we do not have any formal report from the Government. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Health - 2.46THE MINISTER OF STATE OF FOR HEALTH (GENRAL DUTIES) (Ms Anifa Bangirana): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I take the concern raised by Hon. Brandon Kintu on the death of 105 children in the hands of unqualified medical workers. It is very unfortunate.This morning, I took responsibility to call Jinja District Health Officer. He assured me that they did not have any report on such an incident. However, now that the honourable member has made it clearer that it is a NGO we shall take his prayers very seriously and we do a comprehensive investigation. Personally, I undertake that I will move closely with the MP and visit this NGO in the very near future. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when do you think you can report back here?MS KAWOOYA: In two weeks. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. The two weeks are granted. MS KAWOOYA: Thank you. 2.47MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Mr Speaker, I rise on an issue of national importance in regard to lack of medical services at the health centre IV level in Isingiro South. Isingiro South is a constituency that has seven subcounties. Out of these, only three have health centres III, leaving the rest of the population unserved. This has been very disturbing in as far as the health of our people, especially the women and the children, is concerned. Mr Speaker, this constituency is a very heavily populated area with a population oscillating between 230,000 and 250,000 people. My prayers, Mr Speaker, are; 1. That the Ministry of Health takes cognisance of this urgent request for a health centre – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, just go to prayers.MR BYARUGABA:  That is what I am talking about, Mr Speaker. My prayers are;2. That the ministry takes interest in ensuring that Isingiro South gets a health centre IV like many other constituencies, as is contained in the policy statement. 3. That an upgrade of health centres III – I have seven subcounties and only three subcounties have health centres III and the third one is actually in the Oruchinga refugee settlement area. The rest do not have any health centre III operational. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister for health - 6989THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 JANUARY 20232.49THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Anifa Bangirana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take concern of the Member and I want to report that I had a phone call with Hon. Alex Byarugaba as I was in touch with the District Health Officer of Isingiro District, in particular, on the issue of Isingiro South. Isingiro South was curved out of Isingiro West. So, Isingiro West is where the original health centre IV remained, leaving Isingiro South without a health centre IV . It is a policy that we should be having a health centre III in every subcounty and a health centre IV in every constituency. However, due to funds – and we have been here - I want to put it right again that I checked with the population officer of Isingiro and they told me that Nyakitunda’s population is 125,688 and the policy is known. However, Mr Speaker, like you are aware, even in your own constituency, we have lists for all within the current policy that, as a ministry, we would want to see that they are upgraded to health centres III and health centres IV – knowing that we do not have enough funds for the districts. Once we get this funding, however, I still take charge to keep in touch with the Member to find out whether the requirements have been put in place and, then, we will put it into consideration. However, we want to finish those we have started. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Kahonda?  2.54CAPT. (RTD) DONONZIO KAHONDA (NRM, Ruhinda South County, Mitooma): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the non-payment of employees of Posta Uganda. As you are aware, Posta Uganda is a Government parastatal and wage takes a first call on the expenditure of every entity. Mr Speaker, in this regard, I want to bring it to the attention of this House that some of these employees were last paid in May 2022. It was on this note that the Managing Director (MD) of Posta Uganda, through his official email, wrote to all staff that the money that had been paid was for May for the senior cadres and December for the lower cadres. In this regard, Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the emails from the MD of Posta Uganda – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First, do you prayers and then, you can lay. CAPT. (RTD) KAHONDA: My prayers, Mr Speaker, are:1. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should update this House on all the monies that were released to Posta Uganda.2. That the Minister of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance updates this Parliament on why these employees were not paid their salaries. Mr Speaker, these employees were even paid segregatively.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you are going into details which we cannot handle here.CAPT. (RTD) KAHONDA: Those are my prayers, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Come and lay the document on Table. CAPT. (RTD ) KAHONDA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the official email from the Accounting Officer of Posta Uganda, addressed to all staff of Posta Uganda, which was sent on the 3rd of December, which was a Saturday, at 1.32.03 p.m. (Laughter) I beg to lay. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister?6990STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR2.54THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIV ATISATION AND INVESTMENT) (Ms Evelyn Anite): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since the honourable has been very detailed, specific and clear, I commit that you allow me come on Wednesday, also, with a very elaborate and detailed report on the status. 2.55MR PETERKHEN LOCHAP (NRM, Bokora East County, Napak): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the issue of incomplete construction of valley tanks in Kokeris Village, Lotome Subcounty in Napak District. The water situation in this subcounty is very bad and the livestock move for more than 20 kilometres in search of water and risking insecurity from cattle rustlers. Another complaint is that animals get lost. My prayers: 1.  The Minister of Agriculture should task the contractor to go and redo the shoddy work.2.  The relevant state organs should investigate this issue where the contractor was paid all the money yet shoddy work was done. I beg to submit. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government -2.57THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Denis Obua): Mr Speaker, first of all, I want to thank the honourable member from Karamoja for raising that very important subject matter. My office undertakes to inform the Minister of Agriculture to act in accordance with the prayers of the Member. I also undertake - if the Member could furnish my office with some documentation within his reach - to write to the Director CID to institute a criminal investigation. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. This is a matter to which you do not need to report back here. It is a matter where we need action on the ground. Then, once you fail, that is when the Member can come back here. 2.58MS JENIFFER AYOO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalaki): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the Abalang-Idamakan-Surambaya Road. In this financial year, my district received Shs 360 million for the rehabilitation of this road and the works kicked off immediately. To my surprise, before the road was even commissioned for use by the public, we got an outcry from the community and as a committee on the roads committee, we visited only to find that all the bridges were broken down; the road is impassable. The road is in a worse condition than it was before prayers. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Prayers? MS JENIFFER AYOO: My prayer - Mr Speaker, from them  - (Laughter) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, we have got the story that you have a bad road. What do you want Government to do?MS JENIFFER AYOO: We have the police and the State House Anti-corruption Unit that was handling this matter, in September. However, up to now, we do not have a report. They tasked the engineers from the ministry to go and have an independent investigation on this matter, but up to date, we have not yet received a report. Therefore, my prayer is that the ministry takes this matter as urgent as it sounds and provide us with a report so that we can have these people helped. Currently, Ogwolo Subcounty is cut off from Anyara Subcounty, yet Ogwolo Subcounty has no health facility. They -(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, they should come and work on your road because getting a report without working on the road will not help your people. 6991THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 JANUARY 2023Honourable members, you see, when you have - it has been difficult for me, like being between a hard place and a rock. I try to explain to you when you come to my office; “This does not fit to be a matter of national importance - this is a very urgent matter; it fits”, but you explain to a colleague and you observe that a colleague feels like you are victimising them and they say “You do not want me to speak for my people; Mr Speaker, you are squeezing us”. Now, we come here and spend two hours on matters of national importance. That is why I am giving you one minute so that you can go straight to the point. I do not know why you even first say “I stand up on a matter of national importance”. That is the session we are in and you are repeating yourself. You should go straight to the point and you make your prayers and the minister responds. Otherwise, when I was doing five questions, I would allow two or three minutes. Now, I will go back to five questions only.3.01THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Denis Obua): Mr Speaker, the road the honourable member is talking about leads to Alebtong from Kalaki. So, I am equally affected. I undertake to notify the Minister of Works and Transport to come and explain to Parliament what transpired on this road, with the view of rectifying what has gone wrong. Thank you.3.02MR ABDU ADIDWA (Independent, Bukooli South County, Namayingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on the matter concerning the Namutumba-Bulange-Bugiri-Muterere and Nakivumbi-Bugiri-Namayingo Road, which connects Busoga and Bukedi districts to Lake Victoria for economic reasons. Mr Speaker, Government promised to upgrade those roads from gravel to tarmac in the manifesto of the 2011 Presidential campaigns. This was the main reason our people voted the ruling government. Mr Speaker, today, the mentioned roads are rugged, tattered and they cannot enable an ambulance during the rainy season to fetch sick persons from their homes to the health facilities for treatment.My prayers: 1. They said that roads should be included in the docket of the Prime Minister. 2. Traffic lights, a fly-over and a roundabout should be set up at the juncture of Namayingo and Lumino to reduce the accidents that have already claimed 10 Ugandans, including one teacher since 2019. I rest my case.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government -3.04THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Denis Obua): Mr Speaker, as a matter of fact and principle, I know that a number of roads have been earmarked under NDP III to be upgraded, funds permitting. However, as stated by the honourable member, if this is part of those roads earmarked to be upgraded, the Ministry of Works will be moved to come and explain to this House on the state of affairs. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Gorreth Namugga-3.05MS GORRETH NAMUGGA (NUP, Mawogola County South, Ssembabule): Mr Speaker, my matter is about the heavy rains that destroyed close to 10 villages. My poor are left homeless and my prayer is that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister should move to Mawogola in Ssembabule District and give our people food, iron sheets and cement. Mr Speaker, it has become a routine for the Prime Minister to only give beans and posho to the people in disaster. This time, I call upon the Prime Minister to give beyond mere food and other common items. Thank you. 6992STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister for Disaster, they want cement. 3.05THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Ms Esther Anyakun): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank my colleague for raising this issue. We are very much aware that we have issues of finances. The best we can do to respond to instant disaster needs is to give relief. When you talk about cement, that is long term. We have ministries that do development projects, not the disaster ministry. The policy has changed, honourable members. We only give iron sheets to institutions that have been affected by the disasters, not to households. We are here in the budgeting season. All that the ministry needs is for you to support the Office of the Prime Minister. We should be able to support your schools and other non-food items, but not cement.3.06MS CHRISTINE NANDAGIRE  (NUP, Bukomansimbi County North, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Namugga is my neighbour and we are affected by the same issue. That is what I had brought to your office. Honourable minister, the heavy rains and hailstorm affected over six villages in my district. I would like to the Minister for Disaster Preparedness to give our residents shelter and food. After all, three children are admitted in hospitals and they are in a critical condition. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when you were responding, you did not say what you are going to do for the people in Hon. Namugga’s constituency. After refusing to give her cement, at least, give her posho and beans. MS ANYAKUN: Mr Speaker, we shall send an assessment team to see the institution she is talking about. We will then be able to support.About the food items, just as I have been communicating on this Floor, we get assessment reports from the Chief Administrative Officer who is the chairman of the District Disaster Committee. Once we get that report, we should be able to support. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, follow up with the minister. 3.08MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My issue is about the withdrawal process initiated by UNHCR over the staff under their payroll in schools and health centres under the support for refugees-hosting communities. Government has not shared a repatriation plan with us. The refugees are still with us and we need the schools and the health centres. My prayers are:1. The minister in charge of refugees’ affairs should ensure that this process is halted. Schools are beginning next month yet already, they are withdrawing their officers; and2. The honourable ministers should report to this House. Thank you. 3.09THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Anifa Bangirana): Thank you, Mr Speaker . I take the concern on behalf of the Minister of Health because the honourable member raised the issue of donors withdrawing personnel from health centres. It is very unfortunate that some partners have scaled down the support due to inadequate and insufficient money. However, the ministry is engaging the district locals that are hosting the refugees. Good enough, I have visited all the eight districts that host the refugees. I understand the areas better - the ministry will continue engaging 6993THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 JANUARY 2023these donors to ensure service delivery is not discontinued. At another stage, we shall come to ask for support in case the donors completely withdraw. Otherwise, we are in touch with the local administration. Thank you. 3.10MR TOM AZA  (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have issues of insecurity along the common border between Uganda and South Sudan whereby a whole Chief of the Mangalotore, who came as a refugee and settled in a place called Kerwa Subcounty, was gunned down by somebody coming from Sudan. Our prayers are:1. May the Minister of Internal Affairs provide us with more policemen and military men to patrol the common border points;2.  Can we have more detaches of the police and army men along the border so that we can have security;3. May Government embark on disarmament of the people of – (Member timed out)3.11THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Ms Esther Anyakun): Thank you, my senior. For sure, we have been working very well together with the Minister of Internal Affairs to ensure we have security in all the refugee settlements. Most of the security, which is attached to the settlements is being facilitated separately by UNHCR to ensure they have an added allowance. (Hon. Olanya rose)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister has just started speaking - no, the clarification should be from her submission. Yesterday, you were the acting Leader of the Opposition and did very well . (Laughter)MS ANYAKUN: Honourable member, we shall expedite the issues raised together with the RDC and be able to help.3.12MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Mr Speaker, the Agricultural Cluster projects and UgIFT projects under Ministry of Education and Sports; and ACDP, under Ministry of Agriculture, have stalled in various parts of the country. I am here to demand that the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Agriculture should bring a status report stating why the projects have stalled. Secondly, there is non-compliance with the Physical Planning Act that was amended. The minister, under the law, is supposed to bring a report to Parliament, but he has not done that. The Auditor-General is supposed to audit the National Physical Board and bring a report here. All these things have not been done. I am here to request that you direct the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to comply. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Lands, you are hereby directed. 3.14THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will comply with your guidance and directive to bring the report on UgIFT to the Floor as requested by the Member. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, how long do you think you need? MR OGWANG: Mr Speaker, give me two weeks. I will be able to deliver that report. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Two weeks granted.MR OGWANG: Thank you. 6994STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT3.14MR IBANDA RWEMULIKYA (Indepen-dent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter regarding Bw-eramule Government-aided Secondary School. This school was grant-aided by Government in the Financial Year 2019/2020, but it lacks structures.  In the Financial Year 2021/2022, I wrote to the ministry and they responded that they would consider it. However, we were left out in the last financial year and we are not anywhere even in the coming financial year. Students are studying under semi-permanent structures that were constructed by the community, but they are in a sorry state; soon, they will collapse, endangering the lives of our young ones. My prayers:1.  The Ministry of Education should send a technical team to Ntoroko District with a view of getting remedies;2. The ministry, in this coming financial year, should consider this school because students are learning in a very terrible situation. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay these documents; the correspondence with the ministry. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you do not need -MR RWEMULIKYA: There are some photos of the current structures - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister is here and you have laid them before the minister. MR RWEMULIKYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  It is much better. Let him go with the record. Honourable minister -3.16THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank Hon. Ibanda. First of all, I have picked the information that he has given me. I am going to take this to the ministry, follow up and look at our budget line for purposes of seeing how Government can support this seed secondary school like any other seed secondary school we are supporting in the country. I thank you.3.17MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, the former President of FDC, Dr Kiiza Besigye and the National Unity Platform President, Hon. Robert Kyagulanyi were stopped by the police and the army from participating in a meeting at a hotel in Kampala. Mr Speaker, you may recall that on 26 March 2020, section 8 of the Public Order Management Act that required the public or any leader to seek permission from the IGP was dismissed as unconstitutional, null, void and of no effect. My concern is that even when this was done, the police continue to use it. My prayers are:1. May the Minister of Internal Affairs brief the House under which law such meetings are required to seek prior authorisation from the IGP;2. Since I heard the Police spokesperson saying there is a terrorism threat in Kampala, may the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs brief this House if terrorism threats are only targeting Opposition leaders in Uganda. Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Internal Affairs, on Wednesday, please, come with a response to this issue on the Floor.6995THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 JANUARY 20233.19MR XA VIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter of national importance I am raising relates to the social and economic unrest being experienced by my people as a result of their crops being sprayed and destroyed. In the year 2000, the army leadership gave land to the people surrounding Bihanga Army Barracks and they started cultivating it. To that effect, we thank Government for that mercy.However, late last year, without notice, people’s crops were sprayed and destroyed; they are languishing without food. My prayers are:1. Those whose gardens were not destroyed, but are being denied access be allowed access to harvest their crops. 2. Those whose gardens were destroyed be given food relief by Government, financial relief to take their children to school and to enable basic needs and also be provided with seeds for planting for the next season in their own gardens. I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Defence was around. Government Chief Whip, take up this matter.3.20THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua): Mr Speaker, I commit to relay this information, as raised by the Member, to the Minister of Defence and Veterans Affairs for appropriate action.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, let me do something very unorthodox. We have a Deputy CDF and this is an issue of the UPDF. Deputy CDF, my brother, the army gave land to the people of Bihanga to use around 10 years ago and they have been using it. However, from nowhere and without any warning, they started spraying and destroying the crops. The honourable colleague needs your intervention. I am sure Hon. Oboth does not have more details than the Deputy CDF. Can you volunteer? You see, he cannot be compelled - Please colleagues, I cannot compel a Member to speak. I can only request him to volunteer if he can help on this matter or promise to take action.3.22LT GEN. PETER ELWELU (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to consult and then, we can sort it. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That is a good one, honourable. However, most importantly, this is an issue where we do not need to report back here. Hon. Kyooma is your colleague; please, take up the matter with the Army leadership and ensure that you help him out.  3.23MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago North County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance about the insecurity in Agago District.Two weeks ago, a group of warriors came. One of the LC III Chairpersons from Kotido District called the Chairperson of Paimol Subcounty, informing him that his people were coming to graze their animals and to look for water in our area; Agago North County. On arrival, they gunned down three UPDF soldiers. Yesterday, they came in the night and assaulted a woman from Omia Pachwa in Agago North County. The woman was beaten badly and they used a bayonet to pierce her. They again killed three UPDF soldiers. In the process, the UPDF put one of them out of action and recovered a gun.The other ones who killed three UPDF soldiers took off with the guns. When they realised that COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6996STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT [Mr Okot]COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRthe situation could turn bad on their side, they threw the guns by the roadside.Mr Speaker, the situation of insecurity is going to increase in the area because those warriors have animals and on the side of Agago North County, there is some pasture and water. When they come, they come with guns.My prayers are:1. Our colleagues, UPDF representatives who are here in Parliament should take keen interest in this matter. We have tried our best. We have been writing letters and gone to the ministry and even on this Floor of Parliament. Now that they are part of us and they are also Members of Parliament, they are here. The Deputy CDF is also here. Why don’t they take interest and move with us to the area? They should also talk to the UPDF who are on the frontline of the operation. It is as if they are also demoralised.2.  Members of Parliament who come from the two subregions; Acholi and Karamoja Subregion, should take a deliberate plan and move as a team and talk to this community. By doing that, it is going to reinforce and bring that kind of relationship building also, especially those who do not want to take up the matter in a good way. If the chairperson can take a step to call a counterpart in another subregion and alert him that his people are coming to graze. When they come with guns, the leadership from those two sides can intervene in the matter to solve the problem. Mr Speaker, people are running away from their homes and they are Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs), especially Omiya Pachwa. My prayer is that Government should come in, give them some tents and food to boost up the –(Interjection)–  Whatever you want to understand –(Laughter)– in the area because at the end, we want to offer security to our people. Let the ministry responsible for relief help our people in the IDP camps. Thank you very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me start with the minister of disaster preparedness and then, the Government Chief Whip.3.27THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Ms Esther Anyakun):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are getting this information of displacement today from here. We are going to expedite and find information from the Chief Administrative Officer to let us know how many IDPs we have in the area.We all know very well that in the previous season, when we had the same challenge, we visited IDPs in Kapelebyong and Agago districts; we gave them relief items. However, I speak as someone who comes from Karamoja. The issue of Karimojong going to graze in the neighbouring districts; we know it has been a challenge because of the drought. Members, the drought is coming all the way from the Horn of Africa and it is biting. When those people are coming, we expect leaders and people from Lango and Karamoja from the side of Kotido to have a meeting to harmonise. This is what we do with the Pokot. Currently, I have cows from Baringo, Kenya in my constituency. They came from Kenya to graze in my constituency. They are even right now in Bukedea in the Rt Hon. Speaker’s constituency, but we talk to each other. We need to engage as leaders to make sure that people who are affected are protected because it involves security and local leaders. Thank you.3.29THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua): Mr Speaker, the issue raised by Hon. Amos Okot is sensitive and it involves life and death. As we have heard, some lives were lost; we condole with the families.Mr Speaker, in the absence of the Minister from the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, I 6997THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 JANUARY 2023would wish, if it pleases your chair, to invite the Deputy CDF to provide information within his reach, as we consult further on this subject matter. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, that means the aspect of you first consulting has been cut off. The colleague needs help in his community.3.30LT GEN. PETER ELWELU (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of Karimojong raiding neighbours has been there even before I was born, but Government has done quite a lot and dealt with the situation. What we are now seeing is what I could refer to as criminality. Some few individuals coming here and there; stealing one cow and killing whoever they find. They are still there, but I want to assure my colleague that we are going to beef up deployment there. By February, we shall be passing out over 10,000 LDUs –(Interruption)  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we have a point of order. You know, in Parliament, civilians order Generals. (Laughter) It is the only place where this happens. MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, this matter is very serious. I remember the Members of Parliament from Acholi have been raising this very important matter many times.When we were in Teso, we raised it before His Excellency the President and the UPDF promised to beef up the security to safeguard Karimojong never to cross to Acholi Subregion. However, the problem continues. Lt Gen. Elwelu is now trying to insinuate that the UPDF is doing great and has managed to curtail the situation. What he is saying is not true. Is the honourable member in order to come up with such allegations yet our people are suffering and are being killed? Is he in order to come and tell the whole world that the UPDF is doing much yet they are doing nothing on the ground?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Now, colleagues, I am constrained because yesterday, when Hon. Olanya was acting as the Leader of the Opposition, he praised UPDF here on the Floor. He said they were doing a great job. He further said that just a few Members do wrong things. Now, he has said they are doing nothing. So, I do not know what has changed over time. Honourable members, I want to request you - As we are here wearing our suits under Air Conditioner (AC), you have your brothers and sisters being beaten by rain and being bitten by mosquitoes. To come to the Floor of Parliament and say they are doing nothing on the ground! You are even able to come here peacefully and dress the way you are dressed because of the work they are doing. If you try other countries –(Applause). You know, we have countries. You know we have countries - Honourable colleague, that was a very unfortunate statement. You might be dissatisfied with what they have done on ground, but to say that they are doing nothing – the way you concluded – is wrong. Please, clarify on that issue.MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, I am talking, specifically, on this matter of the Karimojong raiding the people on the side of the Acholi. We went there, together with the UPDF soldiers, and they promised to beef up security in that area. We were convinced that no one would be killed again. However, again and again, the same thing is happening. It is true that they are doing other activities in other areas, but within that area, I think our UPDF should pull up their socks; they are not doing as they are expected. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is much better. Also, remember the honourable colleague said we have lost six soldiers. The people you are saying are doing nothing are dying. We have not lost any MP in that area, but we have lost soldiers. So, please, there are other issues that really - but the final statement was much better, that they should pull up their 6998STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT [The Deputy Speaker]COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRsocks because the community is demanding for security. So, do you want to add anything?MS ANYAKUN: Mr Speaker, on the issue of saying the Karimojong should be withdrawn, people should know that these are raiders. There are thieves and criminals in every other part of this country and they are not called “Banyankole” or “Baganda”, but “thieves”. Let us say “raiders” or “thieves”. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We can say “thieves from Karamoja”, not everyone. (Laughter)MR ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising relates to how we have processed the business raised by the honourable member. We practise a Parliamentary system where the Executive is accountable to Parliament. A question was raised to the Executive and, instead, a Member of Parliament – a part of us – Gen. Elwelu, comes here to answer. That cannot be put on the record as a commitment from the Executive to address a matter. Would we be proceeding rightly and setting a precedent that our own questions can be answered by our fellow Members here? How will Parliament, therefore, follow up such a matter when the Executive has folded their hands and not responded?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, you are right. When I was calling Gen. Elwelu, I said “I am going to use an orthodox means for purposes of information”. The information he has is very important. Also, beyond what we have here on the Hansard, such matters require serious action. I am very sure that from here, Gen. Elwelu, who has come on the Floor and committed, will go on ground – please, I am the Speaker. You cannot tell me who to respond or not.I can tell you to go your Constitution – if you want to continue that way. (Laughter) You know, honourable members come from nowhere – I do not know where they pass – and they just come and -When I am handling these matters, I want ministers to come back and bring answers here and matters where I want action to be taken on ground.The honourable colleague has reported a security situation and the Deputy CDF has given us information. So, he will liaise with the colleague and go on ground.What people need is security on ground not more and more repetitive statements here. I am sorry, honourable member. It might not satisfy you, but that is my assessment. 3.40MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, the matter, which Hon. Akun from Karamoja, the minister of state for refugees affairs, has raised -(Interjections)-Anyakun – I did not want to say it in full because “Nyakun” means somebody who wants attention all the time. (Laughter) However, I think that being a minister, she does not have to work hard for our attention. That information is very important. Whatever we do, we should promote what unites Uganda. We all know, traditionally, that cattle rustlers are known as “cattle rustlers” and we know cattle rustlers rustle cattle through Acholi, Lango, Teso and beyond.I do not know whether the Karimojong are very many to raid very many animals – clearing all the animals in Lango, Acholi, Teso and beyond.So, let us be careful about using the word “Karamoja”. Let us insist on using the word which we have used since the Uganda Peoples’ Congress days: “cattle rustlers”. That would, at least, quench the pain, which our daughter is feeling at the moment.6999THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 JANUARY 2023Mr Speaker, even for the celebration of tomorrow, if some of us do not go there, it is because we want to promote unity because anything that makes you remember the wrong way should be avoided. We know 26th brings bad memory for some of us and should not be celebrated every year. (Laughter) It is important.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is a very important advice from our elder. I think it has been noted. Hon. Nyanzi had an issue.3.42MR PATRICK BINGI (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My matter concerns the illegal actions of NFA, involving evicting and grabbing people’s land in Kyankwanzi District. This morning, as early as 5.00 a.m., NFA trigger-happy men, in the company of over 120 goons – with all assortments of weapons – descended on helpless locals of Kitwala in Mulagi Subcounty, slashed all their plantations and brought their houses and homes down. In the process, one was shot dead, two were injured and – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, switch on the microphone. MR BINGI: Right now, one is dead, two are nursing wounds and several have been injured. Relatedly, around Kikonda Forest Reserve – that is in Kiyigikwa Parish, Nsambya Subcounty – residents have also been grappling with the challenges of NFA.For over two years, their plantations are slashed and homes pulled down. I wonder how we are going to achieve the socio-economic transformation in such a system -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prayers, honourable member? MR BINGI: I pray;1. That the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development expeditiously prevails over NFA to avoid such reckless acts. That NFA–(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, switch on so that we get your prayers.MR BINGI: National Forestry Authority should be responsible for all damages and deaths; 2. Perpetrators of all these illegal actions should be brought to book. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Government Chief Whip?3.45THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Denis Obua): Mr Speaker, it is a known fact that within the country, there are gazetted national forest reserves. I undertake to give notice to the Ministry of Water and Environment - in this case not the lands ministry - to come and explain the circumstances surrounding the land in question. Is it public land or does it belong to these Ugandans who have been disturbed this morning such that from there, we are able to establish the facts and the way forward. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Balimwezo - 3.45MR RONALD BALIMWEZO (NUP, Nakawa Division East, Kampala City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Cabinet and Parliament approved the loan from African Development Bank and French Development Agency to construct Kampala-Jinja Express Highway. It also secured a grant from European Union to construct the same road. It is now over four years, Mr Speaker. Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) was mandated to secure the right of way of that 7000STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [Mr Balimwezo]corridor. Up to now, nothing is going on. Recently, we had a downpour and buildings within the corridor collapsed because UNRA told them not to do any further construction within the corridor. Our people are dying. Recently, I lost three people in that corridor.This is a loan that accrues an interest. My prayer is:1. When are this project-affected persons going to be compensated or resettled?2. When is the actual construction of this road infrastructure beginning?3. The minister should tell us the conditions of this loan because it is accruing interest and four years of this interest will be a big cost to this nation. Thank you. THE DEPUTY  SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleague, I understand the Committee on Physical Infrastructure is handling this same matter and you are a member of that committee. Rule 80 of the Rules of Procedure, which is anticipation, does not permit us - since the committee is handling the matter. Let the minister update the House, but also let the Committee on Physical Infrastructure ensure that, indeed, this issue is among the issues handled. Government Chief Whip, I need the minister to give us an update here on Wednesday. On Tuesday, we shall be having only one substantive item to do with a debate for the National Budget Framework Paper. We want to have some hours of debate. Hon. Migadde, I am finalising the issues, which I had. Let me finish. This is the final issue.    3.48MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Mine is not a separate issue, Mr Speaker, but because I am the Deputy Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy and the Member highlighted that there was a loan that was approved for Jinja Express Highway - I want to inform you that there has not been any loan, which has come before this committee right from the previous Parliament. So, maybe, you can talk about other matters, but there is no loan that was approved as far as the committee is concerned. So, I wanted to volunteer that information. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Migadde, if our memory could serve us right, I was with you on the Committee on National Economy. We passed a loan of $400 million and it was passed specifically for the Kampala-Jinja Expressway. I was a member and that road, which was projected to cost $1.1 billion – the loan came in because – in fact, it was African Development Bank and European Union, not French Agency. The issue was simple - instead of all the cost of the road being offloaded onto a concessionaire, we would mitigate that so that the money can be – I do not know why we are struggling. Hon. Bahati is the one who moved it and we passed it. He is here; then he was the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development – at that time. I need the minister to come on Wednesday and update the House. MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking guidance. As soon as you had assumed that office and this precious chair where you are seated, I raised an issue about appointing the substantive Governor of the Bank of Uganda. I remember very well, - you said that the President was still thinking about the person he was going to appoint. Today, you have talked about oil and other issues that concern the same matter. But here you are, Mr Speaker, it is now over a year and a half without the President appointing a substantive Governor of the Bank of Uganda. The guidance I am seeking from you –(Interjections) – the Government Chief Whip 7001THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 JANUARY 2023is doing a good job. Whenever I raise matters here, he asks the substantive ministers to respond. I would pray the same matter happens because the minister for the Presidency who is an ex-officio  member is never here, yet, he is supposed to respond to a number of issues concerning the Office of the President. We might sit here thinking that the President is still thinking about it, but, of course, you should also remember his age. He might have forgotten that there is a Governor in Bank of Uganda missing. So, if possible, with your guidance, Mr Speaker, maybe the Government Chief Whip could remind the President that this country has no substantive Governor of Bank of Uganda. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Ssewungu, the problem is you cannot have a limit on thinking. You do not have a time limit, but what I can assure you – I promised to take the matter with the President. They were two issues: the Human Rights Commission and Bank of Uganda. In a meeting between the President, the Speaker and I, we raised these matters.On the Human Rights Commission, he has taken action and he promised us that he will also take action on Bank of Uganda. I am sure the President will take action. MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I trust your statement. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And I will remind him. MR SSEWUNGU: And even outside this House, I will continue reminding you. Otherwise, it cannot take all this time. I am not asking for somebody from Kalungu to become a Governor or one of my family, but we must have a substantive Governor of the Bank of Uganda. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We shall remind him, honourable.  MR NAMBESHE: Mr Speaker, the procedural matter I am raising is in regard to the NSSF Select Committee, which you have just constituted. The membership of that committee with Hon. Bakkabulindi would be conflicted because he represents the workers and because of that pre-existing relationship with the Fund, he will easily influence the outcome of the decisions of that investigation. So, there is conflict of interest. Mr, Speaker, therefore, he should not be allowed to participate in the investigations of that – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, acting LOP. I have taken note because he was nominated by the Chief whip. We are going to consult on the same. There is also another matter, which Hon. Odur and I had shared. Though you may have seen a small clash between him and I, we have been friends for long. And even from here, I know he will take me for tea, but I will first demand an apology. So, just take what was between him and I lightly. That is how we are; we always clash, but make up immediately. However, on that issue, it will be part of the issues I am going to consult on and pronounce ourselves.3.55THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE)(Mr Jacob Oboth): Mr Speaker, just for the record, the acting LOP, who was one time referred to as a bishop, has said that Hon. Charles Bakkabulindi will be conflicted. Mr Speaker, protect me from the Kasese people. (Laughter) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The problem is that you are listening to many instead of - MR OBOTH:  Just for the record that in conflict of interest, there is a procedure and it is not a crime. If we are to follow that strictly, then, nobody would even sit in any committee. Nobody would even be a judge of law. So, the conflict of interest would require him to declare those interests. However, another argument 7002STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT [Mr Oboth]COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRwould be to ask who is more interested in the NSSF Fund issues than the Parliamentary representative of the workers in this country?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Anyway, as I said, we are going to consult. One way that we sometimes do it is to bring a colleague together with the one who raised the issue to be reassured that the person accused of harbouring conflict of interest is not conflicted. On the other hand, you never know the person accused of being conflicted can declare that they are conflicted, in which case, we will need to come to an amicable conclusion. Next item. (Members rose_) No, honourable colleagues, I need to move. I request you honourable members to allow us to move. Next item, please; it is already 4.00.p.m. MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATE OF ROADS IN KAMPALATHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister for Kampala.3.57THE MINISTER FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AND METROPOLITAN AFFAIRS (Ms Minsa Kabanda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a report on Kampala City Roads Rehabilitation Project. At the First Sitting of the Third Meeting of the Second Session of the Eleventh Parliament held on Friday, 6 January 2023, you guided that the ministry presents a comprehensive statement to the House on the status of the road network in Kampala and the utilisation of the loan on Kampala City Roads Rehabilitation Project. Mr Speaker, we are aware that the current area of concern in respect of service delivery is due to the poor roads due to an old road network, flooding due to insufficient drainage capacity, traffic congestion due to inadequate capacity of intersections, inadequate public transport and low kilometres of paved roads and damage to the new road infrastructure due to frequent cuttings for utilities. Mr Speaker, the current inventory indicates that the total road infrastructure network within the administrative boundaries of Kampala City comprises 2,110 kilometres of road, of which to-date, 646 kilometres, that is 31 per cent, are paved and 1,487, which is a total of 70 per cent unpaved. However, a number of interventions to address the gaps include the Kampala City Roads Rehabilitation Project as part of a City-Wide Infrastructure Improvement Programme that seeks to meet Government’s long-term development strategy as outlined in Uganda’s Vision 2040. This aims at increasing and improving the quality of infrastructure to foster the transformation of Uganda’s economy, from low-income to more competitive upper-middle-income status. This project is aimed at addressing congestion in the city of Kampala, through the improvement of the road network, upgrading traffic junctions and enhancing drainage capacity to mitigate flooding of the streets.Mr Speaker, as you may be aware, the Parliament of Uganda passed the loan in 2020, having considered the economic benefits to the city. The funding covered 29 roads and other roads infrastructure. That is 69.70 kilometres of roads. Some of the roads sections will be of dual carriageways, thus increasing the length of 83.7 kilometres complete with associated drainage works, 22 traffic junctions, which is 123 kilometres of non-motorised transport facilities, commercial vehicles, parking places, bus depots, 30 public toilets, six markets along project roads for women vendors, installation of 1,600 energy efficient streetlights and tree planting.Mr Speaker, in May 2021, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development signed off the financing agreement with an estimated cost of $288 million to be financed by the Bank Group ADB, 77.8 per cent and ADF 17.7 per cent of Global Environment Fund (GEF) 0.7 per cent and Government of Uganda with 3.8 per cent. 7003THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 JANUARY 2023The project has other complementary initiatives, which include women and youth skills on entrepreneurship development and institutional support to boost project execution capacity. Mr Speaker, in 2021, the project was reviewed to estimate the Eco buses and to add an additional stock of roads. A total of $12 million that had been earmarked for the provision of Eco buses was converted to the construction of additional roads that serve the city, which include Mpererwe, Kiteezi, Kiti Road, Ntinda to Kampala, Northern Bypass and Old Kira Road, effectively increasing the total length by 16.37 kilometres. KCCA got clearance for the project from the Attorney-General’s Chambers in July 2022. Current status Mr Speaker, you recall that - (Interruption)MS NAMUGGA: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. I would like to inquire from the honourable minister whether the report was given to the Clerk. I am asking this because we do not have it yet it is not displayed and I have been told that the network is off. So, we would like to find out where the problem is because we are not following.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, that is a point of clarification and not procedure. Go on, Minister.MS MINSA KABANDA:  Thank you very much. Mr Speaker -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  And on a point of procedure, you address the Speaker not the colleague on the Floor. Please, go on, honourable minister.MS MINSA KABANDA:  Mr Speaker, you will recall that this project was approved in 2020. However, its implementation was delayed due to procurement processes and harmonisation with the bank. There was also a shift in the procurement of the Eco buses that needed a construction network. Additionally, there was also internal clearance by the Attorney-General’s Office, which was completed by July 2022. Implementation has since commenced and civil works have been packaged in five floats, as seen in the table below. You can look at the tables; that is Table 1 –(Interjections)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, the minister submitted the statement to the Clerk. Honourable minister, I do not know why you are panicking. She submitted the statement, but we have had a problem with Alfresco. This same issue is being handled by the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. In fact, they were supposed to meet KCCA next, if tomorrow was not a public holiday. After the minister has submitted the statement, I will refer it to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. We shall also rectify the system so that when they bring the report, we are able to discuss it. Let us allow her to finish her presentation.MS KABANDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am referring you to Table 1 – (Interruption)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order?MR SSEWUNGU: I rise on a point of order, Mr Speaker. I know that the front row is particularly for the ministers. However, I am seeing an honourable member who is a perennial backbencher like me sitting on the front row with Hon. Oboth. Is the honourable member in order to promote himself - and another shadow minister seated at the back - without going through the Appointments Committee and an appointing authority; replacing the censured minister? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Linos, we need the attention of the minister. Please, go back to your seat. Do we have any other colleague not seated in the right position? Very good. Honourable minister, please, conclude.MS MINSA KABANDA:  Mr Speaker, I am referring you to table one –7004STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Go on to the conclusion. Honourable members do not have the tables. The details will be in the committee.MS MINSA KABANDA:  Mr Speaker, the current status of roads is as follows:Procurement prescription, current procurement status and procurementi) Lots 1 up to 6 is 60 per cent. Evaluation reports were submitted for the bank’s review.ii) Lots 7 to 9 is at bidding level. The deadline for bid submission was extended to 13 January 2023. That means it is also complete -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you read the conclusion? I am reading from your statement. Honourable colleagues do not have the tables here. The committee will go into the details of lots. We do not know what is in the lots. MS MINSA KABANDA:  Honourable members, KCCA has now signed contracts with the qualifying service contractors and the project is expected to commence in the month of February 2023.  I, therefore, beg to lay the report on the status of roads at Kampala City Roads Rehabilitation Project. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. The report is referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. Please, ensure you report back quickly on this matter. Members are mainly interested in the cost. I heard Hon. Kivumbi asking about the unit cost. We also want you to be clear; unit cost per kilometre is what we consider. We have ever had a situation where a road of four lanes was expected to cost the same as that of two lanes. It has to be unit cost per kilometre per lane for more details to come out properly. Leader of the Opposition, do you have an issue?4.08THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. I also thank the minister for her brief statement. This week, my Cabinet considered a petition of the Lord Mayor relating to a similar subject. May it please you that on Tuesday, it is formally presented so that it is considered alongside the minister’s statement such that we do not consume a lot of the House’s time. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, I will give you space on Tuesday. Although, if you had it ready, I would even allow you to lay it because the committee is already processing so that they all go together to the committee. I can amend the Order Paper and allow you to lay it so that they are processed together. Please, do.MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the flexibility. We missed the orientation and the Member is asking whether the petition is uploaded. (Laughter) I will not mention his name. I beg to lay, for the House’s consideration, a petition of the Lord Mayor of Kampala City relating to matters of maladministration and inflation of costs in Kampala Capital City Authority. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The petition is referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. Of course, this should be under KCCA, but because the Committee on Physical Infrastructure is already handling the matter - I do not know how the Committee on Physical Infrastructure is now focused on KCCA roads. It should have been the Committee on Presidential Affairs. Honourable chairperson -4.11THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Ms Jesca Ababiku):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. KCCA falls under our committee. In relation to issues of roads, we picked concern and started doing our own investigations. We 7005THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 JANUARY 2023received submissions two weeks ago, but I did not know that the same House had also requested the other committee to do the same work. Otherwise, we had started on the work. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This has been the issue. What brings this is the programme-based planning, which we adopted as a country. That is why the Committee on Physical Infrastructure took it up. Can I request the two chairpersons of the committees to meet? I do not know whether you might need my intervention, but you would meet so that you harmonise. We do not need to have two reports on the same issue here on the Floor.MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. W e can do that and we shall. Thank you.4.13THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE  (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In as far as KCCA  is concerned, even before programme-based budgeting, our committee only had a component of roads. We have not been handling the other issues.  Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I mentioned programme-based planning. The roads programme is under your committee. Please, meet with the chairperson and harmonise. The committee can transfer to you all the information they have already gathered. Hon. Oboth, did you want to guide on the same?MR OBOTH:  Mr Speaker, you have already guided. I just wanted to put it, for the record, that it is possible for the two committees to process and come up with a joint report. So, where there is an intersection, they can jointly meet and process the petition.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will get who to lead the team; please, agree on who will lead. Please, sort it out so that we move quickly. However, for now, I will refer it to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, which had already moved. MR MUTEMBULI: Mr Speaker, I have had a benefit of looking at Rule 32 of the Rules of Procedure as far as laying of documents or papers on the Table is concerned and the rule is very clear. The Clerk shall ensure that a paper to be laid on the Table is distributed to all Members before it is laid. There is all evidence on record that all the papers that have been laid on Table have not yet been distributed to the Members. A paper is any document - it is also defined under the rules. “A paper” means any document in any form that may be laid on the Table. Are we proceeding well, by having these documents tabled contrary to rule 32?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleague, the Clerk distributes by uploading them on the intranet. The moment the minister gives this document to the Clerk, he has done his part. Therefore, you cannot say, “Minister, do not lay here because the Clerk has not yet distributed the document.” If there is any action to be taken, it is administrative and that cannot stall the business on the Floor. The one of Hon. Mpuuga; I have used my general authority under rule 7 to allow him to present because that is what is feasible. You know, sometimes we do what is feasible. If I wait for Tuesday yet we have already submitted one document - let them move together. However, we shall ensure, indeed, that the Clerk always uploads these papers on the system. Thank you. Next item.MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE BUDGET PERFORMANCE FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2021/2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, the honourable Minister for Finance has been here with us, but she got an emergency and came 7006STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT [The Deputy Speaker]to me here. This was to do with her child. She delegated Hon. Bahati.4.17THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (IN-DUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati):  Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for the adoption of the National Budget Framework Paper for the Fi-nancial Year 2023/2024 to 2027. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable, we are on Item 4. That is Item No. 5; let us start with No. 4. Sorry- No. 4 is for the chairperson. We shall call you on No. 5. I am sorry about that. Item No. 4 - 4.17THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Ignatius Wamakuyu): Mr Speaker, it is true that the item which has been read is one of the issues to be considered by the Budget Committee. However, Mr Speaker, due to the Statutory timelines for the National Budget Framework Paper, we were unable to complete that item. I request the House to give us up to Tuesday. In the National Budget Framework Paper, which is coming, there are highlights on the performance of the budget for the Financial Year 2021/2022, as provided under Schedule Three of the Public Finance Management Act (Amended), 2015.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, the chairperson came and met me together with the shadow minister for finance and we looked through this issue. I found the approach they had taken - they had just brought highlights and incorporated them in the National Budget Framework Paper. However, we want it to stand out alone because you see, we have been passing budget after budget, without exhaustively looking at the performance of the previous budget. Therefore, that is why we want it to be a stand-alone item.  Therefore, we agreed that the committee goes back, picks out that component, enriches it and presents it as a stand-alone item on Tuesday. For now, in the presenting of the National Budget Framework Paper, you will find very important information in terms of highlights and this is going to help us very much when we are debating the framework paper. Secondly, the committee had been assigned to assess the half-year performance of the budget - that is quarter one and quarter two. I know many colleagues were raising many issues and were saying, “No, no, no, we are coming to that issue so when we bring it up, we shall allow you to make presentations.”However, the chairperson had some complaints- if you could put them on record so that I can guide.MR WAMAKUYU:  Mr Speaker, it is true that the House gave us the assignment to handle. However, we requested the Ministry of Finance to provide us with information about the expenditure for the first quarter and second quarter, but up to now, we are still waiting. They only gave us the figures in terms of releases per quarter, but the actual expenditure was not given. Therefore, my appeal, Mr Speaker, is that you prevail over the Ministry of Finance to give us that information on expenditure by Friday so that we process both reports by Tuesday.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 4.21THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, your intervention was very timely because I had gone over the National Budget Framework Paper report. In my assessment, there was an attempt to smuggle the budget performance using the National Budget Framework Paper report. I have known Hon. Mudimi over the last 10 years - I know they could not produce a Budget Performance Report. The disclaimer they have smuggled through the Speaker’s Office - However, Mr Speaker, the revelation by the chairperson –(Interruption)7007THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 JANUARY 2023MR WAMAKUYU: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. The National Budget Framework Paper I am yet to present is guided by Schedule Three- the format for the National Budget Framework Paper in Public Finance Management Act (Amended), 2015. In Schedule Three, Item No.3 on midterm fiscal forecast - “The midterm fiscal forecasts shall cover the previous two financial years, the current financial year and the next financial year, and shall indicate in respect of each financial year, the following economic variables: for non-petroleum revenue of Government in respect of tax revenue, non-tax revenue and external grants for annual budgets and projects, petroleum revenue expenditure and net lending for Government…” It goes on and on. The format of the document I am going to present to Parliament is per the law. Mr Speaker, is the LOP, my good friend, in order to insinuate that I have smuggled in the documents when I have acted in compliance with the law? (Laughter) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Just take what the LOP said in jest. I know he was just pulling your leg. You are very good friends. However, I can also see your concern on what goes on record here. I am sure the LOP can clarify better what he meant.MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Of course, Hon. Mudimi knows that I was being graphical in my communication. He knows better that I hold him in high esteem as far as these matters are concerned. However, I was actually trying to amplify his concerns relating to the failure of having the budget performance report in the House. In fact, Mr Speaker, the House has every reason to reject the National Budget Framework Paper report without the budget performance report. I do not know why the very able chairperson would allow the Ministry of Finance to get away with this kind of flimsiness in the management of public affairs. Mr Speaker, I would like to request for your indulgence to compel the Ministry of Finance to avail this information because failure or deliberate refusal is an affront on the powers of Parliament. There is every reason we are demanding for these figures. We know that the Ministry of Finance has been in defiance mode across the financial year. They have been supplying “air”. They have been here on the Floor and supplied lies to the House. We have every reason to conduct a citizen  arrest on them before we consider the National Budget Framework Paper report. Therefore, I concur with you and your order that on Tuesday, we either have their figures or we consider other business. I thank you. 4.26MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since Hon. Bahati left that ministry, there have been challenges. (Laughter) We may demand that Hon. Bahati gets back to that ministry. That ministry has five ministers. It is disturbing to realise that to-date, the Minister of Finance has failed to give us that half-year performance. Even when we were looking at the background to the budget, we would see problems in some ministries. Mr Speaker, there should be sanctions if the Minister of Finance does not adhere to what he is supposed to do. The half-year budget performance report is very key for us to be able to move. We know that there are items that we did not approve and they went ahead to release money for them. Could that be the reason they are being very cagey in releasing the half-year performance report? Mr Speaker, we plead with you that there should be sanctions if by next Tuesday, the Ministry of Finance does not bring this half-year budget performance report. We can repeat what we did on Monday on some of them. Thank you. (Laughter) 7008STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTNATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR FY 2023/24 - 2027/28THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us conclude this matter.MR ODUR: Mr Speaker, the timelines for approval of the National Budget Framework Paper is 1st of February and that is next Wednesday. I see that we are asking the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to provide it by Tuesday, yet the committee has to sit and process it. The committee will not merely receive and transmit it to the House. They have to analyse it and report to us. So, I seek your guidance, – given that Wednesday is the deadline. The committee chairperson is here; unless he can assure us that he can process this within the timeframe so that we comply, on our part, by that deadline. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rule 145(3) is very clear on the processing of the budget framework paper. It is by the 1st of February. This is a statutory deadline. Ministry of Finance, provide the committee with all the necessary information by 9.00 a.m. on Friday so that the committee meets at 10.00 a.m. and starts processing the report. They are going to work over the weekend - but you are even making people suffer over the weekend over information, which you have. Secondly, we shall have a half-day debate on the National Budget Framework Paper on Tuesday – and we hope to consider it that day. However, I will not preside over the House to consider the National Budget Framework Paper without a certificate of compliance for climate change. (Applause) The minister committed on the Floor here. I have taken it upon myself and I have been calling the minister. I even reached the extent of calling the Ministry of Water and Environment to ensure that this is done. We have to do what is compliant with the law. I do not want us to do work here and then someone takes us to court. You know, lately we have very many lawyers in town who want to show Parliament or any institution - and even individuals - that they are not doing their work. Please, I am just putting you on notice. On Tuesday, if we do not do it, I will allow debate, but I will not put the question. I have told you this early. Thank you. Next item.MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FINANCIAL YEARS 2023/2024 – 2027/2028THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - 4.30THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion that the House adopts the National Budget Framework Paper for Financial Years 2023/2024 – 2027/2028. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) It is seconded by Hon. Ogwang, Hon. Okeyoh, Hon. Keefa, Hon. Komakech, Hon. Kayondo, Hon. Apea, Hon. Alyek, Hon. Linda, Hon. Ababiku, Hon. Karubanga and many more Members. Honourable minister, do you want to speak to your motion?MR BAHATI: In justification of the motion, Mr Speaker, this is just to remind the House that the theme for the National Budget Framework Paper was: “Full Monetisation of the Ugandan Economy through Commercial Agriculture, Industrialisation, Expanding and Broadening Services, Digital Transformation and Market Access.” This is anchored on the overall East African Community’s agenda of accelerating economic recovery and enhancing productive sectors for improved livelihoods. It is a continuation of the agenda for socio-economic transformation for all Ugandans, and it is actually the same as this financial year.Mr Speaker, we did consult widely within and outside Government. This budget framework paper was referred to the Committee on Budget 7009THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 JANUARY 2023and the discussion has been on for some time now. I recommend to this House to debate and adopt this budget framework paper. I beg to move.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable committee chairperson -4.33THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Ignatius Wamakuyu): Mr Speaker, I beg to report on the National Budget Framework Paper for Financial Years 2023/2024-2027/2028. Before that, I beg to lay a copy of the report, minutes of the proceedings, copies of the sector committees and the response of the Opposition on the budget framework paper, which is also contained in this document.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, have you done an executive summary which you will present? MR WAMAKUYU: It is there, but this document has two parts. One part is on legal compliance and part two is on the sectoral observations and recommendations, which is a 70-page document, which is uploaded and of which I will make a summary.On legal compliance, in accordance with section 9 of the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Act, 2015, which is in our law - I think Members can read that.Section 30(b) of the National Climate Change Act, 2021 required a minister responsible for climate change, in consultation with the Chairperson of the National Planning Authority, to issue a certificate certifying that the budget framework paper is climate change responsive and contains adequate allocation for funding climate change measures - actions and measures.So, those are legal compliances, but like you said, there is no certificate on climate change. Otherwise, the rest are in compliance with section 9 of the Public Finance Management Act. When we talk about submission of the budget framework paper to Parliament: the National Budget Framework Paper for Financial Year 2023/2024 was submitted to Parliament and laid on 23 December 2022, accompanied with a Certificate of Gender and Equity Responsiveness within a speculated time.In compliance with section 3 of the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA), an assessment by the committee indicates that the budget framework paper; overall structure compliance level 2, schedule 3 largely conforms to requirements under the law. However, the following information was not provided as required by law: i.  Quantifiable estimation of the fiscal impact of fiscal risks An estimation of the likely fiscal impact of the risks - if they are materialised - and an alternative fiscal framework.ii.  The flow of investment of Government in the financial year. That was not provided and the committee recommends that schedule 3 of the PFMA should be fully complied with, and a detailed statement on compliance is always presented to Parliament whenever the National Budget Framework Paper is read to Parliament. Honourable members, Table 1 shows compliance assessment of the National Budget Framework Paper to schedule 3 of the PFMA.2.2 Consistency with the National Development Plan IIIThe goal of NDP III is to increase average household income and improve the quality of life of Ugandans. The overall theme of the NDP III is, “Sustainable Industrialisation for Inclusive Growth, Employment and Sustainable Wealth Creation.”This goal is expected to be achieved through an overall strategy of sustainable industrialisation for wealth creation, employment and inclusive growth. 7010STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT [Mr Wamakuyu]Mr Speaker, the objectives are outlined there; Members can read them. In Table 2, NDP III objectives and strategic programmes; still, members can read that. They are five of them.A. Macro-economic policy alignment With regard to macroeconomic policy alignment, the National Budget Framework Paper is largely aligned to the NDP III. The table also shows that: members can read that from table III.B. Allocative Efficiency Alignment In regard to allocative efficiency alignment of the National Budget Framework Paper to the National Development Plan III, there are slight allocative inefficiencies as highlighted in Table 4, mainly under NDP III objective on enhancing value addition in key growth opportunities. It is important to note that the projected budget allocation in the Financial Year 2023/2024 towards programmes that contribute directly to enhancing value addition in key growth opportunities is only 5.6 per cent of the total budget. And only 4.7 per cent of the total projected budget for the Financial Year 2023/2024 has been allocated to the programme, which contributes directly to strengthening the public sector’s capacity to drive growth and create jobs.Table No.4 also shows the allocation, assessment of allocative efficiency alignment. So, Members should read Table 4. It goes up to page 10. In that regard, there is a statement here: honourable members, the effort was made by both the National Planning Authority and the Ministry of Finance to align the national budget to NDP II by providing processes and guidelines aimed at linking the budget to NDP III, through Programme Implementation Action Plans (PIAPS).However, the alignment of the NDP III to the budget as averaged at 60.3 per cent, over the last four years, notwithstanding many unfunded priorities. According to NDP III medium-term review report by the National Planning Authority, the following challenges have constrained the effective alignment of national budgets to NDP III.i.  The NDP III contains more projects than what can be financed by the national budget.ii.  Programme planning, costing and monitoring capacity in both MDAs and local government is still inadequate. And this has constrained the program-based systems. iii.  The PIAPs results frameworks are not directly linked to the actual expenditure system. IFMIS/ Charts of Account - the mid-term review established that NDP III projects are integrated into the IFMIS/ Charts of accounts.The interventions, which are the key unique identifiers of NDPD III, are not part of the budget execution. In this regard, the committee recommends the following:i.  Domestic revenue mobilisation interven -tions should be strengthened as Govern-ment aggressively seeks external financ-ing from development partners. In addi-tion, it would be necessary to put planning and budgeting on a more fiscal realistic path, due to the current global economic challenges. ii.  Programme planning, costing and monitoring capacity in both MDAs and local governments must be strengthened.iii.  PIAPs results framework ought to be directly linked or integrated to IFMIS. NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR FY 2023/24 - 2027/287011THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 JANUARY 20232.3 Consistency with the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility Honourable members, on pages 11 to 12 are the issues on the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. In order to effectively comply with the charter, we set annual targets. Financial Year 2023/2024 projected a fiscal deficit as a percentage of GDP of -3 per cent, and the public debt to GDP ratio is all within the set targets in the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility. It should be noted that public debt is projected to peak at 53.1 per cent in June 2023 and decline to below 50 per cent by the Financial Year 2025/2026, according to the charter. The committee recommends that the budget for the short and medium term fully complies with the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility requirements and any deviation must be guided by section 7 of the Public Finance Management Act, inclusive of the reasons for the deviation and the adjustments to be done to bring the nominal debt to GDP back to the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility path over the remaining financial years.2.4 Gender and Equity Responsiveness Honourable members, you can read that section; it talks about the Certificate of Gender and Equity Responsiveness, which we have been processing. The committee has observed that the interventions articulated in the certificate were not informed by any national gender and equity gap-mapping survey to inform the assessment of the National Budget Framework Paper and subsequent recommendations of the Equal Opportunities Commission. The late submission of Programme Budget Framework Papers to the Equal Opportunities Commission affects the timely assessment and production of the assessment report and hence, hinders the timely issuance of the certificate. Some MDAs do not possess adequate capacity in gender and equity data disaggregation, and costing and budgeting of gender and equity interventions, among others. We recommend as follows:a) The Equal Opportunities Commission is supported to undertake periodic national gender and equity gap-mapping surveys; b) More capacity building should be undertaken in all MDAs especially with regard to the gender disaggregated data compilation, gender budgeting and assessment, developing gender and equity performance indicators, among others; andc) The programme secretariats that do not submit the required programme budget framework paper on time should be subjected to the sanctions as provided for in section 78 of the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Act, 2015.Mr Speaker, Table 6 talks about Gender and Equity Performance. Members, you can read that. Other programmes like digital transformation scored zero, sustainable energy development also scored zero. Mineral development scored 2 per cent, as highlighted. The issue of climate change was not provided with a certificate. So, we recommend that the ministry responsible for climate change complies with the law and presents before Parliament a certificate certifying that the National Budget Framework Paper is climate-change responsive. Economic and budget performanceEconomic performance We are talking about economic growth. This is largely for the last Financial Year 2021/2022. Mr Speaker, since I will be presenting a report, these are highlights. It talks about economic growth; I will bring the details. It talks about inflation, interest and exchange rates, external development, sector 7012STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTdevelopment, employment, and public debt - let me read something on public debt because there is a statement by the Auditor-General. According to the National Budget Framework Paper, the stock of public debt increased from US$19.54 billion in June 2021, to US$ 20.99 billion in June 2022.  As a share of the GDP, public debt increased from –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a procedural point, honourable. MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We would love to follow his presentation on our iPads, but there is no network. The ICT Department is telling us that the network is down and we do not have access to what he is reading. Mr Speaker, it is important for us to follow very closely. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Ensure all our screens are on and – but he is saying that the ones here cannot look at that screen. So, they have to see other screens. Colleagues, this is going to be rectified and debate will be on Tuesday. This was intended to allow you time to have enough time to read through it. That is why I told him to do a summary. Otherwise, the entire document is going to be uploaded so that you access it on your Alfresco and on Tuesday, we shall have a debate on this matter. Hon. Enosi, do you have an issue?4.49MR ENOSI ASIIMWE (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Mr Speaker, I also pray that you compel all the ministers of finance to be here on Tuesday. Genuinely, to have Hon. Bahati representing the ministry yet the document we are about to debate has a lot to do with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and all the other five ministers - I pray that you compel them to be here on Tuesday when we will debate this document. Thank you very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, I already talked to the full minister. He is hosting the President tomorrow; he was hosting the Vice President today and that is why he is not here. But also from the rota they submitted, Hon. Evelyn Anite is supposed to be here today, but she got an emergency. Otherwise, on Tuesday, they will be here. Hon. Byanyima, do you have an issue? 4.51MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga North County, Isingiro): Mr Speaker, this is a different budget. We are all here together to have a good budget. However small it will be, we want it to have an impact. We expect, as you have put it, all the sector ministers to be here so that we can cut the cake proportionately to this country, Uganda. Not to constituencies, but to this country, Uganda. These people have been taking us for granted. So, let us put our heads together; each one of us should have a copy either on your iPad or a hard copy so that we can really have a full day debate and ensure that we have a budget in the sense of the word “budget.” Not the budget we approve here and they do something else. I thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, you will have, of course, soft copies because we shall consider a report. Government Chief Whip, we need all sector ministers to be here. We have been used to debating the National Budget Framework Paper in 30 minutes and we are done. We want that to change. We want to give the budget enough time. It is a shame when you meet colleagues in the corridors and they do not know what is even in the budget yet they passed it. We have heard some Members on the Floor saying, “I propose we process a supplementary” when we have just finished the budgeting process. Why not bring that idea and we consider it during budgeting? So, we decided, as the leadership, that we are going to give the budgeting process ample time. We want colleagues to scrutinise it well.    And I want to inform the Committee on Budget early. This business of the final budget coming [Mr Wamakuyu]NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR FY 2023/24 - 2027/287013THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 JANUARY 2023in at 2.00 p.m. and it passed at 3.00 p.m., we do not want it to happen this financial year. We want it to come a day before so that we have a full day dedicated to it by scrutininising it, figure by figure. I have informed you in advance; you better prepare. 4.53MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have guided well about the documents that should be presented to us prior. However, we do not want documents that are not reflected in the final document. We are already worried that when we come the next day, it will appear as if the other documents will be presented yet we shall not have them reflected in the final document. I do not know how, for example, the climate change compliance certificate and its contents will be reflected in the final budget. The same applies to other documents, especially the projections and expenditure documents. It is my prayer that they are reflected and not just shared with us.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sure, honourable.MS KAAYA: Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have started the budgeting process. If it cannot be reflected at this stage, we shall have it as we go into the full budget and the figures. Hon. Max, as long as we have it, it is available to you and you will be able to use it as an instrument, together with your team. Moreover it will be very helpful. I heard the chairman say that the Minister for Water and Environment should present it here; no, it is the Minister for Finance who should have sought for it and not the Minister for Water to say, I know you are budgeting, I, therefore, give you a certificate. It is a requirement for the Minister of Finance to seek for that certificate, just like he has sought for other certificates. Colleagues, the chairman is presenting a report. 4.55MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Mr Speaker, since you have guided, I would like to seek your indulgence that in this budget, when uploading the documents, the report of the sectoral committee should also be uploaded so that we see how the Budget Committee has addressed the recommendations of the sectoral committee. It should come because most times, the Committee on Budget - he will not present, but let it be uploaded so that we can access them and see all those documents. Additionally, the list of all projects that are going to be undertaken should also accompany this. In the past, this has been an issue. For example - and I am not debating in anticipation - Government proposes to buy five milk coolers. We would like to know where, on the list, they are going.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will try, okay? Clerk - because now the task is on us. I do not know how heavy the reports are - Hon. Mudimi, let me just pick the two colleagues and then we - Hon. Byarugaba and Hon. Ogwal.4.56MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Mr Speaker, once again, I want to thank you and I want to take cognisance of my colleagues’ submissions. One, if you are not on a certain given committee that has certain given projects, it is most likely that you will never ever – and mark this because I may not be the only one - be part and parcel of the benefits of this budget or other budgets that are forthcoming. I, therefore, concur with a colleague who says that we should look critically at what has been approved and for which part of this country; and what about the remaining parts, so that all these are captured. Just a few moments ago, I raised a very big issue regarding my health centre IV . I want to see, if it is not in this financial year, can it be captured in the next financial year at least? This is so that my people can have hope 7014STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTinstead of coming and escorting others. Year in, year out, you escort others and people tend to think that we are not doing anything here. Secondly, I think this is a very important document. When you saw me go with Hon. Byanyima, we went down to the printery to see whether we could squeeze out a hard copy. This one is good and quite convenient, but sometimes when I want to write a note, it might be very difficult. Is it, therefore, possible for the powers that be to make a few copies for those who want hard copies? To me, this is a very critical document. I request most kindly, sir. Thank you so much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleague, the copy we upload is printable. If you want a hardcopy, print it out. We do not stop you. We do not have a budget for printing because we put it under iPads, but we upload a PDF, which you can print. So if you want a hard copy – the LOP has already printed his. I am very sure that my able MPs can afford to print this small document. I do not want to lie to you here; we shall not print for you copies, but the document we upload is printable.4.58MR MOSES OGWAL (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo): Thank you. I would like to inquire whether, amongst the documents which will be made available, there are those related to tax proposals.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The tax Bills will come later; they are not yet laid. When considering the National Budget Framework Paper, there are no tax Bills because you are framing issues to be considered in the Budget. Taxes are on the revenue side; so, they will come later. Honourable, please conclude.MR WAMAKUYU:  Mr Speaker -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the Hansard will capture the whole report.(The report is hereby attached.)MR WAMAKUYU: The honourable members have raised many issues, but we are proceeding under our Rules of Procedure. For example under rule 145, all chairpersons of sectoral committees are ex-officio members of the Budget Committee. We normally go through all these documents together. So, maybe we can amend that at a later time to also give copies from the sectors.Mr Speaker, I was on public debt. According to the Auditor-General’s report of Financial Year 2021/2022, the reported public debt, as at 30 June 2022, stood at Shs 86.6 trillion of which domestic stock was Shs 38.1 trillion and external Shs 11.5 trillion, equivalent to 15.31 per cent when compared to the stock.Here, I am making reference that the numbers, which the Minister of Finance provided and what the Auditor-General reported varied. Therefore, we recommend:a)  That Government reconciles the reported amount of the public stock;b) Government should balance support for economic recovery and sustainable public debt while reducing reliance on domestic borrowing to alleviate crowding out public sector financing; and c) Reduce the amount of expensive domestic borrowing and concessional financing over the medium term as this will help to keep debt at a sustainable level. That is Government debt stock; it is on that page.Highlights on budget performance, like I indicated, go from page 18 to page 22. Still on page 22, we look at the economic and the budget strategy for financial years 2022/2023/2024.Economic and budget strategy The theme for the National Budget Framework Paper for Financial Year 2023/2024 is, “Full Monetisation of Uganda’s Economy through Commercial Agriculture, Industrialisation, Expanding and Broadening Services, Digital Transformation and Market Access.” [Mr Byarugaba]NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR FY 2023/24 - 2027/287015THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 JANUARY 20234.2 Resource envelope Members, you will know that the preliminary resource envelope of Financial Year 2023/2024 is projected at Shs 49,988.7 billion, compared to Shs 48,130.7 billion for Financial Year 2022/2023. This reflects an increase of Shs 1,858.0 billion. It should be, however, noted that whereas the resource envelope has increased by Shs 1,858 billion, the discretionary resource envelope reduced by Shs 2,533 billion due to the projected increase in interest obligations and obligation to settle Bank of Uganda borrowing. Much as it has increased, the resource available for expenditure has reduced.Honourable members, you can read that summary of the resource envelope in Table 10 up to 11. Then, when you get to Table 11 – the summary of aggregate expenditure composition for the Financial Year 2022/2023 is there. Expenditure categories are all in that table. Policy observations and recommendations1. Poverty and inequalityWe have noted that these remain critical development challenges for the country. Here, we recommend that there is need to strike a balance between infrastructure and human capital development, as well as re-engage development partners especially under the programme of human capital development. Investment in social sectors especially health, education and social protection have a direct impact on poverty and income equality. We propose that Government should focus on that.Public Investment Management (PIM)There is a recommendation that:a) There is need to undertake project due diligence through rigorous feasibility assessments to gauge the viability of the projects. This will ensure that projects are structured, commercially viable and will provide value for money;b) Government undertakes real-time monitoring of development projects and bi-annual monitoring reports are presented to Parliament to enhance oversight of the project implementation;c) Government develops a comprehensive legal framework on public investment management;d) Government fast-tracks the development of a policy on acquisition of right-of-way and the corridors for the development of infrastructure to ease planning and avoid delays in infrastructure development;e) Government sequences projects with priority given to those generating a big gross dividend;f) Funding/releases to projects whose implementation is off-track should be suspended and responsible officers apprehended; andg) There is need to further review Government’s entire project profile in order to assess the projects, which should exit the project investment plan. Projects that are not performing should be stopped so that the funds can be released for emerging priorities in the mineral, manufacturing and tourism sectors, and development of industrial park infrastructure, petroleum sector, among others.NDPIII Core ProjectsThere is a statement on that. We recommend that:a) There is a critical need to scale up revenue mobilisation to fund these core projects;b) In order to benefit from the PPP financing, given its complexity, there is need to enhance skills development in project financing, legal provision for contracts and contracts monitoring based on outcomes. PPPs organised by communities should also be encouraged by Government; and7016STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTc) Government should start exploring other options to finance large infrastructure projects. Government should consider alternative financing models. These include issuing of long-term infrastructure bonds. Government should also mobilise large surplus institutions to finance infrastructure projects such as pension funds, particularly the NSSF in Uganda.NDP III Overall implementation frameworkThere is a statement. The committee recommends that through the ongoing process, developing an implementation framework for the entire plan should be given a priority.Resource mobilisation - honourable members, you can also read on that. We recommend that:a) Fast-track the implementation of domestic revenue mobilisation strategy and develop an effective implementation action plan for the domestic revenue mobilisation strategy. This should include establishing policies to formalise the informal sector;b) Develop a national tax policy that would form the basis for effective tax legislation and tax administration as currently there is none;c) Implement a co-ordinated approach to revenue mobilisation across government ministries, departments and agencies to improve revenue mobilisation effort;d) Wider consultations on tax policy design should be given priority to draft tax policies into laws and to avoid tax policy reversals. There is a statement on the programme-based budgeting forms. Honourable members, you can read that on page 29. We recommend that:a) Fast-track the full implementation of the programme approach including, among others, finalisation of the upload of the programme budget system, shifting from MTEF resource allocation to be done by programmes and strengthening the programme secretariat so as to improve its effectiveness and increase its associated benefits. Programme secretariats should be at the centre of allocating resources within their programmes;b) Fully strengthen the programme Secretariat both technically and financially, and which are resourced annually through the Budget;c) The National Planning Authority should spearhead production of regional plans in line with regional divisions. The Authority should also consider establishing regional offices to support routine implementation of planning;d) To enhance budget efficiency, there is an urgent need to introduce annual programme spending reviews (expenditure tracking) prior to budget processing - what we are going to discuss next week. These reviews should be used as partly the basis for giving resource allocations. Without spending reviews, the risk is that programmes which are ineffective, low-priority or have outlived their usefulness will continue to draw on public resources; ande) Strengthening the functionality of Monitoring and Evaluation and the statistical units within the planning departments.Supplementary budgets Honourable members, it has been an issue. We recommend that we stick to the law for proper planning. The expenditure should not exceed the 3 per cent threshold limit. Domestic ArrearsThere is a statement on domestic arrears. The stock of domestic arrears is at Shs 4.6 trillion. In this current budget, almost Shs 700 billion was provided to clear it. However, in the next budget, the projection has gone down to Shs 200 billion. [Mr Wamakuyu]NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR FY 2023/24 - 2027/287017THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 JANUARY 2023We think that for stock of Shs 4.65 trillion, if you provide Shs 200 billion annually, it will take a number of years to settle these arrears. These are suppliers. Some of these people borrowed money to do businesses with Government. Financial institutions have sold their property – they are largely destitute now, yet they have done work with Government. Therefore, Government should give them priority. When you go to programmes, there is agro-industrialisation. Members can read that statement. We recommend that:a) Government should give priority to effective implementation of Pillar 1 (production, storage, processing and marketing) of PDM;b) Government should give priority to access to extension services by recruiting more extension workers; andc) Government should also promote the enabling laws on the use of biofuels. I think we passed the law on biofuels in the Ninth Parliament, but we do not see its implementation. Once this is done, some of these agricultural products can be mixed with petroleum products, which would reduce the cost and agricultural products can also get market. Effectiveness of industrialisation strategyThere is a statement and we have given many recommendations. Members can read them on page 34 – the document is uploaded. Human capital development strategy There are recommendations there. We are saying that:a) More resources should be given to the education and health sectors;b) There is need to provide physical infrastructure, particularly to lagging primary, secondary, BTVET institutions and universities;c) There should be rehabilitation, expansion and equipping of health centres III, IV and general hospitals, referrals hospitals and specialised care facilities; andd) There should be rehabilitation of dilapidated structures of vulnerable groups including the youth, children and persons with disabilities. There should be strengthening of inspection systems on those issues; On strengthening the public sector to drive growth and investment- there is also a statement. We said that Government should reduce the appetite for domestic borrowing and increase access for longer-term financing, among other measures, to widen investment opportunities in the capital markets, promote retirement benefits and recapitalisation of financial institutions such as the Uganda Development Bank. On stock and quality of productive infrastructure, there is a statement there.On digital transformation, there is a statement. In that regard, we recommend that:a) The last-mile connectivity should be given priority. The rollout in districts should be extended to cover the last inch (departments and units);b) Government should recruit ICT officers at local levels to support the effort;c) Government needs to set up a policy that positions the Uganda Institute of Information and Communications Technology as the preferred trainer for all MDAs and local governments that require ICT and related training. The Parish Government Model (PDM)Members are aware about this and there is a statement on it. We recommend that:a) There is need to empower the PDM secretariat with enough human and 7018STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTfinancial resources, and the mandate to be the one to speak for Government on PDM. All other communication from the MDAs on PDM should be coordinated by the secretariat to avoid inconsistency of messages to the public;b) The national secretariat should continuously create awareness to stakeholders about their role;c)    Local governments will need to provide continuous capacity building on management of associations, financial literacy for the parish chiefs, parish development committees, SACCOs and enterprise groups, integrating mind-set change in business advisory service delivery and extension services to agriculture producers;d) The PDM should envision innovation and case-by-case development solutions for the parishes. This way, we shall have interventions that will deal with real issues that are adaptable to local conditions and circumstances; ande) For the full implementation of the PDM, Government should integrate and mainstream the PDM in all MDAs’ strategic plans, budgets and work plans. Mr Speaker, we have realised that under the PDM pillar of financial inclusion for the SACCOs, they formed parish development committees, but there is no facilitation given to them. I do not know how they are going to sit to do that work. I am not anticipating, but they might encroach on the money, which the Government will give. That is obvious. You cannot sit in a committee where you are not facilitated. We request that Government provides funds to those committees. Otherwise they are going to encroach and they will force the beneficiaries to contribute. That is my assessment and I see it coming. Part twoMr Speaker, we have part two, which is about committee observations and recommendations on V ote plans and expenditure. These are now issues on the committees. I think Members can read them. All committees are there. The committees move up to the end, where we have the summary. This summary, at times, explains what Hon. Odur indicated. We have tried to list the items, which the committees brought to us to be incorporated in this framework. So, all the funding requirement gaps are listed as Annex 1. Mr Speaker, the figure is big; it amounts to Shs 6.1 trillion. I beg to report.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. (Applause) In fact, you have done it like we had consulted here. It is very good. I have read this report. I have held meetings with these people - you will need to read it. I can tell you that on Tuesday, I will be tough. If you come here to debate and because you have not read you start referring to just a small bridge in your area, which even falls under local government and cannot be reflected here, you know –(Laughter)- Hon. Nathan has advised that it can be captured. (Laughter)However, I am just emphasising that on Tuesday, when debating, is when we shall know whether you are a national MP or you have just remained limited to your own area. Let us read through and we are going to ensure tomorrow - I think it is already uploaded. When you get out of here, it will be working. It is the network issue in here, but outside, the network is on. (Laughter) We are on Wi-Fi and the Wi-Fi here is failing to work. However, if you move outside, you will get the document. [Mr Wamakuyu]NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR FY 2023/24 - 2027/287019THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 JANUARY 2023So, start reading tonight – and we are going to ensure that it is worked on properly, honourable colleagues.Chairperson, it is your task to inform us whether you have a minority report or not.MR WAMAKUYU: Mr Speaker, I have not seen any indication of a minority report. (Laughter) We have been processing this work with Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, is it only Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi that can bring a minority report? MR WAMAKUYU: And all other Members. Mr Speaker, our rules provide that the mover of the minority report should formally inform the chairperson in writing. So, I have not seen that written submission to that effect. Based on that, I do not think that there is a minority report. It has collapsed on its way. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I know why Hon. Mudimi is saying that. They have tried their level best to reconcile the issues, but there seems to be some issues, on which they couldn’t merge their minds. So, I received a notice for a minority report. I called Hon. Kivumbi to present – you can even see Hon. Mudimi knew who has –(Laughter)– because he said, “Hon. Kivumbi”, yet any Member can bring a minority report. 5.26MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, happy New Year to you. I think I have not been on this Floor since the beginning of this year. We have been busy. You have a copy.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do not mind. It should not be a problem. They will be delivered. But at least the Speaker should have a copy. If you have an extra copy, you can share with me, but go on, honourable. MR KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I have only eight dissenting opinions. I take the opportunity to also thank the Budget Committee where we worked hard and forged some kind of concurrence on a number of issues. So, 90 per cent, we agreed. My first issue is the unrealistic majority report and it is where he ended. The majority report has come up with a funding gap of Shs 6.1 trillion as unfunded priorities, without identifying the source of funds for the priorities identified. Government came up with a resource envelope showing the proposed resources of revenue in the budget framework paper and the expenditures. This affects committees of Parliament, to simply come up with funding gaps without identifying the source of funding, is an academic trip in this process. It should be imperative that committees and even ministers who, in Cabinet, approve these spending limits, then they come to committees of Parliament and cry for more resources, knowing those resources are not there. And burdening committees with funding gaps and priorities is uncalled for. It renders this whole exercise simply of no input essentially.So, that is where we defer and we asked the budget committee. You have identified Shs 6 trillion in additional funding, it will push the budget to Shs 50.4 trillion; where is the source of funding? Why do we engage in mere academics here? My point of view is that the whole of that report is unrealistic. The second one is on tax exemption. We have Shs 8 trillion tax exemption in this year’s budget. I have just sampled a few companies where we have exempted, and then Parliament now takes a critical decision where it is not high time that we comprehensively review the tax exemption. Look, one example I have identified and few I have sampled: Oil Palm Uganda Limited, value added tax: Shs 155 billion, Uganda Oil Palm Limited, corporation tax - now corporate tax is profit tax. A company has come here, STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT7020STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTyou have given it land, you have reduced the power costs, you give them water at reduced rates and they make a profit. They do not pay taxes. Government says just walk away with your profit. Some of these companies – Roofing Rolling Mills Limited, this company has been here for the last so many years. Why on earth doesn’t it pay a corporation tax? Does it need affirmative action after some 20 years, honestly? We are here grappling with lack of resources to do bridges. We are letting some fellows walk away with so many billions of money.Steel and Tube Industries: even that, Shs 15 billion corporation tax. Uganda Post Limited - PAYE. Honourable colleagues, when it comes to PAYE - where they do not pay PAYE, let me tell you what happens: that when the Government of Uganda exempts a company from PAYE, the Government of Uganda goes its way to pay that money. It means that poor me, I am paying PAYE on behalf of the Uganda Posts and Telecommunications; that is what happens. We are in this era budgeting with this kind of mentality. That goes to Uganda Posts Limited. Go to Fine Spinners Uganda Limited; for example, on stamp duty, the Government of Uganda not only gave them every incentive, we even gave them Shs 20 billion working capital. Still, they cannot pay stamp duty worth Shs 239 billion. Why? There is this Chinese Company called - the Kia Finance Construction PSV Limited. It is a special-purpose vehicle. It cannot pay PAYE and so many others; even the specialised hospital in Lubowa and others, they cannot pay PAYE. Mr Speaker, our appeal is that last year, we passed a resolution –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kivumbi, what I just wanted to understand is where I see withholding tax. Go on.MR KIVUMBI: People are refusing to pay withholding tax and we excuse them. That is why we have accumulated Shs 8 trillion in tax exemption. We have a – Mr Speaker, I will come to it - of an equivalent amount of money, where Government has failed over years to pay. So, if you reviewed this and just realised some Shs 4 trillion out of Shs 8 trillion, we can easily balance up our books and be able to do more. It is high time this Parliament put up a committee of inquiry into tax exemption. (Applause)The law is very clear, Mr Speaker. We have not been doing our work. Section 77 of the Public Finance Management Act mandates every ministry, where they tax exempt, to come every three months to Parliament and account for the costs and the benefits to Uganda of that tax exemption. Do they do so? No. Therefore, we should go to the committee to fully overhaul these tax exemption procedures in Uganda. And the Minister of Finance has been taking it upon himself to say, “I exempt this” as if these are personal coffers. Hon. Mudimi, I think you can now see why I should come up with a minority report – (Laughter)– I am just joking.Mr Speaker, in the unrealistic resource envelope, the issues we get with the Ministry of Finance is that they come here and give you a resource envelope of Shs 49 Trillion and on the 1st of July of every year, they sit down before we go to another financial year and do a supplementary reallocation on day one. The reason they come up with a ballooned resource envelope that will not be fulfilled is to have a bigger cut of the 3 per cent so that they have a huge - for which they will do secondary appropriation, to go ahead and fund items that were rejected by Parliament. But when I look at the resource envelope, they are telling you revenue is going to rise by Shs 3 trillion. However, when I look at the last five years, I notice that not in any single year have we met our revenue targets. So, how do you fool us that this year, you are going to realise Shs 3 more trillion without any added tax because inherently, the homogeneous growth [Mr Kivumbi]NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR FY 2023/24 - 2027/287021THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 JANUARY 2023of the economy projected at 6 per cent will give you that tax yield? And you base on that anticipation to draw a national budget? We are here talking about Shs 49 trillion. We raise the country’s expectations. And from this table, which I have drawn here, there is no single year in which they realised 100 per cent tax revenue or a surplus. What has been rising every single year, and spontaneously, has been the debt. When you study the column of debt, it progressively - I think on this table, they should have missed the column -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As you get that, Hon. Muwanga-Kivumbi, we usually hear the Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) announcing, “We have collected a surplus” I thought the targets given to URA are targets against projected revenue in the national budget. Why are you saying that they have never realised 100 per cent when they are always saying they have collected a surplus? Because monthly targets should be projected against the projected revenue we pass here -MR KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, the source of my table is the table that was supplied to us by URA. It was only in the Financial Year 2018/2019 when they met the target, but in Financial Year 2019/2020, they targeted Shs 20 trillion in revenue collection. They collected only Shs 16 trillion. In 2021, they collected Shs 19 trillion against the projected Shs 21 trillion. In Financial Year 2021/2022, it was Shs 22 trillion, but they collected Shs 21 trillion. So, it is only this year that we do not have the figures they are giving the country saying, “We are collecting surplus”, but from where?  The failure in that collection means that every single year, the borrowing goes up. In Financial Year 2018/2019, the borrowing was at Shs 24 trillion. In Financial Year 2019/2020, the borrowing went to Shs 28 trillion. In Financial Year 2020/2021, the borrowing went up to Shs 36 trillion, and last year, it was Shs 35 trillion. Net borrowing in total has been rising from Shs 44 to 57 to 70 to Shs 78 trillion, and we are now at Shs 86 trillion. The reason we are performing that way is that we make unrealistic budget revenue collections and consequently, we raise our recurrent expenditure yet we find ourselves with no money at the end of the fourth quarter to even pay salaries. We go to the domestic market to borrow. So, the only way we can tame this appetite, and in the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility, is to peg increased Government expenditure to direct proportion to increased revenue collection. That if you want to increase Government expenditure, show us that net increase in the expected revenue, but a realistic way should have been to always project the budget for what was realistically realised in the previous financial year. If you budget that way, you will never have all these crises we are having. The reason we are having this crisis is because the guys at the Ministry of Finance are lazy; they go for easier options. Because the law permits them to borrow on securities, they think they can run there every time. That is why we must review the Public Finance Management Act to remove the 3 per cent that erodes the parliamentary powers of appropriation. Secondly, we put stringent borrowing measures through securities because that freehand has been demonstratively abused. On debt rollover, we should provide space for a debate on debt rollover. Our projected revenues have been rising. By 2018/2019, our revenues were at Shs 16 trillion. Even by our standards, we are now at Shs 25 trillion, but even at a passionate level, if our incomes have been rising, it would be very funny and scandalous for the debt you failed to pay to grow. The debt can grow, but the one you are failing to pay cannot grow. That is why in this financial year, I think it is high time we capped any extra revenue that we generate as a country to go towards tackling this issue of debt rollover.7022STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Muwanga-Kivumbi, conclude. I know it is a very sweet message, but conclude, please.MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI:   I have got only two items to conclude with. The first item I want to conclude with is the Road Fund. I know the majority committee report has come up with a very generous recommendation of Shs 1.5 billion per district to tackle the issue of the Road Fund. However, Mr Speaker, we passed the Road Fund Act of Uganda, which Government has failed to operationalise, save for the levy on fuel. The levy on fuel is intended - a portion of it to go towards the Road Fund so that local governments can have roads under interconnectivity. You have enough money to rehabilitate and maintain a national road network. Government grabbed the money, took it for general budget support and failed to operationalise the provisions of the Road Fund.There are two issues here: one is that we need to go into some kind of rationalisation; members of Parliament, please protect the Road Fund; and two, let us urge Government to operationalise the Road Fund Act so that we can have real money ring-fenced for the maintenance of our roads in the districts. Members of Parliament are currently using their mega emoluments to maintain roads and build bridges and they are being voted in and out because of the poor state of the roads, yet Government failed to operationalise the Road Fund. Mr Speaker, I want to end with the one of the National Forestry Authority where I have a rebellion from my shadow minister. It is high time - and I want to urge this Parliament to block the budget for the National Forestry Authority. Fifteen years ago, when they set up the National Forestry Authority, our natural forest cover stood at 60 per cent. They were set up with a mandate to protect and restore. Therefore, they were to maintain the 60 per cent and add more to the natural forest cover. What has happened? Fifteen years down the road, our natural forest cover has reduced to 9 per cent. Fifteen years down the road, we shall not have any natural forest standing on the watch of the National Forestry Authority. How do we continue funding an agency that is more or less a terrorist in maintaining forests in this country? These are proper terrorists and I have been speaking to the army officers in the Ministry of Defence. The question of the environment and protecting our nature is a question of national security. With our poor economies in Africa, for as long as the natural environment that my mother uses to grow cassava depends on the village mate, if the rains do not come, people are going to march on the streets and we will not be able to stop them. That is why I call the National Forest Authority a terrorist authority and I do not care about the protection from my Minister of Water and Environment. I do not give a damn.Mr Speaker, my only view is to urge this Parliament - unless we have a strong case and commitment, we no longer get value for money. We gave them the army, the police - They have soldiers to protect the forests. Instead, they are at 9 per cent. It is high time we stopped this destruction. I beg to move, Mr Speaker. (Applause) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Kivumbi, I am going to arrange a meeting between you, the shadow minister and the Executive Director of the National Forestry Authority. You gave them the army and the laws, but what other capacity did you give them? You might find that you still have that 9 per cent because of the National Forestry Authority being there. I can tell you that big people who have titles in forests are smiling from your statement. They are saying, “Remove it and we take our forests” because the National Forestry Authority is blocking them. I can tell you because we know. NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR FY 2023/24 - 2027/287023THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 JANUARY 2023To me, the National Forestry Authority needs support and we can look into their issues, but it is very important to have a dialogue and you take them on. I will ensure that meeting is there - Government Chief Whip, please arrange that meeting. It is very important. Colleagues, we have the committee that we appointed to study the case of tax exemption of Bujagali. We should not go into the budgeting process before that committee reports. I am giving them next week to present their report. Hon. Masaba, are you on the committee?  5.46MR KARIM MASABA (Independent, Industrial Division, Mbale City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was part of the committee and we finished the report and submitted it. We have been waiting for it –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Very good. We are going to give you space on the Order Paper because I want to give you – we will look at the way you handled the assignment and see whether you have done a good job. If we find that you have done a good job and the House appreciates, we will give you these other entities to continue with; the ones which have been listed for exemption.Because you already have the framework, you know how quickly it can be done. We will give you around two weeks so that you can expeditiously handle this during the small break that we will have, as the ministry compiles more information to do with the budget. Colleagues, we shall have a debate on that issue. I received a complaint from the Chairperson, Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs that they want the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs to formally inform Parliament of the UPDF operations in the DRC. I tasked the minister and the minister has told me that the report is ready. I want all this to be considered during budgeting. As such, I am going to adjust the Order Paper to allow the minister to present that statement now. Clerk, can you call out the statement because I want it to be captured on the Hansard. You can help him with your copy so that the statement is captured.STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS ON OPERATION SHUJJA5.48THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Mr Jacob Oboth): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I move under rule 52 of our Rules of Procedure to give a statement to this august House on Operation Shujja by the UPDF in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). Mr Speaker, following the escalation of the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) attacks, both in the DRC and Uganda in the last quarter of 2021, the two countries agreed to conduct joint operations against the ADF in Beni and -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sorry, honourable minister. ICT team, can you adjust the statement to fit on the screen? Thank you. MR OBOTH:   - Irumu territories in eastern DRC. Consequently, a Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in Defence and a Status of Force Agreement (SOFA) were concluded in Bunia and Kampala, respectively. This culminated into the launch of the Joint FARDC-UPDF operation codenamed “Operation Shujja” in November 2021. Under this bilateral agreement, each country is responsible for the command, control and administration as well as logistical requirements of its forces within the operation. The operation has evolved through phases renewable every two months. The joint operation - Operation Shujja - remains on course, with significant achievements registered. In 2022 alone, 424 ADF terrorists were put out of action, 8l others captured, ll5 abductees 7024STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTrescued, and ll8 firearms with assorted ammunitions and l0 IEDs recovered. The joint forces continue to mount pressure against ADF elements in order to decisively neutralise the group. Mr Speaker, meanwhile, the East African Community (EAC) Heads of State Conclave held in Nairobi in April 2022, resolved to establish and deploy the East African Community Regional Force (EACRF) to deal with other armed groups and enforce cessation of hostilities to create an enabling environment for resolution of conflict in eastern DRC. Uganda, as a member, is to contribute a battle group to the regional force to be based in Ituri Province. The UPDF has deployed advanced troops to the force headquarters in Goma while the main body is already prepared, awaiting final administrative arrangements to deploy. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to report.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I am going to pick a few Members. I am trying to see the Shadow Minister for Defence; he is not around, but would – Hon. Jonathan - oh are you - the LOP usually speaks last. (Laughter) I do not want a coup here on the Floor. Let me start with Hon. Ssewungu, Hon. Rose Obigah and Hon. Rwemulikya. After that, Hon. Oseku, Hon. Baba and Hon. Lillian.5.53MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Honourable minister, thank you for your statement. First of all, I need to know why civilians like Andrew Mwenda go to that operation. They wear combat and begin commanding and sitting in choppers yet we are civilians. That does not give a good image of our army. These people go through rigorous exercises to become generals or privates, as the matter may be.Mr Speaker, the statement is not comprehensive. I wanted to get better answers because we know we are in the East African Community; but why is it that it is the Ugandan soldiers going for any operation all the time? “Operation Shujja”, name it. We need to know: are we the problem or is it the other side that is causing problems? Those are the areas I want. As I conclude, Mr Speaker, I need to know why civilians are, most especially, in that kind of operation – is it because Mwenda has a relationship with the former commander of that operation who was recently removed? That image was not good and I cannot accept it, but the minister can tell us. Thank you very much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.5.55MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to applaud the UPDF; honestly, in areas like Bundibugyo, this other side of Simbili, which is around Maracha would have been invaded by the rebels if the UPDF had not gone to put them out of action. However, again, my plea is - there is a problem with the funding of the people who have been sent there. The money for these officers who are suffering in the wilderness has been tampered with.  Can we correctly credit their accounts and also with the funds meant to help them while they are on the battlefield? They are ‘small’ people; they cannot speak for themselves. But honestly, what belongs to Caesar should be given to Caesar and to God what is for God. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Rwemulikya.5.56MR IBANDA RWEMULIKYA (Indepen-dent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I thank the minister for the very good report. Personally, I would also like to thank the UPDF for the job well done. [Mr Oboth] MINISTERIAL STATEMENT7025THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 JANUARY 2023Mr Speaker, for us who stay at the border with Congo, we know a lot of things and see a lot of trouble with the ADF; the havoc they cause across Congo. And recently, we also saw their wrath when they invaded Ntoroko. However, the issue is that honourable minister, your operation – because we know the areas in Congo where the soldiers are now stationed; they are in the areas of Boga, Mitego and Tshabi. However, they have not really covered the place - because we have areas like Geti, Kasenyi, Kyomya, Bunia where the ADF is still operating. They are concentrating on the other side of Beni, Mitego, Boga and they are leaving a wider area for the ADF to operate. Even in the areas of Kasenyi to Bunia, people are still being slaughtered on the way. Therefore, I would like to seek the indulgence of the minister that if the UPDF want to do a great job – because I know the UPDF can do a great job in Congo - they should also occupy areas of Geti, Kasenyi, Kyomya, Bunia up to Commander, so that the ADF is wiped out of that country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.5.58MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to appreciate the minister for the report and the progress in the operation. My concern is that the minister committed to state the achievements of the UPDF by the enemies that were put out of action, and also the recoveries that we have done. However, he fell short of mentioning the losses we may have suffered in the operation. And listening to this House, perhaps the families and the parents who may have lost their dear ones would feel very bad that there is no mention about some of the soldiers we may have lost in the operation. It is very important that we also state that we have had some losses here and there, because they happen as far as battle is concerned. That is my concern - because it is an honour to mention that we lost, and the families that lost their loved ones in battle feel good that the participation of their own is recognised.I thank you, Mr Speaker. 5.59MS LILLIAN ABER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister - my senior - for the brief report. Indeed, we applaud the UPDF for the great work being done. Honourable minister, I really want to request that we redeploy those soldiers who are working very hard on that side to make sure there is peace, to Oromo in Kitgum District, to ensure that we also rest from the cattle raids. Otherwise the communities are asking; “How come we are performing so well in outside battles, but within, we are not giving it focus?” I thank you.6.00MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Mr Speaker, I too thank the minister for his statement. However, the fact that this Shujja operation was done under the EAC arrangement; there was a clear mandate for them to go into that territory. It was also an admission on the part of the DRC that they had little capacity to deal with insecurity in eastern Congo. Certainly, it is true Kinshasa is more than 3,000 kilometres away from this theatre of operation; there is hardly a presence of government there. So, if they ask for help, it is good that neighbours come to rescue them. As a matter of fact, we should have even sent more troops to eastern Congo and South Sudan because these are neighbours who are seriously in trouble. They have no capacity to deal with the challenges they have. If we can support them, why not send more?As a neighbour, both to South Sudan and the DR Congo, we know the magnitude of this challenge. If chaos broke out and extended to our areas, we would have nowhere to run. So, let us support the operations of the UPDF in those areas for our own protection and for the stability of our neighbours. Thank you.7026STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Aleper. 6.01MR MOSES ALEPER (NRM, Chekwii County (Kadam), Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not here to discount the success of the UPDF in Operation Shujja, but rather applaud them for what they have done. I just wanted to say that for the future – if you remember, when this operation was initially set up, it was supposed to last three months. Then after the three months, there was no such report that was brought to this House and this has periodically been sustained.I think it is just right and proper that when such sustenance occurs, there should also be periodic reports like this. Next time, this report should be very comprehensive. It is very shallow. I want to reiterate the point someone mentioned here. Just imagine yourself bringing your son to that seat and he takes pictures on it. What does it portray to this country? I think it will demonstrate that there is no seriousness in this House.  A civilian going to pose in a helicopter in a war zone - some of us have grown up in war zones: war is war. A civilian cannot just go and pose. Something should have been done to the commander at that time. I think as leaders in this country, such acts should not be encouraged. I thank you. 6.03MR GIDEON MUJUNGU (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese): Mr Speaker, I would like to applaud the minister and the report on defence. On behalf of the people of Kasese and my brothers and sisters who border Congo, we understand, very much, the value of the UPDF in Congo. Mr Speaker, you have seen on social media that a neighbouring country downed the DRC jet. Such a thing sends chilling ripples in our back. What do we want, as neighbours? We want stability. We want peace.However, the presence of the UPDF in Congo and their proper operations there require infrastructural support. Some of the bridges on these borders are weak. They have been weakened by rivers and floods. Recently, we were reporting about the bridge on River Tako and River Rubiriha. It is the same story on the Bundibugyo side. As we go onto the budgeting process, we request that support is given to such bridges. Finally, the people on this side depend on Congo, as a market. A lot of our products go into Congo. Therefore, when Congo is secure, then, our pockets are secure as we get income. I also urge the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs and Operation Shujja, to beef up the intelligence system in Congo. The incident that happened in a church in Kasindi the other day – a few kilometres from Mpondwe - was very bad. Innocent people were killed or maimed and of course the whole community was terrified.I urge the security forces in Uganda, the defence minister and our President to beef up intelligence in Congo so that we do not see similar incidents again. I thank you. 6.06MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO  (NRM, Buhweju West County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I applaud the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the other security agencies for a job well done. However, while I appreciate the participation of the UPDF in the Democratic Republic of Congo, my concern is about the leakages back at home such as the recent skirmishes we heard of in Bundibugyo and Kasese.Mr Speaker, in Buhweju, where I come from, we border a forest – Kashohakitomi. There is talk that people have seen strange people within the forest. The UPDF has not come out to declare itself. Remember that at one time, the ADF operated in that forest, up to Bihanga in Nyakaziba Town Council. [Mr Oboth] MINISTERIAL STATEMENT7027THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 JANUARY 2023My concern is: what has the UPDF intelligence done to detect those people who pass behind their lines to come and cause mayhem within Uganda? That accompanies the recent action by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the police of decimating the police posts. For example, in my area, the subcounties of Kyahenda, Rubengye and Burere border the forest. They did not have police stations. The small police posts that were there were reduced and the policemen taken inside. Therefore, there is no force or intelligence that can detect if the ADF is back. So, I ask that the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs works with the Ministry of Internal Affairs to rethink the decision to decimate police stations. Thank you. 6.08MS BRENDA NABUKENYA  (NUP, Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I thank the minister for this statement, but I have two questions. I want an assurance from the minister that, actually, the UPDF’s going into DRC guarantees peace to Uganda. Why should it be the UPDF specifically? Any country can go and help the DRC in maintaining peace. I want to know because this is at the expense of the taxpayers. The Ugandan government funds that. Why is it necessary? Also, it is not the first time the UPDF has gone to Congo. The last time they went, they came with minerals and Ugandans had to pay heavily. Can you assure us that, actually, they went to do the Operation Shujja - to chase the ADF? At the end of the day, I do not think Ugandans will pay next time. At the International Court of Arbitration, Uganda was told to pay Congo a lot of money. We want to know if that is going to happen again. I thank you.6.09MR MARTIN OJARA-MAPENDUZI  (Independent, Bardege-Layibi Division, Gulu City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to thank the honourable minister, but most importantly, the UPDF, for doing a wonderful job. It is important that we give them the support they need to continue ensuring the safety and security of the citizens.We are all aware that last year, the DRC joined the East African Community. That is a very virgin area for Uganda, well aware that the DRC creates a lot of opportunities. It is a country with a huge population of about 90 million people and there is a lot that Uganda can benefit from the DRC. Of course, we know that we can never have peace in Uganda without having peace in the neighbourhood. Therefore, it would be important to begin to strategically think of how Uganda can take advantage, given this new environment that has been created by the DRC joining the East African Community. As we pursue that, there are already a lot of activities going on between Uganda and the DRC, including our people doing business there. I would like to give you an example: for the last several months, the people of Zombo, who do a lot of business in the DRC, cannot move freely. We have seen pictures and complaints where trucks were lined up for over two weeks and commodities are getting rotten on the road. I think that as we secure the safety of our people, we also need to see how we can begin to put some of this infrastructure to support the people to do meaningful business. I thank you. 6.11THE SHADOW MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Jonathan Odur): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for the opportunity to respond. I want the House to recall that we made a resolution here requiring the minister to come and inform the House, as required by the Constitution, which call from the House was blatantly undermined by the minister. 7028STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTTherefore, we are dealing with the question of compliance with the law, as opposed to the justification for the deployment - this should be understood from the onset. The Constitution and the UPDF Act, under Sections 39 and 40, recognise that there may be circumstances where the army would be deployed outside the country. Under Section 39, there are for peacekeeping or peace enforcement. Peacekeeping and peace enforcement should be in line with Charters No. 6 and 7 of the United Nations Charter. The statement that has been brought here falls short of the requirement of coming to this House to seek for the approval envisaged under the Act. The minister has not come here to seek for that approval. Therefore, I move that this statement be rejected until the minister comes to seek the approval that we require. Nobody is objecting to the justification to go into Congo, but it must comply that you are coming here to ask Parliament to approve because it says the President may deploy. Mr Speaker, to make the Members see the point, under Section 39; it actually says that if Parliament is in recess, the Speaker is commanded to summon the House within 21 days. That means that as soon as the deployment is done, the minister ought to have come here to report. Therefore, that is an indictment on the ministry for undermining the authority of Parliament in this matter. Secondly, Mr Speaker, under Section 40 of the UPDF Act, there could be a bilateral or multilateral arrangement for the deployment. Even then, it is stated that the Memorandum of Understanding must be brought to Parliament. Why? Because we do not want our soldiers who are deployed in the DRC, for example, if they commit a crime there, what happens? Which law will apply? We want to see from the MoU, has the DRC consented that if one of our soldiers has been arrested for committing a crime, they will be repatriated back to be tried here, or will they try them under the Congolese system, which is a different criminal jurisdiction from what we practice here in Uganda. So, that Memorandum of Understanding has not even been laid here before Parliament. Lastly, Mr Speaker, we understand that it is now more than a year since the UPDF went there. This report appears to capture only the initial period of operation. The report appears to suggest that the achievements, which we saw the President talk about and the ministers, are not updated up to now. If we have moved deep inside Congo, for example, to hunt and we have annihilated them from there, why is it that we still see them coming easily into Ntoroko? Where is the intelligence system? Is there any justification at all to go there or now you have to come back and deal with them since they have already penetrated the country, and they are inside Uganda? I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The LOP. When you see me calling the Shadow Minister and the LOP, it means I am concluding. Colleagues, I have very important visitors waiting for me.6.16THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I have ably deployed and I do not know whether the Government Chief Whip would rather exchange his minister for mine for the information of Parliament and the country. Mr Speaker, the issues are very clear. Parliament is the proverbial old woman of the clan. Even when you run around and around, you go to the city and enjoy, you always come back for burial, and she shows you your burial site. The minister has been running around and refusing to come to Parliament to actually [Mr Odur] MINISTERIAL STATEMENT7029THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 JANUARY 2023speak to the law of the land, both under Article 220 and the Act, as my able minister has enumerated. This statement, Mr Speaker, we should know better that it is targeted for the budget, not for the information of Parliament, which is why it speaks to its flimsy nature. Hon. Oboth is a very intelligent man, I know it. If he had intended to give Parliament information, he would refuse to carry this. This flimsy statement is intended - and I would not know why a very able man would insult us with this pager. This is an internal memo, not a statement to Parliament, Mr Speaker. I want to invite the Parliament to reject it, not out of disrespect for the honourable minister, but out of a huge duty we bear as leaders in this country, to compel the rank and file to give this Parliament information. We are not asking for classified information. For instance, if I was part of this delegation that was in the MoU, and you resolved that each party takes care of their charges, why wouldn’t you negotiate off the costs that we owe the DRC in exchange for this operation? Why wouldn’t you - the honourable member is speaking in whispers that the other one is court. But you know that I am a lawyer; we know how things can be offset; so, that does not arise. Mr Speaker, why wouldn’t they negotiate and offset these costs as part of the settlement? We agree Congo’s security is our own security. However, should it be at our cost in its entirety? Of course, we love and support the spirit of East Africa; I would have expected the honourable minister to comment about the role of the other players in the region. So, what happens when you meet the other people, when you meet our brothers from Rwanda in Congo, what happens? Have you drawn the borders where they cannot go and you cannot go - what happens when you meet in a theatre and you have really labelled it well, it is a theatre. In this theatre, you, the drunkards - everyone has their own space, you have the villagers sauntering in the corridors of the theatre, and you have also the tenants and the landlords. You should have briefed Parliament as to what happens with other players. We have a UN presence and the African presence in the theatre. Mr Speaker, with due respect to the honourable minister, who is deliberately being very conservative with information, and especially having refused to come to Parliament to walk with the law - we have him for lunch. Now that he wants to align his pockets to go and operate, he must surrender relevant information including, out of respect for Parliament to come and say, “I am formally here to seek permission”. Start with an apology for being late, we shall understand your indiscipline and forgive you. We may not censure you today, but be on notice. (Laughter)  I want to invite the Parliament to honourably ask Hon. Oboth to walk back humbly and come back.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Of course, we are all concerned on issues of deployment and informing Parliament. Now the clarification I need, honourable minister, is; what was the purpose of the deployment? Was it peacekeeping or peace enforcement? Because, if it is peacekeeping under the UPDF Act sections 39(2), you are supposed to inform Parliament. The section only talks of peacekeeping. Therefore, I want to know: did you go for peacekeeping or peace enforcement, which is not provided for here.MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, let me just pre-empt what the honourable Leader of the Opposition is thinking about; he is seeking my apology. 7030STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTFirst of all, for the record, it is not true that we have been running away from reporting to this House. I made an undertaking in the committee that I would do so. I would like to start with the clarification sought. The confusion was if it was section 39 or section 40 of the UPDF Act. What we are doing in Congo is not under section 39. You are trying to catch a terrorist who has been bombing the natives - Ugandans- and also causing terror in the Democratic Republic of Congo. You agree with your neighbour that this is our common enemy and we know where this enemy is running to and hiding. The neighbour says, “Come, we fight together.” This is what happened. We agreed to look for this enemy and fight. Together with the DRC, we are not doing peacekeeping. Peacekeeping is a constitutional requirement for us to come to this House. The Shadow Minister of Defence spoke very well, but made it appear like I could be available for lunch on the premises that I had defied the provision of the law. On that note, you have made me unavailable for lunch. I would like to apologise, where it is required, that probably we should have done this much earlier. A country where leaders do not take political responsibility makes life very difficult. I am not one of those who will not take responsibility. Mr Speaker and Members, there was the issue of a civilian going out and posing on a military aircraft. This civilian mentioned here widely and broadly, is Mr Andrew Mwenda. For the record, he is not one of the known commanders or soldiers in the UPDF, but he is known as a journalist. He had to dress up in the military fatigue to camouflage. This is a practice known world over. In any case, we should have commended him for the patriotic spirit he exhibited when he went to the battleground, knowing he is not a soldier. Some Members said the report is so shallow and so flimsy. I do not know which details you wanted, that are not here. You seem to have a preconceived - my brother said, “This is too shallow.” However, the goat’s tail is too brief, but can be able to cover the subject matter. Therefore, I thought this report can be equated to the goat’s tail; it is brief enough to cover the subject matter. (Laughter) Nonetheless, I would like to thank you, honourable colleagues, for the comments and the advice you have given us. Thank you for the commendations. The UPDF and the brothers from the border appreciate this; Hon. Gideon Thembo and Hon. Rose Obigah appreciate this. You know that the men in uniform are doing all that they can to save Ugandans. The areas to go to in Congo are all agreed upon; so, you cannot just go and be anywhere in Congo. We must be able to know. Where it has been possible, they have used force multiplier – [Mr Olanya: “Clarification”] - I am still talking. If I was talking about land matters, I would clarify. You should appreciate –(Laughter)– But with your permission, I wanted – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, conclude.  MR OBOTH: On the issue of the UPDF losses, that was an oversight. Thank you, Hon. Oseku. We shall be able to furnish this House, but – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can do it through the committee. MR OBOTH:  Yes. On the relatives and families, there were some few accidents. I can remember about three or so. We have been doing very well. Join me in appreciating the UPDF. Thank you. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please conclude. I have visitors. MR OBOTH:  Thank you very much. I have responded. [Mr Oboth] MINISTERIAL STATEMENT7031THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 25 JANUARY 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is past 6 O’clock. Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I think this is now a settled matter. Article 210 of the Constitution says we shall regulate the deployment of the UPDF. We did that regulation through the UPDF Act, 2005. The minister has confirmed to us that they deployed them under section 40. Section 40 is very clear, “Where troops are to be deployed outside Uganda, under a multilateral or bilateral arrangement with other countries, the minister shall enter into an agreement referred to as the Status of Forces Agreement with the host country or organisation.” Therefore, you have tied my hands. I do not know what to demand more from the minister, apart from our oversight duty through our committees ensuring the money we give is well utilised and the activities are well monitored. Also, on the issue of MoUs, we have a way of handling classified documents. As presiding officers, we shall link up with the minister for the satisfaction of the honourable colleagues. We can discuss how we can look at the bilateral agreement in the form of classified documents. We have a mechanism - so that they are not in the public domain. Honourable colleagues, with that, I adjourn the House to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. (The House rose at 6.29 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 31 January 2023 at 2.00 p.m.) 