
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Thursday, 27 January 2022

Parliament met at 10.11 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to welcome you to this special sitting. This sitting is entirely dedicated to paying tribute to an eminent son of this great nation; the deceased Governor Bank of Uganda, Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime Mutebile. 

Without pre-empting the motion by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government business, I take this opportunity to thank the good Lord for blessing this country with Prof. Emmanuel Mutebile, a patriot, for the social-economic transformation of this country. As the Governor Bank of Uganda, he served with distinction: he was corrupt-free and served with integrity. This nation will dearly miss Prof. Emmanuel Mutebile. I wish we could have more Mutebiles in this country. 

I urge you all, fellow countrymen, to learn from the distinct service that has been shown by Prof. Mutebile. It is an exemplary leadership and professionalism. 

As we send off Prof. Mutebile to his final resting home, may we, as leaders, continue to strive for the growth and prosperity of this country – something that the professor has worked for. The call to leadership is a call for transformation. Let us honour the memory and legacy that Prof. Mutebile has shown us as a country, especially in the economy of Uganda.

May the Lord grant the bereaved family, staff of Bank of Uganda and all friends and lovers of Uganda peace in their mind that Prof. Emmanuel Mutebile has gone to be with the Lord and has left a legacy behind. Let us stand for a moment of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, we have always brought bodies, but for today, since it was on a short notice, we could not be able to bring the body here. 

Before we have the motion, I would like to recognise the dignitaries who are in the VIP Gallery: We have His Excellency, hon. Edward Ssekandi, the former Vice-President; we have the Rt Hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda (Ndugu); we have the Rt Hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi; that is the Super Minister. We have Dr Olara Otunu; we have hon. John Nasasira, a former minister; we have hon. Elly Karuhanga, a former minister; and we have hon. Amanya Mushega, the former Minister of Education and Sports. Thank you all for coming. (Applause) 

We also have Prof. Mondo Kagonyera; we have Prof. Ezra Seruma; we have Prof. Barnabas Nawangwe; we have hon. Miria Matembe - that is a girl-child; we have Prof. Augustus Nuwagaba; we have Mr Charles Mbire and we have Mr Musinguzi Garuga. Thank you very much for coming. (Applause)

We also have the honourable members of the East African Legislative Assembly. Thank you so much for coming. (Applause)

We also have the family members. Among the family members, we have Mrs Betty Mutebile. (Applause) She is right behind here. Thank you, Betty, for coming and thank you for all that you did for the professor. We cherish you and thank you for being a good wife. I wish all women would be like you. (Applause)

We also have Ms Samalie, a sister to the spouse; Mr Duncan Tumusiime; Mr David Mutebile; Mrs Alice Mutebile, wife to the brother of the late Mutebile; Maj. Gen. Timothy Sabiiti Mutebile, a brother to the late; and Mrs Irene Sabiiti, wife to Maj. Gen. Sabiiti. Thank you all for coming. (Applause)

They have come to join us in the proceedings of today as we pay tribute to the gallant son of Uganda. 

Still, in the Public Gallery, we have Bank of Uganda staff: We have Dr Atingi-Ego. Dr Atingi-Ego, we would like to thank you for standing in for the late. There was no gap, but we really thank you for being there for the bank. (Applause)  

We have Mr Daudi Murungi, still from Bank of Uganda; we have Mrs Joyce Okello, the personal assistant to the late Governor; we have Mr Charles Mugisa, Ag. Executive Director, Finance and Chief Accountant; we have Mr Jacob Opolot, Economic Advisor to the Governor; and Mr Henry Rugambwa, President of the late’s Rotary Club.

We have members of the Bankers’ Association:

    1. Mr Mathias Katamba
    2. Ms Sarah Arapta
    3. Mr Thambi
    4. Ms Anne Juuko, and
    5. Mr Wilbrod Owor

We have the family from back home with the following members:

    6. Mr Daudi Murungi
    7. Mrs Jolly Murungi
    8. Mrs Grace Murungi
    9. Mr Noel Muhumuza Mutebile 
    10. Mrs Brenda Mutebile
    11. Lt. Gen. Jim Owoyesigire
    12. Mr Justus Rugyengye
    13. Ms Rachael Mugisha
    14. Ms Penina Kirabo
    15. Mr Paul Jesse Mubala
    16. Mr Edward Kamasha
    17. Ms Agnes Kamasha
    18. Ms Nora Aine
    19. Ms Annet Natukunda
    20. Ms Marion Natukunda; and
    21. Mr Patrick Tibbs. 

Thank you for coming. (Applause)

Those are the people who have come to join us. If I have not mentioned your name, kindly bear with me; we will be here for some short time. Can we have the motion?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE PROF. EMMANUEL TUMUSIIME MUTEBILE, GOVERNOR BANK OF UGANDA

10.24
The prime minister and leader of government business (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, happy New Year –

The Deputy Speaker: Just a minute. Honourable members, please do not squeeze yourselves; there is still COVID-19 – it’s free sitting.

Ms nabbanja: Madam Speaker, I move a motion, under rule 56 for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime Mutebile, the Governor of Bank of Uganda, for his dedicated service to the Republic of Uganda. The motion reads:

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received, with deep sorrow, the sad news of the demise of Prof. Tumusiime Mutebile, which occurred on Sunday, 23 January 2022;

AWARE that Prof. Tumusiime Mutebile has had a distinguished career, serving in various capacities, both in the public service of Uganda, the private sector and on the international scene;

RECOGNISING that Prof. Mutebile Tumusiime has held several key positions of responsibility including –

    a) Deputy Principal Private Secretary to the President, State House, Entebbe, from June 1979 to 1980;

    b) Acting Under-Secretary, Ministry of Planning and Economic Development in 1981; Chief Government Planning Economist, Ministry of Planning and Economic Development, 1982;

    c) Permanent Secretary in charge of Economic Affairs, Office of the Prime Minister, from September 1985 to May 1986;

    d) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Planning and Economic Development from May 1986 to 1992;

    e) Chairman, Agricultural Policy Committee and also Chairman of the Steering Committee for drawing up the Agricultural Modernisation Plan, 1985-1996;

    f) Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, April 1992 to May 1998;

    g) Consultant for the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in Washington D.C. as a member of the External Review Group on the Fiscal Affairs Department of the IMF, August 2000;

    h) Chairman of the Association of African Central Banks, from August 2003 to August 2004;

    i) Chairperson of the Executive Board of the African Capacity Building Foundation, based in Harare, Zimbabwe, from 2003 to 2005; and

    j) Governor and Chairperson of the Board of Directors of Bank of Uganda, December 2000 to date;

APPRECIATING that Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime Mutebile was a diligent leader who immeasurably served Uganda with dedication and patriotism, and participated in shaping the destiny of Uganda through the modernisation of Uganda’s financial sector and designing and implementing economic and fiscal reform programmes that have restored Uganda’s economy; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved as follows:

    1. Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and the people of Uganda for the loss of a distinguished and gallant citizen of this country; and

    2. Parliament takes cognisance of the immense contribution that Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime Mutebile has rendered to the people of Uganda.”

I beg to move.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business. Is the motion seconded?

Hon. members: Yes.

The Deputy Speaker: It is seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Mpuuga; the Opposition Whip, hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, hon. Seggona, hon. Bahati – I am mentioning some names just for the Hansard to capture – but okay, the whole House supports the motion. (Laughter)

Hon. Ndamira, Woman Representative for Kabale, thank you very much for seconding the motion. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, would you like to speak to your motion?

Ms nabbanja: Madam Speaker, the justification for the resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime Mutebile, the Governor of Uganda is: 

On 23 January 2022, we received the sad news of the death of Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime Mutebile, the Governor of the Bank of Uganda. He succumbed to diabetes and related complications. 

Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime Mutebile served as the Governor, Bank of Uganda, from 2000 until his death. He was highly respected as the central bank governor, a professional economist and reformer. 

He spearheaded the design and implementation of the economic reform programme that restored Uganda from the economic instability of the 1970s and 1980s, to the sound economic performance, during his deployment as a Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Prof. Emmanuel Mutebile was born on 27 January 1949 in Kabale District. He attended Kigezi College, Butobere and Makerere College School. In 1970, he joined Makerere University, where he was elected President of the Student’s Guild. In 1972, he fled Uganda after criticising President Idi Amin’s expulsion of Asians. 

He completed his studies at Durham University with a degree in Economics and Political Science. In October 1972, he joined Balliol College, University of Oxford for postgraduate study. 

In 1977 to June 1979, he was a lecturer in the Industrial Economics University of Dar-es-Salaam. In 1979, Prof. Tumusiime Mutebile returned to Uganda and served in several capacities; in 1979 to 1980, he was a Deputy Principal Private Secretary to the President. 

In 1981, he was the acting Under Secretary in the Ministry of Planning. In 1982, he was the Chief Government Planning Economist in the Ministry of Finance. 

Madam Speaker, in 1985 to 1986, he was a Permanent Secretary in charge of Economic Affairs, Office of the Prime Minister. In 1986, he was transferred to the Ministry of Planning and Economic Development as Permanent Secretary and appointed Chairman of the Agriculture Policy Committee. In 1992 to June 1996, he worked as a Permanent Secretary of the newly merged Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  

In July 1996 to April 1998, he was a Secretary to the Treasury and Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

Prof. Mutebile worked as a consultant for the World Bank, International Monetary Fund, UNDP, African Development Bank, Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, Microeconomic and Financial Management Institute of East Africa and Central Africa, UK Department of International Development and the North-South Institute in Canada. 

Prof. Mutebile was a Rotarian of the Rotary Club of Kampala; one of the first rotary clubs in Uganda, where he maintained membership for 39 years. He made donations to all major rotary activities in Uganda and contributed generously to the Rotary Foundation of Rotary International to support humanitarian services. 

Prof. Mutebile lived his full potential as a versatile economist, a nationalist and a Pan Africanist. The monetary and fiscal reforms he championed restored Uganda’s economic standing and international rating hence attracting investments, creating jobs and improving household incomes in Uganda. 

We extend our sincere sympathies and condolences to his family, Bank of Uganda and the country at large. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of Government Business. Can I now have the seconder, the Leader of the Opposition? 

10.36 
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the honourable colleagues this morning in paying tribute to the late Emmanuel Tumusiime Mutebile, who was the Governor of the Bank of Uganda. 

On behalf of the team that I lead, Madam Speaker, on your left, I would like to extend our sincere sympathies to the bereaved family, staff and management of Bank of Uganda, the people of Kabale and the country at large for the loss of one of the economic pillars of our time. 

The passing of Prof. Tumusiime Mutebile on the morning of Sunday 23 January, 2022 marked the end of an era – of someone in that generation that participated in nation and institution-building processes from a time when over 85 per cent of Ugandans today were not yet born. That distinction falls on a select few who get that one rare opportunity to help set up institutions during and after the birth of a nation. 

Prof. Mutebile was a fortunate man. He was the right man with the right credentials who rose on account of his competence that helped cushion our economy from a state of near collapse in the early 1980s to one where our people can only try to survive on the basics of life. 

However, good fortune alone does not fully explain everything. Prof. Mutebile was one of a kind. He was a leader, mentor and a very straightforward man from Kabale who went on to make history as the founding father of neoliberal economic practices in Uganda’s contemporary history. I hasten to add that he was a non-apologetic high priest of structured adjacent programmes. That is part of what will go down in history as his hallmark. 

Prof. Mutebile believed and preached at every opportunity, the ability of free enterprise to creating jobs, enhancing incomes and wealth for nations. He believed that macroeconomic stability or low inflation, high GDP growth and better terms of trade with trading partners abroad would drive our society to prosperity. After more than 40 years of active service guiding economic policy and management in Uganda, the late Professor bows out at a time when Ugandans are still waiting to see the economic miracle often propped up by the NRM leadership, including yesterday’s gathering at Kololo grounds. 

He leaves Uganda in the uncomfortable company of so many countries that have talked about middle-income status for so many years but failed to attain it. Our other neighbours, without mentioning names, grew their economies faster and sustainably to attain middle-income status years ago. This decorated economist has passed on and left behind leaders who are selling the Parish Development Model as the miracle economic transformational tool that will uplift our poor citizens from poverty to prosperity. He has left us in a country where the promised economic miracle to transform Uganda will be powered by unreliable power supply, and unaffordable electricity supply as well as unaffordable credit from banks and other financial institutions.

He leaves Uganda as the sixth worst performing country in terms of revenue collections when measured by revenue as a percentage of GDP - this is well documented, Madam Speaker. 

This gallant son of Uganda - an authority in economic management - is leaving Uganda chocking on public debt; with interest payment on public debt for the Financial Year 2022/2023 programmed at Shs 5.088 trillion of which, Shs 4.059 trillion is interest payments. 

The late professor was an honest man who did not fear talking straight - what sometimes made the powers that be, so uncomfortable.  Allow me to single out three incidents: 

I recall in 2011, the Governor, Bank of Uganda disagreed with the President over the decision to spend $740 million on six fighter jets. At the time, this payment led to a rundown of the stock of our foreign reserves from six to four months of import cover. 

The Ministry of Defence, under the President’s directive, and a watchful eye of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, in a single transaction, withdrew $400 million (first payment) overnight from Bank of Uganda to pay for the fighter jets without parliamentary approval. Since that time, the competitiveness of our shilling has never regained as the import cover has never risen up to five months. 

The Governor informed this Parliament how he reluctantly accepted to release hundreds of millions of dollars after assurances and an informal agreement with the finance minister and the President that in about two years, proceeds from oil revenue would be used to repay the Bank of Uganda loan. 

Madam Speaker, that to the new Members of Parliament explains the history of what we now consider recapitalisation of Bank of Uganda that this Parliament has been making since Financial Year 2017/2018.

The second incident, Prof. Mutebile, without fear attributed the inflation and exchange rate depreciation of 2011 to the election cash bonanza, in which the NRM and its leadership literally broke into the central bank in order to buy votes. 

After, KACITA, the city traders’ association, went on strike- they were protesting against the escalating dollar price. The Governor did admit that this money was used for electioneering and that plunged the economy into chaos. He then promised that, next time, the Government’s attempt to raid the central bank during election campaigns, would not be allowed. We live to explain whether that did not happen.

The third incident is when the Governor stood his ground and resisted a plan by the Executive to award an exclusive contract to print Uganda currency to Veridos Identity Solutions, a company without any history of currency printing. 

The Governor resisted the President and the Minister responsible for Finance as well as the Attorney-General on a deal that would have most likely created a risk of the public’s lack of faith in our country’s currency as a store of value. 

We now pay tribute to a man who stood his ground and served his country according to what he judged right, not what was being imposed on him. Unfortunately, he has left us when more than half of the Ugandan households (about 57 per cent) are still in the non-monetary economy. 

Madam Speaker, before I take leave of this eulogy, may I take this opportunity to address this august House on two important policy issues that we must not run away from as Parliament.
 
First, our senior citizens who have served this country with distinction and honour deserve to retire honourably and enjoy many more years of their lives in retirement. (Applause) 

This House owes our citizens a law that bars men and women who have reached retirement age from continued stress of public service. I believe that Members will agree with me that we need to reconsider particular provisions that would plunge people that would need to retire into continued stress - probably, the professor would have lived more days had he been allowed to retire because he had played his part with honour.

Secondly, the practice of seeking specialised treatment in neighbouring countries is very unfair to millions of our citizens who entrusted us with the privilege of sitting here to fix the broken health sector. 

Out-of-pocket healthcare financing is a big burden to most of our households who seek specialised treatment. Health insurance, which our neighbouring countries adopted years ago, is the only alternative that can support our underfunded healthcare system. 

My team intends to take leadership on the Health Care Insurance Bill, which Government has failed to re-introduce to this House. Probably, after we have laid to rest this gallant son of Uganda, we should return and demand for an explanation as to what became of the Lubowa Speciliased Hospital. People should stop spending money abroad when we have spent taxpayers’ money on non-existing health care projects like the Lubowa project, which is now botched.
 
May the soul of the late Governor rest in eternal peace.  I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, the Leader of the Opposition. At least, it is an agreed fact that we had the best economist, a very honest man, very intelligent, very transparent, a man of integrity, and that is Prof. Mutebile. I am happy that even the Opposition is agreeing with that. 

I thank the Bank of Uganda for treating Prof. Mutebile. You put all to have Prof. Mutebile live for some of these years. Can we hear from the Independents?

10.49
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank you in a special way for giving us, who came to this august House on individual tickets - termed as “Independents”- a slot to eulogise one of the greatest sons of Uganda.

I will not be speaking on behalf of the Independents since each of them is independent of the other. But I have taken the honour to represent them under the belief that-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you have only two minutes.

MR NIWAGABA: Okay, most obliged, Madam Speaker. (Laughter) 

I first had an interaction with the deceased professor some time in 2002 or thereabouts, when we had a delegation to perform a cultural marriage function in Soroti for the family of hon. Shem Bageine in the family of the late hon. Ejalu, and we had a wonderful evening - that is when I came to know the social part of Prof. Mutebile. 

In company, we had the late Justice Amos Twinomujuni and the late Manzi Tumubwine- I will not narrate what happened that evening, but they had a good time. That is when I came to know the social part of the late Prof. Mutebile.

For us who come from Kigezi, we always had political rivalries and wrangles. However, whenever we had such wrangles, it was only Prof. Mutebile who would call us to order and reconcile the warring parties. He would do that at the insistence of Mama Tereza Mbire. His demise leaves a vacuum as to who will be intervening and reconciling the warring parties in Kigezi.

The region had a lot of respect for Prof. Mutebile and he contributed a lot in education, not only as a lecturer. When the sons and daughters of Kigezi established a non-profit making university called Kabale University, using his position as the Governor Bank of Uganda and under the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) of Bank of Uganda, that university was financially supported to keep afloat and offer education to students across the region, until the Government took over. We applaud and cherish him for that. 

Prof. Mutebile was non-sectarian. Practically, all religions in the region, be it Islam, Catholic, Anglican or Pentecostal benefited from his magnanimity in one way or the other. He was a brutally honest Mukiga. When some of us are treated as “rebels” because we speak our minds - that is what a typical Mukiga should be. At times, he would take positions against his own because of his honesty. 

I remember, when he decided to close the National Bank of Commerce (NCB), which formerly was Kigezi Bank of Commerce that was begun by his friends - the Rugundas, the Mwangas and the Surumas, definitely, he ought to have been one of them but he decided to close it because it did not meet the requirements of Bank of Uganda. That is the professor we are talking about. (Applause)

He was the lion of Kigezi and we will miss him. We pray to the Almighty God to rest his soul in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Wilfred Niwagaba. 

10.53
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I would like to, first, take this opportunity to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for the motion she moved and the Leader of the Opposition for the secondment of the motion. 

I stand to move an amendment to the motion that has been moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I move under rule 58. I beg to move an amendment to the prayer that the Government or Bank of Uganda gets an appropriate property for the family of the late Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime Mutebile. This property or home should be for the family, led by the widow. 

It is a known fact that the late professor was a very honest man. The fact that he was the Governor, Bank of Uganda for a very long time - as we talk, the family may not have where to go. These days, when people are in such positions, they amass a lot of wealth, which this gentleman did not do. It would be good, if this Parliament supports me in getting a befitting home for the family of the late because he served Uganda and Bank of Uganda diligently without being corrupt – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order in the House.

MR SILWANY: It is appropriate that we award such Ugandans, who have served with dignity a befitting send off and provide a full settlement to the family.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move an amendment to the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Silwany. Is the amendment seconded? [Honourable Members: “No”] 

Members, yesterday, I happened to attend the vigil. I am not debating but I am giving you information. I went for a vigil yesterday at the professor’s home, which is a Bank of Uganda house. What the widow said – whatever you are doing here, people are looking at you - how insensitive can you be? What the widow said – all of us know that the late Prof. Mutebile was corrupt free. The widow said, “When the contract was ending, I asked my husband, ‘where are we going?’ and he said, ‘God will provide.’” Now, you are becoming the “gods” to provide. Is the amendment seconded? 

10.57
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga West County, Kagadi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I rise to support the motion, which was moved by hon. Silwany, our Parliamentary Commissioner. 

The reason I support the motion is that before the professor died, in June, I had the privilege to visit him where he stayed in Kololo. Personally, I knew - because I had gone to see him – that, that was his home. When I asked those who were processing my appointment to see him, they said, “This is the official residence of the Governor of the Bank of Uganda.” 

Madam Speaker, when such information comes out, that such a distinguished servant of this country - whereas he has left to live with his heavenly creator, he leaves behind a trail of dependents the country should never forget. This amendment directly provides for the trail this distinguished Ugandan has left behind. (Applause) It is the reason, I support the motion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we hear from the Leader of Government Business? 

11.00
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, I have taken note – [Mr Lubega-Sseggona: “Madam Speaker, can the Rt Hon. Prime Minister sanitise the microphone?”] I like the way that Member –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He admires you a lot. (Laughter)

MS NABBANJA: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I have taken note of the concerns of Members. All of us know that when you leave this world, sometimes you may have some gaps. I request Members to allow me go and inform Government and consult widely. (Applause) We shall come back and inform you about the action that we shall have taken.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Members, the motion stands amended with a clause from hon. Silwany.

11.01
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion proposed by the Prime Minister. I received a call from hon. Jim Muhwezi to record his apologies because he lost his sister but he will be joining the family in Kabale.

I have been chairing the committee put in place by Government to coordinate the funeral arrangements and would like to extend gratitude to members of the committee and Ugandans for the overwhelming support they have given to the family and the condolence messages that have continued to flow from within and outside the country, in honour of Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime Mutebile.

I would also like to extend my condolences to the family – the widow who is here and the siblings – friends – some of whom are in the gallery – Bank of Uganda, the bankers, rotarians, people of Kigezi and Ugandans.

The impact of Prof. Mutebile went beyond the boundaries of Uganda. So, we have lost a gallant son of this country, but also of this world. I thank Government for according an official burial to Prof. Mutebile. 

We would to like to request that, in the tradition of the Bakiga, we usually separate a funeral arrangement from politics and I beg that we do not vulgarise the funeral of Prof. Mutebile by mixing it with our partisan politics. (Applause) We can have time in this House to debate the economy and how Uganda is moving, separate from a funeral arrangement where we pay tribute to our fallen hero.

Allow me, in the short time, to talk about Prof. Emmanuel Mutebile as a professional economist. All of us agree that he was an icon, a professional, a pillar in building the economy of this country and I can hasten to add that Uganda’s economy is one of the fastest-growing economies. It is the 11th if you check the records available.Therefore, we thank him for the great contribution that he made in advising Government to build a sound economy. I speak about Prof. Mutebile the honest man, as others have made reference. He gave his professional advice without fear or favour.

Last night, Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda told us about how, at the beginning of the National Resistance Movement Government, when we were venturing into barter trade and other economics, he stood his ground as the Chief Economist of Government to tell Cabinet even when the Cabinet, chaired by the President, had a different view.

He disagreed with Cabinet and told them how the economy should be moved. Based on his advice, the achievements we have registered are to an extent related to the advice that he gave. That is how the Bakiga behave; brutal honesty –(Interjections)– even myself. 

Sometimes the honesty of the Bakiga is misunderstood for arrogance. You heard that when he was the Guild President of Makerere University, he disagreed with the Government then and fled the country, yet, people who could not have been brutally honest, probably, would have just been subdued and would have tried to follow what President Amin was doing.

This reminds me of a Mukiga man who was going to the market to sell his dog and a prospective buyer met him and asked: “Does this dog bark – is it a very strong dog?” The Mukiga said, “No, it is a useless dog. That is why I am selling it.” (Laughter) It was at the risk of undermining the market of the dog – that is how honest the Bakiga are.

I am sure Members of Parliament recall that whenever Prof. Mutebile would come to the committees in the House here, he would give his brutal professional comments and opinions. Even when we would disagree with him, eventually we would realize that he was an economist giving sound advice. We thank him for that.

I speak about Prof. Mutebile, a man of integrity. Prof. Mutebile was not a slave to material wealth and worldly riches and that is why the commissioner was making amendment that he did not amass wealth even when he signed on the legal tender and presided over Bank of Uganda. He did not have greed – in a situation where for some people, greed has become their creed. We thank him for the integrity that he exhibited as the Governor, Bank of Uganda.

His wife told us that despite the busy schedule that he had as the Governor Bank of Uganda, he would find time to always have lunch and dinner with the family and that he would make sure that he was with the family for prayers at home. 

The Deputy Governor Bank of Uganda told us that every Sunday, they would meet at his house to talk about bank matters and also pray to God for the strength of Bank of Uganda.

I speak about Mutebile as a man who loved God; a man who went to Church. We got information from All Saints that sometimes he would conduct the choir at All Saints Cathedral at Nakasero. You would think that the Governor Bank of Uganda would think that he had no time for Church, but that was him.

I speak about Prof. Mutebile, the generous man. As people who hail from Kigezi, we know that he was a greatly generous person who contributed to many community causes without any sectarian tendencies. He supported all churches and faith institutions without discrimination. He supported many causes as a Rotarian. He supported many community interventions. 

We have an association that brings together the Banyakigezi from Kigezi and in the diaspora. He was our patron and we greatly appreciate the contributions that he made. I could go on and on but time is not on our side.

Lastly, as a person who has been chairing the funeral arrangements, I request to brief Parliament on how we are going to handle the burial and funeral arrangements.

With your permission, let me update Parliament that his body arrived on Tuesday evening and as we have already known, the Government accorded Prof. Mutebile an official burial. Last night, we had a vigil at his residence in Kololo and now, we are paying tribute in Parliament.

Tomorrow, there will be a funeral service at Kololo Ceremonial Grounds but it will be a scientific service, where mourners will be only up to 300 people. We request that majority of the public follow the proceedings on television, radio and other IT platforms. We shall be live streaming the proceedings at Kololo and all those set to access the grounds have to undergo a COVID-19 test.

His body shall be flown to Kabale on Saturday. We shall have a vigil at his residence in Kabale Municipality in the evening and burial will be on Sunday. 

On that Sunday, the burial ceremony will start with a Church service in Rugarama Cathedral at mid-day. Thereafter, he will be laid to rest at his home in Kijuguta Village, Kabale Municipality. 

Thank you very much for allowing me to give an update with respect to the funeral arrangements. We welcome you to Kabale, for those who will manage to travel, so that we can give a decent send-off to the distinguished son of Uganda, whom we respect a lot. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

Condolence books have been opened at Parliament here for members of the public to sign, but also at the Bank of Uganda, as well as Prof. Mutebile’s residence in Kololo. So, there are three places where a condolence book has been opened and members of the public can freely go to his residence, Bank of Uganda or here at the Parliament of Uganda. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi. Can we have hon. Bahati before a brother comes in to – [Hon. Zaake: Procedure] - Members, we are paying tribute. I have a session at 2.00 p.m.; wait for 2 O’clock to raise your points of procedure, order and whatever. (Laughter) Is the procedural point related to the death? Let him finish, then you bring it.

We have a brother to the late Prof. Emmanuel Mutebile in the names of hon. Jimmy Akena; he will speak next.

11.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to our elder brother and a great economist, Prof. Emmanuel Mutebile.

Madam Speaker, I want to first of all, thank you for accepting to have this sitting to pay tribute to our elder brother and the Members for coming in big numbers to pay tribute to this patriot and great economist.

Prof. Mutebile now belongs to the ages but we will remember him in so many ways. We shall miss him as a hardworking and disciplined public servant who made a mark on the economic development of our country.

His firmness and truthfulness, especially in a situation that required difficult decisions, helped our country take firm and solid reforms that have seen our country grow economically and maintain a stable inflation in single digits for the last 30 years.

Our economy, because of the reforms he and his colleagues initiated, has seen our country expand from over $3 billion shillings, in the 1990s, to now $44 billion.

The late Prof. Mutebile was very firm and truthful and was never ashamed to say what he believed in or abandon his friends. We know now, for sure, that despite his political ideology, he was a very good friend to the Obote family and remained friendly with them until his death. Prof. Mutebile will be remembered as a man with a big heart and his generosity touched many lives. 

Madam Speaker, I want to say that Prof. Mutebile initiated, at the Bank of Uganda, a project to support maternal health that has built health centres in Gulu, Arua, Mbarara, Rubanda, Jinja, Masaka and Kabale.

On Saturday, as hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi has said, the military helicopter will take off from Kololo Airstrip to airlift the body of Prof. Mutebile and after one hour, it will land at Kabale Golf Course. This will mark his last trip home, but the economic journey he started will not have ended. 

We who are still alive can keep his legacy by ensuring that we maintain inflation in a single digit, through fiscal discipline, pass budgets that support production, not consumption because consumption increases inflation, and bring the interest rates down.

One time, I asked Prof. Mutebile – and we had this debate over time – why he was not bringing the interest rates down. He said, “You know, I have one tool that I use. That is the Central Credit Rate. The second tool is within your court to make sure that you have fiscal discipline. This domestic borrowing you continue going into will continue to cause you problems.” That is what he told me.

Also, let us continue to support the policies that support free enterprise. Sometimes, we hear voices that want Government to again intervene and nationalise - Mutebile believed in an open market economy, where forces of supply and demand determine market prices. That is what we should continue to support.

I want to thank Aunt Betty, the wife of Prof. Mutebile. She has lived up to the vows she took when she married Prof. Mutebile. (Applause) In sickness and in health, you have stood by Prof. Mutebile and we are very grateful.

I also thank His Excellency, the President, for remaining loyal to Prof. Mutebile, the Governor. Even when some voices were saying, “At his age and situation, can’t we…” President Yoweri Museveni continued to renew his contract until he died because he knew that the wisdom in Mutebile was still needed in this country.

Despite being a great economist, as I wind up, Prof. Mutebile also had another side. Later in his life, he became spiritual and used to sing. You cannot imagine and believe he was a good singer. Every time anybody visited his home and they said a prayer as a family, he would sing. 

He had this particular song he liked, which is drawn from the Bible – Revelations 7:12, which I would like to read, not sing because I do not want to imitate the deep voice of Prof. Mutebile. It says, “Amen, blessings and glory and wisdom and thanksgiving and honour and the power and strength belong to God forever and ever. Amen.” Prof. Mutebile, for all that you have done and contributed to this country and to your family, the glory belongs to God. Amen.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Amen. Thank you. Members will have two minutes each. 

MR ZAAKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a procedural issue and I ask for your guidance. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister came with a motion which we all supported as the House, including myself. And my colleague - my fellow commissioner - came up with an amendment on that same motion. When the Rt Hon. Prime Minister stood up, she never mentioned whether she is in support of that amendment or not and also, the whole House never supported that motion. 

Personally, I did not support the motion because I believe just the money that was used for his burial can be enough to build for him a house. 

Madam Speaker, let the House support this motion so that it is put on record. I stand to be guided. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My Commissioner, thank you for your concern. The motion was brought, if you want it to be put to a vote we will do it - we do it mindful of the financial implications it has.  However, we are saying that the government and Bank of Uganda must take responsibility to ensure that the family has a place of abode. It is an amendment.

11.23
MR MEDARD SEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Yes, it is an amendment. Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very much for permitting me. We are moving in one direction and my view is that our concern, first of all, is to recognise the contribution of Prof. Mutebile to the country. And this is not the first time we are recognising contributions. 

I also would like to thank you, for the guidance where you are taking us; that we should do this in accordance with the law. Will you permit me, therefore, to move a slight amendment to the effect that the government follows up, as undertaken by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in today’s proceedings, to ensure that the welfare of the family of Prof. Mutebile and his contribution to the country are recognised by all across the board and that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister does report to the House in subsequent sittings, the steps undertaken by the government. I so move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I now put the question that the amendment that has been moved be adopted? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

11.24
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am honoured and privileged to be in position to pay tribute to my elder brother on the Floor of Parliament.

Prof. Mutebile became part of our household as a student leader. In those days, my late father admired and tried to groom leaders from wherever they emerged. Prof. Mutebile, as a strong student leader, became part and parcel of our household. 

As somebody who became close to me, I had special admiration for him in that throughout the changing fortunes of time, even when we became political lepers, Prof. Mutebile stood firm and recognised that he had a connection and he was always available for us. It is unfortunate my late father cannot be here to speak to this. My mother is in pain that one of her dear sons has passed, because Prof. Mutebile was always available to help her through the difficult times. 

On the point which my brother, Dr Chris Baryomunsi raised on him being firm and truthful, I want to expound it further. And on this occasion, I want us to be honest with ourselves. Prof. Mutebile was in the Ministry of Finance under the second UPC Government. Within that government, there was crafting of a way to recovery and it was termed as a Revival Recovery Programme. 

There was some bush economics, which came in including barter trade and other things, which honestly did not work and it came to a point where reality had to come to the forefront. And fortunately for Uganda, we had somebody who could speak to that truth, honestly and clearly as an economist. 

At that stage, the NRM Government adopted what was called the Rehabilitation and Development Plan, which is word for word, comma for comma, the Revised Recovery Programme of the UPC. But unfortunately, politics clouded issues that our statistics have almost stopped 36 years later. However, the recovery of Uganda and the contribution of Ugandan citizens must be recognised across the board.

I hope we have honest people and people of integrity, who will serve this country, irrespective of the regime and can be recognised across regimes. One such person is my elder brother here, and is indisputable. His truth always came through that economics does not lie. It is clear it is absolute reality. 

And I hope as Uganda, we can emulate my fallen brother and serve our country dearly; be able to contribute that our contribution will go and will last for posterity. Therefore, it is with a heavy heart that I stand here and also with gratefulness to say, thank you, Prof. Mutebile. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

11.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Prof. Mutebile. 

I first came in close contact with the late Prof. Mutebile in 2003, when I was the chairperson of Makerere University Old Boys Association. I got to him to ask for help for the association and he was the first person to give me a cheque of Shs 300,000 to support the association. He did not stop there, he continued to follow up our activities as the association and also, he was very central in supporting his old school, Kigezi College Butobere, where he was given an award as a golden old boy. 

When I came to Parliament, I went to the Finance Committee, where I became the chairperson for five years. We would invite the late Prof. Mutebile for meetings and he would be there at 10.00 a.m. sharp, ready to respond to all the issues that would arise from the Committee on Finance. 

The late Prof. Mutebile was a very generous man to all Ugandans, but particularly to the people of Kigezi, where he contributed immensely to a number of projects.

The recent one was the support to one of the health centres IV in my constituency on maternal health. I will forever remember him for that contribution, the contribution for Kabale University and for inspiring me to be what I am today. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

11.30
DR NICHOLAS KAMARA (FDC, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime Mutebile, a distinguished economist and embodiment of Uganda’s fiscal and economic policies that enabled Uganda’s sustained growth. 

On behalf of my family and the people of Kabale Municipality where this great icon hailed, I pay tribute to him as a real lion of Kigezi. He will be remembered for steering and revamping the economy of our country through a strong tide.

Prof. Mutebile was a distinguished and proud old boy of Kigezi College Butobere where I also studied; a true Monseigneur. This is a tradition and Government-aided School where he studied in the 1960s. 

Owing to entirely his intellectual prowess, he was able to attain the best education that propelled him to the top of the profession we knew and admired. Kigezi College Butobere is now struggling, an appalling predicament shared by most Government schools in the country. I dare say that if Prof. Mutebile were born today, he would not make the strides in the current system. 

The passing of this exceptional man –(Member timed out.)
 
11.33
MS CATHELINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime Mutebile has been my voter. Allow me to join the rest of the world to celebrate his life on earth. 

The people of Kabale have lost a pillar. Prof. Mutebile has been a depiction of a real Mukiga, an inspiration to many. He issued a number of wise statements that whoever listened to and followed would never go wrong. 

Professor has been a corruption-free man. His corruption levels were at zero percent. I think the Government should always employ such people in sensitive offices if we are to have a corruption-free country. 

Prof.Mutebile will forever be remembered for his great contribution and selfless service towards the growth and development of Kigezi subregion and Uganda as a whole. I want to testify. There was a time when Prof.Mutebile had queries to answer before the committee. I saw the man coming being supported by people. I thought he would fail, but to –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I can conclude the sentence for you that you were surprised he was able to answer what was being asked. (Laughter) Secondly, when he was asked, he said, “I am in this seat until God takes me.” Indeed, it has happened – you will all speak. We have 20 minutes to go.  

11.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (DISABILITY AFFAIRS) (Ms Hellen Asamo): Madam Speaker, I thank you for allowing me to pay tribute to this great son of Uganda. I want, first of all, to condole with the family, especially Mama Betty. Thank you for loving and caring for the professor. 

I had an opportunity to work with Prof. Mutebile when he was the Chancellor of the International University of East Africa, where I was the chairperson of the University Council in 2014 to 2017. I found him a man of humility despite his status, a man of integrity and a man who was straightforward. He was a great mentor. He would always guide us on how to move with the university. He would tell us, “Please, make sure that you give students courses that are marketable.” No wonder, the university became a University of Science and Technology. 

Many people have said here that professor was a good timekeeper. Indeed, when he invited you to the bank for a meeting, he had to be there. When he invited you to his home, you would get him seated already. It is up to you to feel guilty.

Prof. Mutebile was a man with an open heart. No wonder, we are here paying tribute to him. Anybody who approached him, he would always come to them. There was a dream of the professor. One day, he told us, “When I retire, I want go back to Lake Bunyonyi. I want to bring in new animals,” a certain species of animals he described, “so that when I sit at Lake Bunyonyi, I will be looking at these animals and admiring them and enjoying my life.” 

We all know that Prof. Mutebile was a very social man, kind and very approachable. The first time I met him, I said, “How do I deal with a chancellor who is the Governor of Bank of Uganda?” However, I found him very easy to work with, a man who would guide you, smile and always be there. 

I thank Mama Betty again. You used to escort him, but this is the way to go. Fair thee well, Prof. Mutebile until we meet again. Rest in peace, my brother.

11.38
DR JAMES NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, I rise to support the motion that has been moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. At the beginning of this month, Kisoro District lost one of its distinguished sons. I am drawing the attention of Members to this fact because I see tremendous similarities between that man, Rev. Canon Mfitumukiza and Professor –(Interjections)

I am sorry, Madam Speaker. I was saying that at the beginning of this month, the district of Kisoro lost Rev. Samuel Mfitumukiza, a man that I found to have similarities with Prof.Tumusiime Mutebile. 

Now, it is about Prof. Mutebile. I want to say that the country has been robbed of one of the finest brains we can talk about. 

It is not very often, Madam Speaker, that there will be tremendous levels of appreciation to many of us, when our time to go comes. I believe many of us wish that when that day comes, we would be spoken of in glorious stance, the way we are seeing with Prof. Mutebile. 

There is one matter that not many speakers have brought to the attention of Members. Prof. Mutebile passionately believed that this nation’s future depended on the extent to which Ugandans are able to accept and respect that ethics and integrity are the foundation of everything we do. He was a man immensely convinced that without ethics and morality informing this nation’s activities, our chance of being a stable, prosperous and unified nation are going to be zeroed. 

In other words, this is a man who clearly identified a central issue that determines the future and destiny of us all. He was a man who believed that all of us must be completely convinced and this conviction must inform everything we do; that we have to be ethical and morally upright. He was passionate about that. 

Madam Speaker, this is why, as I conclude, when we, Members of the Parliamentary Forum on Ethics and Integrity, thought to have a national conference – and I pray that we do so this year -Prof. Mutebile gave us a handsome sum of money in support of that cause. How I wish, this nation embraces the truth that without ethics and morality informing our ways of life, we are going to be in deep trouble. Prof. Mutebile was that unique man; the finest of a kind that we should all emulate.

The challenge I may say –(Member timed out.) 

11.42
MR TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge Central County, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. We, the people, from Tooro are saddened by the death of Prof. Emmanuel Mutebile Apuuli. We extend our condolences to the people of Kigezi, the family and Amooti Betty, the wife, because he married from our place. The Minister of State for Local Governments is one of the mothers in-law. So, we are really saddened.  

Many of us here represent rural constituencies. Prof. Mutebile knew our country very well. He knew the problems of a rural Member of Parliament and the problems at sub-county level so much that, if you put in a request for laboratory equipment, a computer, construction of a rural primary school and so many others, he would respond – not immediately, but shortly. As long as that application was rooted properly, the response would come and assistance would be extended. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from hon. Rusoke and then I will come back to this side. Members, this is a two-sided House. Please use two minutes. 

11.45
MS VICTORIA BUSINGE RUSOKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I convey my condolence to H.E the President of Uganda, who is a personal friend to the late, upon the loss of such a mighty man. I would also like to convey my condolences to my daughters, Betty Mutebile Amooti, “O’mukyara Ayabazaire Akiiki.” On behalf of our brothers and sisters from the Tooro Kingdom, we convey condolences to His Majesty Oyo Nyimba Kabamba Iguru because our in-law had respect and support for our kingdom.

It is very rare that a human being can have very many talents that all people across the nation accept. Here we are, mourning an intelligent man, a God-fearing man, a generous man, a non-corrupt man, a down to earth in-law, a very morally upright man and hardworking. Even when his body turned weak, he would accept to be supported physically to continue working. 

I know this is the only way to the Lord. Amooti Betty accepted the Lord as her personal saviour. You have been a very good preacher and mentor. I know you are going to stand firm in the Lord. It is impossible for Emmanuel to hear this but if it were possible, he would have said “Miss me but let me go.” May the Almighty Lord reward and rest your soul in eternal peace. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairman, Rwenzori. He is an in-law.   

11.47
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Central Division, Fort Portal): Madam Speaker, I support the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. As an in-law, I am saddened and I am grieving with my sister, Amooti. Be firm. You have done a great job for this statesman, who served this nation tirelessly. He was a true Pan Africanist and has been supporting the Pan African cause in this country and beyond the continent. 

He was not a tribalist. It would be terrible for people to own the late Mutebile as a tribe. He was a true African man and an internationalist, who served the universe to lift the economy of this country. No wonder, the President has had all confidence in him because of his character of commitment and serving above self. We know he has done his role. 

It would be very important for the young generation to learn from him. When they talk about corruption - you know, this is an evil that has engulfed us. Losing people of this stature without documenting them and learning from them would be a disservice to this nation. This Government should put an effort to write about the works of Prof. Mutebile so that the young generation can learn from him. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from his O.B, hon. Baba.  

11.49 
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was on the campaign team of Prof. Mutebile, when he stood as a Guild President in 1971. (Applause) That is when Prof. Mutebile cut his teeth; that is when he grew his boldness and outright decisiveness in life. 

He was competing against Elly Karuhanga; that campaign was like Muhammad Ali fighting against Foreman in Kinshasa – “bomaye,bomaye”. Mutebile stung Elly Karuhanga all over until he won the elections. Congratulations, my brother. That war you started, you never let it down until your last day, which we are now celebrating. Thank you, for that courage. 

Actually, you are the only courageous Mukiga I know –(Laughter)– who can follow through with his threats. Forget about Baryomunsi, Ndugu or JPAM; Mutebile was very courageous. 

Madam Speaker, I have two more points. One, this man was a national patriot. With his qualifications and international connections, Mutebile could have worked outside and forgotten about you, miserable Ugandans. However, this man stood with us through thick and thin until his death. 

Secondly, many of you are highly qualified and very skilled, but you sit on your knowledge; you never apply it. However, this man used his talents. The only way Ugandans will remember him is when he ended shortages – when he ended kibanda exchange rate and kitanda beer. That is the economics Mutebile addressed and now we float in a lot of abundance. Rest in peace, my brother. Well done. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much. It is unfortunate we no longer have Bakiga. (Applause)

11.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (TESO AFFAIRS) (Mr Clement Ongalo-Obote): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second this motion, brought by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and amended by the commissioner, to pay tribute to this gallant son of Uganda, who has gone back to be with our ancestors. 

He was a great man, a man whom we owe a lot. All Ugandans and all successive regimes in Uganda since 1980 found only one point of agreement: the fact that Mutebile was a great man. That is why he worked for Binaisa, Lule, Obote and H.E Museveni. They all recognised the talent that this man had and the brilliance that he had as an economist. 

We all saw it in the fact that in the last 20 years, our economy has consistently and steadily grown by six per cent, which is the 11th fastest-growing in the whole world and the fourth fastest-growing in Africa. 

I, therefore, believe that this man is deserving not only of the tribute that is being paid to him here today but, if it was up to me, I would pay even more tribute to him by dedicating one of our banknotes to him so that we know him and see him as most countries do to their great men and women. 

I am glad that this House is considering taking care of his family. I think it is a good message to all civil servants that if you are honest –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you finish that statement?

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is my belief that by supporting the motion for this House to recognise the contributions of the late Governor by providing for his family, we send a message to every civil servant in this country that if you are upright – if you serve your country diligently and well – we will take care of you when you are gone. 

I, therefore, support the motion and hope that we will do so. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, the minister for Teso Affairs. 

11.55
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise to support the motion that was moved by the Prime Minister. 

On behalf of the people of Amuru, the Catholic Chaplaincy of Parliament and on my own behalf, allow me to join the rest of Ugandans in celebrating the life of our father, Prof. Mutebile. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to point out something which is very significant in my life, as a result of my interaction with the late. I was privileged to be one of those lucky ones to have had lunch in the office of the professor at Bank of Uganda. 

In 2019, when the Archdiocese of Gulu was supposed to animate Uganda Martyrs’ Day. We went to Bank of Uganda. We started with mass with the staff of Bank of Uganda, but to my surprise, the professor came and sat quietly and patiently during mass; that spoke volumes. 

In his frail health, he came and sat. The Archbishop of Gulu, John Baptist Odama, was there. Mutebile sat until the mass ended. Afterwards, he invited us for lunch in his office - a private lunch – during which I was actually honoured to sit next to him. I will forever hold that memory –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are running out of time. Members, remember that we have a normal sitting in the afternoon. I am requesting that if you have not spoken now – we know you all feel for the late professor – you will speak in the next session. Thank you.

11.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Henry Okello Oryem): Madam Speaker, I stand here to support the motion to pay tribute to my dear brother, the fallen Emmanuel Mutebile. 

My first contact with Mutebile was when he was working as a personal assistant in the office of former President Binaisa. I met him in the corridors and my late father introduced him to me. 

However, at that time, he meant nothing because my father just introduced him as an official in Government and a personal assistant to President Binaisa. 

Madam Speaker, in 1993 when my late father was returning to Uganda - I had planned to return to Uganda myself because I had lived in the UK for over 20 years – he gave me the names of leaders whom I should meet in the Acholi sub-region, but also told me: “Please, make effort to meet the following people and they will help you in your life.” He mentioned the name of Mzee Batuma, whom I did not know. He mentioned a one, Rugunda, whom I knew. He mentioned Amama Mbabazi, Amos Nzeyi and Mutebile. 

When I returned to Uganda in 2000, my first visit was with Mr Mutebile. I told him I was going to stand as Member of Parliament for Chua County and that I needed his support. He told me he could not support me, but he told me to go and see a one Amos Nzeyi - the rest is history. 

Madam Speaker, I became closer to the late Mutebile while I was in Government and I came to love this man because of his honesty, professionalism and style of work.

Later on, by the grace of God - because God does miracles - my wife joined Bank of Uganda and worked through the ranks until she became the Executive Director, Bank of Uganda. For the last several years, she has been working in the Office of the Governor, as a director. We have come closer and closer with Prof. Mutebile’s family. I would like to thank the late, for giving my wife and our family at large, the opportunity to work closely with him. 

If there is anything I have learnt in this world and wish to do every day in my life, it is to be honest and to do everything with honesty, transparency and not touch anything in Government because when I do it that way, I will also be remembered like Prof. Mutebile.

Madam Speaker, I hope that when I die one day, when I am 90 years old, not soon, but many years to come - I support the motion that the late Prof. Mutebile’s family be supported so that lessons can go out for being honest, transparent and emulating the life of Prof. Mutebile. I hope the same will also be remembered of me when I die, so that my family can also be given the same courtesy as seen here. (Laughter)

May the good Lord put the spirit of Prof. Mutebile where it deserves. May the angels come with the spirit of those up in Heaven and may the spirit of the ancestors, who are in Heaven, receive him as well. I thank you.

12.02
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by the Rt hon. Prime Minister and seconded by the Leader of the Opposition and as amended by hon. Seggona. 

Allow me to send my sympathies to the family of the late Prof. Mutebile, the people of Kigezi, staff of Bank of Uganda and the country at large. 

Madam Speaker, I would have spoken a lot if I were given more time because of the experience that I had with the late in the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises but due to time constraints, I will limit myself to a few things. 

One of them has already been stated here: the reforms in our economy. Yesterday, at the vigil, Ndungu Rugunda told us that when they had just come from the bush, Prof. Mutebile tried to advise them economically, but they were adamant to his economic ideas. It was until they listened and understood him that the economy improved. Thanks to Prof. Mutebile. 

That is why I want to state that a person who helped to revive the economy of this country, which everybody is proud of today, should really be appreciated by having the welfare of his family taken care of by Government as stated in the motion that has been proposed here. 

He was a man of God. He loved Church and would give his contribution to All Saints Cathedral, Kampala. Not only that, but even beyond. My Old Boy, hon. Butime has stated here – the people of Kasilo Archdeaconry one time wrote to him requesting for assistance. He did not hesitate to help on the construction of their Church. What a kind person in the name of Prof. Mutebile.

In 2011, Prof. Mutebile called me to his office. I entered his office, we had lunch and later he said: “My son, I love the way you conduct yourself and I love the way you debate. I am going to contribute towards your elections campaigns.” What a contribution he made to me. No wonder I am still here. 

I learnt a lot from him as a fellow economist. I really appreciate him. Whenever we went for the World Bank meetings - this is where I want to appreciate Mama Betty - one time, they invited me to their apartment in Washington for a luncheon and to discuss the issues regarding the economy and the debt burden of this country. Thanks be to God that he was able to help us. 

During the times of COSASE when the President appointed us, you, Madam Speaker, hon. Abdu Katuntu, the IGG, Mr Keith Muhakanizi, the Governor, Bank of Uganda and I, to dig into the issues that were affecting Bank of Uganda, Prof. Mutebile said: “No, I will be a conflicted person. I will appear as a witness.” This was because there were people who did not believe in what he was doing.

However, when he appeared before the select committee and gave the answers, we were all convinced that he was doing the right thing. He was a straight forward man and we thank God that Bank of Uganda stabilised. 

I would like to thank the person the President appointed as his deputy to help him when he was not well. Thank you very much, for mentoring the gentleman in that office. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Okupa. When you talk about inspiration, I get you because Prof. Mutebile inspired us in banking. He ordered for our promotion – hon. Mariam Naigaga and I - when we were in Centenary Bank. He said: “Have these girls been promoted.” Indeed, we were promoted. He impacted on everybody’s life. 

12.06
MR NATHAN TWESIGYE (Independent, Kashari South County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I also want to support the motion for paying tribute to this great economist.

I thank God for having Prof. Mutebile as a Mukiga. As my colleague said, he was a courageous Mukiga.

I also thank God for having given Prof. Mutebile chance to go to good schools till he became a professor. The late was a “professor of excellency.”

Madam Speaker, the professor had a dream of excellence. He had visited Makerere University, as you have heard the testimonies, where he had experience as a Guild President and Makerere had located land to build a centre of excellence in the names of Tumusiime Mutebile Centre for Excellence. This gentleman had promised to use his name and contribute and have that centre for excellence. 

Madam Speaker, the information from Makerere, which at an appropriate time, I will provide to Parliament with is that he had started but he had not done much. However, he had got commitment from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the Government would support his project. 

Therefore, in remembrance of his contribution and whatever has been said about this gentleman, I urge that we support his dream for it to come true and have a centre of excellence at Makerere University, where everybody will enjoy its contents. May his soul rest in peace. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Musasizi, follow up that issue of “the Mutebile Centre for Excellence” and report back to the House.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I undertake to follow up and report back to the House soon. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, hon. Tayebwa.

12.08
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Of course, when you are in such a situation and then someone like hon. Baba says there is no serious Mukiga –(Laughter)- I would like to assure the House that hon. Baba likes joking with us, Bakiga. We are his best friends because when you look up there and then you see here, you get to know that the Bakiga mean business.

We are here to talk about a man who dedicated all his life to serve God, his country and humanity. I had never seen Prof. Mutebile wearing a jacket without a logo of rotary. Humanity was always at the epi-centre of his decisions.

The rotary fraternity is represented among the people here; we have lost a very big pillar and we are sure that God has prepared a very good resting place for him.

The late Governor was an embodiment of unity; as you all know in Kigezi, we have our own issues; someone might say, “This man from Mitooma? No, I was born in Rubanda and I am a Mukiga from Rubanda, we are the Bakiga in the “diaspora”.

Whereas we had issues in Kigezi, hon. Mutebile had never associated himself with politics of identity; he always focused on politics of interest and legitimacy for the good of the people. You could not go to him and say, “Support me, because I am an Anglican, or Catholic”. You had to say, “Support me, because I am a Ugandan and I am going to work for Uganda”.

When we were with you, Madam Speaker, in Rubaga at the consecration of the Archishop Semwogerere, he also made it clear that Prof. Mutebile, the Governor, was always supporting people despite their identity.

We have very many divisive figures whom we romance with words; but for Mutebile, we know that what we are talking about is right. 

He was a true definition of a Mukiga, who could not mince his words. Last night, when we had a vigil at home, Mama Betty gave a real picture of the Governor.

The young generation has lost a role model; we are lucky to still have all these important people modeling for us. But I remind my fellow young people that the struggles of rationing sugar - we who never faced those hard times, who are enjoying the beauty of this country; the peace for all; let us work to ensure that we maintain peace and the economy which the Governor sacrificed for so that our country can have better posterity. Thank you and may the soul of our Governor rest in eternal peace. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Government Chief Whip. We have a condolence message from the National Resistance Movement, which was signed by Alhaj Moses Kigongo, the national vice-chairperson. It reads:

“With profound sorrow, I have learnt of the death of a gallant, diligent, committed, down-to-earth Ugandan, Prof. Emmanuel Mutebile, the Governor of the Bank of Uganda and the Chairman Board of Directors of Bank of Uganda.

As an economist and banker, Prof. Mutebile worked hard to restore the economy after the crisis that befell our country during the past regimes and in the struggle that brought democratic governance in Uganda. He has done our country proud till the day he breathed his last. 

As I mourn the fallen comrade in the struggle, I appeal to fellow Ugandans, especially those in the banking sector to uphold the good work of Prof. Mutebile for the good of our country.

I condole with the bereaved family and pray that the Almighty God helps you to recover from the shock of the death of your loved one. May his soul rest in eternal peace.” 

That was a message from the National Resistance Movement.

Members, we have an amendment to the motion. Amendment No.3 to be captured in the Hansard which reads: 

“Parliament urges Government to follow-up on the undertaking that has been taken by Government on matters regarding the welfare of the late Prof. Mutebile’s family and to inform Parliament in the subsequent sitting.”

I now put the question to the motion that has been moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister with amendment that this House pays glowing tribute to the late Emmanuel Tumusiime Mutebile for his distinguished service to this nation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

Honourable members, I thank you so much for creating time to come and pay tribute to our gallant son, father and brother. As the Parliament of Uganda, we extend our sincere sympathy to the family, Bank of Uganda and the whole country for the loss of this gallant son. We will always be available for the family as always.

As for Bank of Uganda, keep our bank well, may the good Lord rest Emmanuel in eternal peace. The House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 12.17 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 27 January 2022 at 2.00 p.m.) 









