

Wednesday, 30 January 2019

Parliament met at 2.42 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I will begin by making an adjustment on the Order Paper to allow handover the Public Accounts Committee (Central Government) to lay two reports. 

Secondly, I would like to announce the sad passing away of another former Member of Parliament, hon. Kenneth Absalom Oteng, who died on 20 January 2019 at Nsambya Hospital. He was 90 years old. 

Col. Dr Oteng was a member of this House. He also served as a lecturer at Makerere University. He was a Chief Research Officer, Director of Veterinary Services. He represented Erute County from 1989 to 1996. He was Chairperson of the Livestock Industry, Deputy Minister for Research, Production and Training, General Manager Uganda Leather and Tanning Industry, founder member of Uganda National Research Council and he also served on many national and international forums. 

He received the first national award from the President for research and training and he was the first PhD holder in Lango region. He was a very strong member in the church; he is survived by six children, 15 grandchildren and a widow. The date for burial will be announced later. 

Honourable members, yesterday, we discussed the issue of sand mining. We have instructed the Clerk to check whether the Parliamentary Counsel is actually drafting the law and I can now confirm that the Parliamentary Counsel has received instructions from the ministry to draft the relevant Bill. I would like to appeal to the minister to bring it as quickly as possible. Thank you very much. 

Honourable members, today we shall not be able to entertain matters of national concern. They will be handled tomorrow. Under our rules, we are entitled to the first one hour on Thursdays; so, they will be handled tomorrow. 

We also have a delegation from the National Assembly of Kenya from the Department of the Sergeant-At-Arms. They include: 

    1. Mr Andrew Shangarai – Senior Sergeant-At-Arms; 
    2. Mr Abdi Salat – Senior Sergeant-At-Arms; 
    3. Mr Joshua Lenambeti – Sergeant-At-Arms; 
    4. Ms Esther Ngechu – Sergeant-At-Arms; 
    5. Mr Manuel Leparachao – Sergeant-At-Arms; and 
    6. Ms Eva Kaare - Sergeant-At-Arms. 
You are welcome. (Applause) 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE INSTITUTE OF PARLIAMENTARY STUDIES BILL, 2018

2.47
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Institute of Parliamentary Studies Bill, 2019” be read for the first time. 

Madam Speaker, we have a Certificate of Financial Implications issued by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, as required under the Public Finance Management Act. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL LOCAL CONTENT BILL, 2019

2.48
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Local Content Bill, 2019” be read for the first time. I beg to move. 
     
Madam Speaker, you are aware that lately, we have challenges getting Certificates of Financial Implications. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has quite often indicated to us at the Budget Speeches that he loves local content and it is the solution to this economy. 

On 17 July 2018, through the Clerk, we wrote to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requesting for the Certificate of Financial Implications. That is after spending two years engaging with the ministry and other stakeholders applying for this certificate, as it is required. 

According to our Rules of Procedure, if the ministry takes more than 60 days, we will assume that the certificate has been provided. It took more than 60 days to get a reply so I wrote to the Clerk requiring publication of the Bill. She wrote back to me informing me that the honourable minister, Matia Kasaija, had written to her on 19 September 2018 indicating that they would not be providing a Certificate of Financial Implication for the National Local Content Bill. 

Unfortunately, the reasons given are matters that we had discussed with representatives of the ministry and we had agreed on many of them. The final statement of the minister was that they were unable to issue a Certificate of Financial Implications, according to the letter written to the minister on 19 September 2018. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you because I had almost given up. I was not in the House but I read in the papers that the Speaker had requested that we put some of these important Bills and prepare them for first reading. I beg to lay on the Table my communication as far as the Certificate of Financial Implications towards this Bill is concerned. It is through your guidance that I have been able to come and present it. 

However, I would like to request that unless the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – Madam Speaker, you are aware of the need for local content in this country. I, therefore, beg that this Bill be processed expeditiously so that Ugandans out there who lack transfer of skills, Ugandans who are excluded from projects and contracts and Ugandans out there who want to participate in their economy are given chance through this legislation. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Nsamba. The Bill will be sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back. However, I would like to appeal to the Government not to use bureaucracy to fetter the work of the backbenchers. 

This request is over a year and by any standards, it is beyond 60 days. I would like to inform the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that any other Bills which are beyond the 60 days, I will put them on the Order Paper for first reading. Thank you.

Honourable members, join me in welcoming a delegation from Itakaibolu in Luuka. They are represented by hon. Stephen Kisa and hon. Esther Mbayo. They are here and you are welcome. (Applause)

In the distinguished strangers’ gallery, we also have a delegation from the African and Arab Youth Council; they are here to visit Parliament. They are: 

    1. Mr Abdu Lahweji, the President and he is from Libya. 
    2. Aminal Hilm Secretary General from Morocco.
    3. Mustapha Abuwawena; and 
    4. Saleh Emad also from Libya. 

You are welcome. At the local level, they have been coordinated by hon. Abbas Agaba. Thank you very much. (Members rose_)

No, even if you are a PWD, you must give me notice. (Laughter) Hon. Akello has a pressing issue, which I will allow in three minutes. 

2.56
MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to raise this procedural matter. On Wednesday last week, I raised a matter of national importance about the sad things that are happening in Apaa. I told you how a health centre was closed.

Madam Speaker, you had directed that the matter be discussed yesterday but it did not come up. Today, there is nothing on the Order Paper or even in the notice of business to follow. As I speak, people are living in internally displaced people’s camps in Apaa centre without food, shelter and medicine. There is a lot of looting going on; there are people who cross with boats, loot and go back.

As their representative, I am very uncomfortable that they are suffering. Several times, we have made very many good resolutions as Parliament of Uganda, but unfortunately, nothing has been done.

Secondly, when the President visited Apaa, he halted all evictions and manners of torture. However, up to now, it is on-going. Who is above the President that cannot even listen to the directive of the President because there is a lot of impunity going on there? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, your matter is actually on the Order Paper as business to follow. Issues of national concern will be handled tomorrow. I had already informed you that –

2.59
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): We are being abused. As we sit here as Acholi leaders, our people are being battered and tortured. Right now, we should not even be in this Parliament. It looks like we are not Ugandans. If we were Ugandans, they would also listen to what the President said. This ceasefire – who are you ordering –(Interruption)

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With due respect to the Leader of the Opposition talking about Acholi leaders, is she in order as a national leader to be tribalistic because she is a national leader of the Opposition? Even in the West Nile, there are members of the Opposition. Is she in order to be tribal as an Acholi yet this is a national issue, having guided that the matter is on the Order Paper?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a particular issue happening in the Acholi Region and that is why she is addressing it. Leader of the Opposition, what do you want us to do?

MS AOL: Madam Speaker, I am a Member of Parliament from Acholi and being Leader of the Opposition does not make me any little Acholi. I represent everybody but first, the Acholi region. As Acholi leaders, I just wish that since we are not being listened to, we should perhaps pick spears and go to fight. 

If we cannot go to fight, we should leave this place and go and identify ourselves with our people. Sometimes, we are even lost for words; we do not have words to express our emotions. If the President of Uganda cannot be listened to and Gen. Moses Ali, who has killed so many Acholi people continues to kill our people and to make us look stupid as if we are not Ugandans; we are ready to fight. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can the Prime Minister tell us what to do about the issue in Apaa, please. We do not need to debate it; there is a problem and we want to hear the solution.

3.02
THE MINISTER IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a very serious issue and I am going to inform the Prime Minister so that he comes with a statement tomorrow –(Interjection)– that is the best I can do.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members. The matter of hon. Lucy Akello is on the Order Paper. However, that notwithstanding, the Prime Minister should come here tomorrow and give us a solution on the issue of Apaa –(Members rose_) I asked the Leader of the Opposition what she wants us to do and she has not told us. She said she is going to fight.

3.03
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Madam Speaker, you have in the past – when we had violations of rights – suspended Sittings of this Parliament. The Prime Minister is not in Parliament and he has not even had the courtesy to ask someone to stand in for him. The minister said, “I will inform him.”

This being a matter as serious as it is, Madam Speaker, I would like to move that you suspend today’s Sitting for Parliament to express solidarity with those who are being battered as well as our colleagues from the affected area; and also to allow Government to take this as a serious matter.

If the suspension of Parliament happens like it has happened, even the Prime Minister – wherever he is hiding – will appear because they have done it before.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us demand the Prime Minister to come here within one hour. Let us proceed with our Business but the Prime Minister should come in an hour and tell us what to do. There are three prime ministers. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a comprehensive evaluation report of the Universal Primary Education (UPE) policy Thematic Report 1, Thematic Report 2, Thematic Report 3, Thematic Report 4, Thematic Report 5 and Thematic Report 6.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the reports are from the National Planning Authority and are now available for your use.

REPORT OF THE UGANDA PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE OF THE INTER-PARLIAMENTARY ASSEMBLY ON ORTHODOXY HELD FROM 3RD TO 9TH APRIL, 2018 IN BEIRUT, LEBANON

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Ssekikubo requested to defer this matter to tomorrow. He has actually escorted the new Bishop of the Orthodoxy to some big offices.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED, “THE RELIGIOUS ORGANISATIONS BILL, 2019”

3.07
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, (Manjiya County, Bududa): Madam Speaker, I am moving a motion seeking leave of the House to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Religious Organisations Bill, 2019”, moved under Articles 79 and 94 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for the peace, order development and good governance of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS Article 94(4)(b) and Rule 110 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament empowers a Member of Parliament to move a Private Member’s Bill;

AWARE that Article 29(1)(c) guarantees a person’s freedom to practise any religion and manifest such practice which shall include the right to belong to and practise or participate in any practices of any religious body or organisation in a manner consistent with the Constitution;

NOTING that whereas Uganda, being a secular state with an estimated population of 35.9 million – 85 per cent of which is Christian, 12 per cent Muslim and 3 per cent Hindu, Jewish and Bahai and the Christian population consists of 42 per cent Roman Catholics; 36 per cent Anglicans; 15 per cent Pentecostals and Orthodox Christians and 7 per cent belong to the other denominations;

FURTHER NOTING that the legal framework for the establishment, management and control of religious organisations is scattered in various legislations such as the Constitution, The Trustees Incorporation Act (CAP. 165), The Church of England Trustees Act, 1908 and the Non-Governmental Organisations Act, 2016;

COGNISANT of the need to consolidate, amalgamate and modernise the law relating to the establishment and management of religious organisations in Uganda as well as the need to bring it in line with current trends;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that this House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled, “The Religious Organisations Bill, 2019” a draft of which is hereto attached and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.” 

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Yes, it is seconded. Justification?

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, the objective of this Bill is to consolidate the laws under which religious organisations are registered to ensure that religious organisations are registered under one body – (Interjections) - to allay the fears of Members, this Bill is not an affront against the faiths. This Bill is fully respectful of the provisions of the Constitution to have full enjoyment of freedom of worship. It is only to create a regulatory framework for registration so that religious organisations are established under one agency.

This Bill seeks to –

1. 	Provide for the management and administration of religious organisations and places of worship; 
2. 	Provide for the registration of religious organisations by the bureau; 
3. 	Regulate the establishment and management of places of worship; 
4. 	Provide for the management of property belonging to religious organisations and places of worship and for related matters.

The defects with the current legislation are that currently in Uganda, the laws that govern and regulate the establishment of religious organisations are numerous. They include:

    1. The Trustees Incorporation Act Cap 165;
    2. The Church of England Trustees Act 158;
    3. The Non-Governmental Organisations Act 2016.

These laws, as you can see, are scattered. They do not provide a uniform mechanism for the establishment of religious organisations. 

For instance, the Non-Governmental Organisations Act requires a person intending to register a religious organisation to first incorporate the organisation and then register it with the bureau. On the other hand, the Trustees Incorporation Act requires a person who intends to establish a religious organisation to appoint trustees, who then apply to the minister for a certificate of registration as trustees. From the issuance of the certificate, such persons become incorporated as bodies corporate with powers to sue and be sued.

This has created challenges in regulating the activities of religious organisations since they are very many different power centres for the establishment of religious organisations. Indeed, religious organisations established under the Trustees Incorporation Act are regulated by the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, while those established under the Non-Governmental Organisations Act are regulated by the National Bureau of Non-Governmental Organisations, which is of course under the docket of the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

Furthermore, the laws governing the establishment of religious organisations are inadequate in as far as dealing with these peculiarities of religious organisations are concerned. Therefore, it is important to note that religious organisations are peculiar in nature and are different from other organisations such as NGOs.

Currently, religious organisations that are registered under the Non-Governmental Organisations Act are registered as if they are NGOs, which are limited in their geographical extent to only areas that are permitted and licensed to operate from, yet religious organisations are supposed to be national in nature, operating and drawing their membership nationwide without limitation.

The law regulating the establishment and operations of religious organisations is also inadequate in as far as its failure to regulate the establishment of places of worship, which are mushrooming in all places, including residential areas and even some close to hospitals or where health care services are. There ought to be a regulatory framework to provide specially gazetted places.

The Bill, therefore, seeks to consolidate, amalgamate and modernise this law relating to establishment, management and operation of religious organisations and places of worship. This is to enhance the enjoyment of religious freedom as guaranteed under our Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

Finally, the remedies proposed by the Bill are to cure the following:

    a) To have the National Bureau of Non-Governmental Organisations register religious organisations by one agency;
    b) To harmonise the governing structure of all religious organisations by requiring all religious organisations to be administered by a governing council, which shall be in charge of the day-to-day administration and management of the religious organisations; and
    c) The establishment of places of worship through issuance of permits, their management, as well as empowering communities in which they are established to have a say in the establishment of such places of worship.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Nyendwoha, please use three minutes.

3.19
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, I rise to second the motion moved by hon. John Baptist Nambeshe to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Religious Organisations Bill, 2019”.

Article 94(4)(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament empower a Member of Parliament to move a Private Member’s Bill. This constitutional right can only be curtailed where the content of the Bill is contrary to Article 93 of the Constitution. 

In seconding this motion, I am furthering the honourable member’s rights, guaranteed under the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, to move a Private Member’s Bill.

The Bill is necessary because it will consolidate, amalgamate and modernise the laws relating to the establishment and management of the religious organisations in Uganda.  It will also enhance the enjoyment of the freedom of worship guaranteed under Article 29(1)(c). 

Article 29(1)(c) guarantees a person’s freedom to practise any religion and manifest such practice, which shall include the right to belong, to participate in any practices of any religious body or organisation in a manner consistent with the Constitution. I beg to submit. Thank you.

3.20
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Nambeshe seeks leave of this august House to move a motion and I think the motion comes in handy as a requirement of the parliamentary Rules of Procedure. I would like to commend hon. Nambeshe for meeting the requirement of seeking leave of this august House. (Laughter)

There is need to establish a legislative framework to make provisions for regulation of religious organisations. The proposed Bill for which leave is sought does not seek to initiate legislations outside the legislative competences of this august House but above all, to consolidate, amalgamate and modernise the laws relating to establishment and management of religious organisations in Uganda.

The proposal as presented by hon. Nambeshe respects Article 29(1)(c) that guarantees a person’s freedom to practice any religion. Once consent is sought and granted by the august House, the House will interrogate the merits and demerits of the proposed Bill appropriately. However, it is his fundamental right that this request is sought and this House grants the request to introduce a Private Member’s Bill to regulate religious organisations in this country. I beg to support the motion.

3.23
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the mover of the motion for having seen something that was not seen by us.

Madam Speaker, I believe every religion is a calling from God. I have listened to his submission and he said there should be a bureau to regulate the mushrooming religions. Will that bureau be a kingdom of God? –(Laughter)– what will be the composition of that bureau? 

I am Catholic and I know there are other religions like Anglicans. By origin, Catholicism was first and because of some misunderstandings, the Anglicans protested and broke away. If the Catholics had a bureau, do you think they would allow the Protestants to break away? They would not. 

Since the 1995 Constitution stipulates clearly that there shall be freedom of worship, let us not pretend to be small gods on earth; we are not. This is just a calling. Let people believe in their God, whom they choose to believe. Otherwise, do you want even the religious leaders to be regulated? They believe in their gods and culture anyway. Do you also want to create a bureau for cultural leaders like Maama Fiina to regulate their activities? Will you regulate the activities of the kingdoms like Buganda, Bunyoro Kitara and Toro? They also believe in their cultures.

Since this is a calling from God, I do not see the need for that Bill. Leave it because we are not small gods; we do not need a bureau because there is no one sent by God to regulate people on how they should follow Him. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the debate should not be about the content of the Bill. It should be on whether we should give him permission or not; you do not have to go to the merits. The issue is; should we give him permission? 

3.26
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion for bringing a Bill to Parliament to regulate religious sects. I would like to tell my brother that if he had brought a Bill on landslides in Bududa, we would have supported it overwhelmingly. 

Recently, we had an issue of duplication of agencies in this country. We want to merge the agencies so that we do not have duplication of issues. I already know we have the Uganda Registration Services Bureau which handles religious sects, marriage et cetera. I do not see why my brother is again coming up with a proposal that we should have another registration bureau for religious sects.

I would like to propose that we should have a countrywide consultation because this is a matter that touches all Ugandans. I know hon. Nambeshe is very interested in consultation worldwide and I am sure he will take this matter seriously. 

When you talk about freedom of worship, I know the Constitution is very clear about it and nobody has ever come here to complain about being barred from worshipping, whether from their bedroom, kitchen or anywhere. That freedom already is there. I do not know why my brother should think that we should come up with a special Bill to handle it. Therefore, I do not think we should give him leave to go and waste time on this matter.

3.28
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to oppose this motion. I, first of all, would like to put my position very clear. I am a member of the Roman Catholic Church and we strongly believe that the church is one Holy and Apostolic Church and it is in Rome. Whatever you see here in Uganda is an appendage of what is in Rome. Therefore, we cannot accept to be subjected to any sort of regulation or control. 

It is not the first time that a Bill of this nature is indirectly brought through the NGO law. We rejected it on this Floor. Therefore, I can say this without any contradiction that the Catholic Church, which is universal, will not support this type of legislation.

Madam Speaker, the dictum that Parliament can make any law except changing men into women should not be abused. We have better things to do that really affect the wellbeing and lives of Ugandans other than coming here to seek our permission to grant you leeway to present such a Bill.

I have very high regard for hon. Nambeshe. I have a lot in common with him. Even when we are in the corridors, we talk at personal level as Oryena Mukwasi and the rest of it. (Laughter)– However, for this particular case, our friendship will not hold water for the time being. I strongly believe that whatever we legislate here –(Interruption)

MR AGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. You have rightly guided that at this point, the mover of the motion is only seeking leave of the House to bring the Bill and attach a justification on whether or not they should be granted leave. 

Given the sensitivity of the matter we are dealing with - as you can see tempers are flaring - it becomes difficult for people to discuss whether or not to grant leave and not waver into the details of the Bill, which may not be available but anticipated.

Under rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure, every Member has a right to introduce a Private Member’s Bill. Secondly, the Member moving a Private Member’s Bill shall be accorded reasonable assistance by the department of Government whose area of operation is affected by the Bill.

Madam Speaker, Rule 121 gives the procedure through which the private member shall raise or bring the Private Member’s Bill. Rule 121(1) reads, “A Private Member’s Bill shall be introduced first by way of motion to which shall be attached the proposed draft of the Bill.”

The point of procedure I am raising is; in Rule 120, it is clear and categorical that every Member has a right to move a Private Member’s Bill. In rule 121(1) the right of the private member to raise a Private Member’s Bill is limited through the procedure that a Private Member’s Bill shall be introduced first by way of motion; and in (2) if the motion is carried, the printing and publication etc - when you say, if the motion is carried, it means the right is limited.

If the private member has a right to move a Private Member’s Bill; and largely if you look at the four roles we play -

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of procedure, hon. Agaba?

MR AGABA: Madam Speaker, the point of procedure I am raising is the contradiction within the Rules of Procedure.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Agaba, there is no contradiction. Rule 120 says you all have a right but 121 lays out the steps you must go through before it is carried.

MR AGABA: Fine; let me make my point clear. Rule 121(2), if the motion is carried, it means the right is limited.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the right is subject to the consent of the House. That is what rule 122 is talking about; subject to our consent. You can move but you have to ask for our consent. If we say, “No” you stop and if we say, “Yes” then you move.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the wise guidance offered. We are not in any way denying any Member of this House to seek leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill. We are only saying you can be granted that will and authority by this House; and it is only after we have all agreed that the Bill is to the interest of this House and the country that we grant you permission to go ahead with your intentions.

However, having said that, freedom of worship is a constitutional matter, whether you want to worship in your house as said earlier on by hon. Nantume; whether you want to strip yourselves naked as long as it is within the paradigm of the law of this country, you are allowed.

However, if you offend any law, then the Ministry of Internal Affairs with the police will pounce on you using the existing laws. Therefore, for you to come up with a proposal that you want to clump our wings as it were; and churches and mosques which have been time immemorial, then it is something which we should safe guard against.

Whereas we are here numbering to about 459 Members of Parliament, we must know that we are not the majority. We are here to deliberate and represent the interests of the 40 million Ugandans, who sent us her. In which case, therefore, we should treat very carefully when it comes to matters of faith.

Religion is an individual conviction in the heart and when you tamper with that belief and conviction, the results may be very fatal. In which case, therefore, let us go slow. You have a good intention but as of now, I personally reserve my support to grant you permission to go ahead with your request to present a Private Member’s Bill even though you are my friend. We can cooperate on other things - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery we have students from Otatai Child Development Centre. I do not know where they are seated. Oh there they are, the young people. Stand up. They are represented by hon. Ariko and hon. Osegge. You are welcome.

3.37
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Semujju): I would like to thank youm Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Hon. Nambeshe is my friend. I am actually shocked that of all the subjects that exist, he has been motivated to come and require our faiths to be registered.

As a Muslim, I would like to tell you, hon. Nambeshe, that I do not support the motion that you are granted leave to go and bring - what in my faith – I will consider a satanic Bill. (Laughter)

Since you are my friend, I would like to persuade you, hon. Nambeshe, to withdraw the motion. (Applause) 

Even the people hearing us discuss that today you want Muslims to begin registering as NGOs and political parties - I would like to ask you, as a friend, that this is a matter for which you should even be afraid to put your name to. I do not know whether in your constituency - matters of faith, my religion is universal. The rules governing my religion are heavenly rules and they are in the Quran.

Idi Amin attempted and declared only four faiths in Uganda. I actually did not know that nearly 45 years later after Amin is gone, there will be another Amin seeking leave of Parliament –(Laughter)

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we must, as a House, be very cautious; let us not abuse our own rules. If the rules grant you permission to present a Private Member’s Bill, you do not present one that will seek for example to abolish Parliament because you have a right to present a Bill.

Matters of religion are very emotional issues. People have fought wars in the world over - (Member timed out.)

3.40
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. It appears the Bill, as being proposed by my good friend although he has tried to cross over to the other side, is quite contentious. 

What we see today is a true reflection of the laxity within the law enforcement agencies of this country. We should not hide our faces. Hon. Nambeshe should have been so open and candid to tell us that we have in reality Pentecostal churches - not all but some - that have transformed their sects into business enterprises. If that is a factual reality, I must state with precision and certainty that we have relevant laws that cannot only govern but also regulate their conduct. 

I will give you an example. When I was a magistrate at Kampala City Council in 2005, there was a pastor who defrauded one of the “faithfuls” by taking her car. That pastor was charged with obtaining goods by false pretence and we recovered that car. 

Today, pastors offer part of the loot to police. How do you expect the police force to enforce the law when they are actually beneficiaries of the loot? 

Therefore, my good friend, Mr Nambeshe, we have all sufficient laws to regulate the unruly and errant leaders of the pentecostal churches. What we need is probably to have a universal policy that can ably enforce these rules and regulations –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform my colleague that we have other churches currently. I know one pastor who, when it comes to the time of worshipping, tells all the women to undress –(Interjections)– there are many of these people. The Bill is seeking to regulate such kind of pastors. We have very many people who claim to be born again, yet, they are not. What they are doing is contrary to the faith of the Almighty God. It is very important –

THE SPEAKER: You rose on a point of information.

MR OLANYA: The information I would like to give my colleague is that there are many people who are dubious and they are not real servants of God.

MR MUGOYA: Thank you for that wonderful piece of information –(Member timed out.)

3.45
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua County West, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I stand to support this very important motion. I would like to congratulate my colleague, hon. Nambeshe for bringing it before us. 

I support this motion because I would like to remind honourable members about the year 2000 when we had an inferno in Kanungu District. A similar scenario happened in the United States in 1988 when a member of a cult, a religious sect drew members and they were all burnt in a church.

I also stand to attest to what hon. Gilbert Olanya has said. Recently, in Kitgum District, we had some religious sect which has been rejected by the community but they keep moving from one place to another. Recently, the community ran rowdy to the extent of burning their church. The police has now gone in to harass and arrest members of the community on this issue.

I feel that it is important for us to give hon. Nambeshe an opportunity to present his Bill because this is a motion. Let him bring that Bill, we discuss and evaluate its merits and demerits and we conclude it. Supposing this Bill protects the existing denomination; is there anything wrong with that?

Lastly, recently, in Rwanda, there was a debate on this similar matter and there was a pronouncement made by the Executive that whoever wants to practice as a leader of any Christian faith should be qualified as a theologian. This was the basis on which they were trying to regulate and protect the people. As Parliament, we are supposed to protect the masses from –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter is a simple one; whether or not to allow the Member to bring a Bill so that we can discuss it on merit. You know that I do not have a side in this issue but you are here to legislate for the whole country. Sometimes, there are unpalatable things brought here. You cannot say you do not want to hear but you can take your vote. It is up to you. 

Therefore, the question is, can we allow him to go and bring a Bill so that he comes and we debate it on merit?

THE HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do give authority to the honourable member to present a Bill. (Members rose_) Can we do it by show of hands? Honourable members, take your seats. We are establishing how many you are and then we take a vote by show of hands.

MR AGABA: I rise on a point of procedure, Madam Speaker. Under our Rules of Procedure, Rule 121 (1) states, “A Private Members’ Bill shall be introduced first by way of motion to which shall be attached the proposed draft of the Bill.”

Further, Rule 121(2) says, “If the motion is carried, the printing and publication of the Bill in the Gazette shall be the responsibility of the Clerk.” Now, the provision that if the motion is carried, means the motion may not be carried.

Madam Speaker, the motion not being carried maybe by vote like you have suggested or in another way, the Members may be asked again to comment about the Bill and maybe, show if they are still interested in pushing it the way it is or they may withdraw it and look at it again.

Would it be procedurally right –(Interruption)

MR GUMISIRIZA: Madam Speaker, the Speaker of Parliament is the custodian of the rules. Is it in order for hon. Agaba to lecture the Speaker on the rules on which the Speaker is the custodian?

THE SPEAKER: I am the custodian of the rules. Honourable members, I want us to take a vote but we are only 110. Therefore, let us defer the vote on this matter and go to the next item.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE SECURITY INTEREST IN MOVABLE PROPERTY BILL, 2018

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, join me in welcoming a delegation of Butaleja Music Group. They are represented by hon. Mugeni, hon. Waluswaka and hon. Nagwomu.

Clause 18

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, we propose to insert a new clause immediately after clause 18. Insert the following new sub clauses;

"Cancellation of initial and amendment notices

(1) 	The secured creditor or grantor may register a cancellation notice where the -
(a) 	registration of an initial notice or the amendment notice was done in error or through fraud;
(b)	registration of the initial notice or amendment notice was not authorised by the grantor;
(c)	collateral is no longer subject to the security interest;
(d)	security interest to which the notice relates has been extinguished and the secured creditor has no further commitment to provide value to the grantor.

(2) 	Notwithstanding subsection (l), the Registrar may cancel notices filed under this Act where-
(a) 	the duration in section l7 lapses without the notice being amended;
(b) the transaction creating security interest rights between the grantor and the secured creditor contravenes the provisions of the Tier 4 Microfinance Institutions and Money Lenders’ Act or any other law;
(c)	there is a mistake or error in the description of the collateral;
(d)	there is wrong description of the collateral;
(e)	The collateral is destroyed or is no longer in existence;
(f)	the Registrar is ordered by court to cancel the notice;

(3) 	The Bureau shall, before cancelling the registration of the initial notice or amendment notice, give notice to the secured creditor or grantor as the case may be.

(4) 	Notwithstanding subsection (1) (d), where a grantor has met its obligations to the secured entity, the grantor or secured entity shall file a discharge notice with the registrar.
(5) 	A person aggrieved by a decision of the Bureau to cancel an initial notice or an amendment notice may appeal to the High Court.”

Madam Speaker, the justification for this is;

    i) To grant powers of the secured creditor or the grantor to register a cancellation notice.
    ii) To empower the Registrar to cancel notices.
    iii) To provide for circumstances under which a notice may be cancelled.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposal. I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause agreed to.

Clause 19

MR BITANGARO: We propose to replace clause l9 as follows:

“19. Notice of Objection 
    (1) A person may, within fourteen days of registration of the notice, reject the registration of a notice on grounds described in subsection (2)

    (2) The grounds referred to in subsection (1) are where the notice -
    (a) contains a wrong description of collateral; or
    (b) the grantor has no right to create a security interest in the collateral.

    (3) The objection shall be in the form prescribed by the regulations. 

    (4) The Registrar shall upon receipt of objection, suspend the registration of the notice and inquire into the objection.

    (5) The Registrar shall, within seven days of receipt of the objection, inform the grantor and the secured creditor. 

    (6) The grantor or the secured creditor may respond to the objection within three days of receipt of the notification referred to in subsection (5) 

    (7) The Registrar shall, where -
    (a) he or she considers the objection to have merit, remove the notice from the register; or 
    (b) he or she finds the object to lack merit, maintain the notice on the register and inform the person objection of its decision; 

    (8) A person aggrieved by the decision of the Registrar may appeal to the High Court.”

The justification for this is to impose a timeline within which a person may object to the registration of a notice and the procedure of objecting.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Chairperson, with due respect to the chairperson, I disagree with his proposal. Restricting the time within which an aggrieved party may object to a registration defeats the core purpose of the objection notice. Time limitation will leave many aggrieved persons without a remedy. 

Clause 19 of the Bill is of a wider scope than the proposed amendment. In the interest of protecting the grantor and other aggrieved persons, the provision should be retained as it is.

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, I concede, given his reasons. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 19 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20 

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, we propose to insert a new clause immediately after clause 19 in the following terms:

“Notice of Discharge
    (1) The secured creditor shall, within five days after the obligation secured by the collateral has been paid or performed in full or in part, discharge a security interest and file a discharge notice. 
    (2) Where the secured creditor does not, within the time prescribed in subsection (1) file a discharge notice, the grantor may apply to the Registrar to discharge the initial notice or amendment notice.”

The justification is to require the registration of a discharge notice in order to notify third parties. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Chairperson, I agree with the statement that reads, “The secured creditor shall, within five days after the obligation secured by the collateral has been paid or performed in full...” However, when you say, “in part” which means if he has done it in part, then the discharge, security interest and file is discharged off. When you say “in part”, I think the creditor has not been performed in full. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you mean “in full” or you also want to say that if they have only fulfilled “in part,” they can also discharge? 

MR BITANGARO: The secured creditor shall, within five days after the obligation secured by the collateral has been paid or performed in full or in part, discharge a security interest and file a discharge notice. Yes, you can charge the part that has been performed. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What if I have only fulfilled part of it? How can I give you a full discharge?

MR BYABAGAMBI: He is using a very strong word, “shall” which means if I have fulfilled my obligation in part not fully, then you discharge the whole interest. I think it is very dangerous. Why can’t we delete “in part” and remain with “in full?” 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On the same note, if you look at the timing - the number of days given, he is talking of five days, not five working days. What about if it falls on a Friday or Sunday? 

This should be clearly specified. We could probably give this more time because five working days is too short. Why don’t we probably give it 14 working days to serve the notice to the third party, as you have said? Five working days is a very short period of time. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, are you still insisting on the word “part?”

MR BITANGARO: For clarity’s sake, we could delete “in part”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: And the five working days?

MR BITANGARO: The five working days are fine. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause, as amended, be inserted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20 

MR BITANGARO: Clause 20 reads, “Search of register.” We propose to delete sub clause (3).

The justification is that the provision is redundant. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why do you say it is redundant? No, but talking about its admissibility in evidence – 

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, I accept.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want to delete it? Does that mean that you cannot use it in evidence?  What this provision is saying is that once the report is certified, it can be used as evidence. Why don’t you want it to be used as evidence? Once it is certified, you can present it in the court and that is what it is saying. This is important.

MR ABALA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. You have exactly said what I wanted to say because if the report has been certified, that means it is authentic. By removing from this provision, it means that we are going to leave the law and it is going to be naked. One way of authenticating and keeping it together, this clause should actually be maintained.

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, we decided to have it deleted because it is already provided for in the Evidence Act and such reports are admissible in evidence under the Evidence Act. Therefore, what is the point for repeating it here?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I keep wondering why you send people on a fishing expedition if you can provide it here. Why do you want them to search if there is an Evidence Act?

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, I concede. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 20 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20 agreed to.

Clause 21

MR BITANGARO: Integrity and security of register. In sub clause (2), substitute for the words “subsection (l)”, the words “this Act” 

The justification is that it is a consequential amendment having allowed the registrar to make changes to register through cancelling and removing notices as prescribed in Clause l9 and the insertion of a new clause immediately after clause 18.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 21 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22

MR BITANGARO: Limitation on liability of the registry. 

In the head note, substitute for “Registry”, the word “Registrar.”

The justification is that it is the registrar that has immunity and not the registry.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 22 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 23

MR BITANGARO: On general rules of the priority of perfected security interests, we intend to substitute for clause 23, the following:

“Priority of security interest in same collateral. 
Priority between security interests in the same collateral shall be determined as follows:
(a) 	A perfected security interest shall have priority over an unperfected security interest; 
(b) 	Priority between perfected security interests shall be determined by the order whichever of the following actions first occurs:
(i) 	The registration of an initial notice; 
(ii) 	The secured creditor or another person on the secured creditor's behalf, taking possession of the collateral; or 
(iii) 	The secured creditor or another person on the secured creditor's behalf acquiring control of the collateral; and 
(c) 	Priority between unperfected security interests in the same collateral shall be determined by the order of creation of the security interests.”

The justification is for clarity and better drafting.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 23 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.


Clause 24

MR BITANGARO: General rules of priority of security interests that are not perfected. We intend to delete clause 24 of the Bill.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE:  Madam Chairperson, I accept. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 24 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24 deleted.

Clause 25 

MR BITANGARO: Insertion of new clause; immediately after clause 24, insert the following new clause;

“Competing security interests created by different grantors.
A security interest created by a grantor is subordinate to an earlier created security interest in the same collateral.”

The justification is to prescribe which security interest has priority amongst competing security interests created in the same collateral by two different grantors.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

Clause 25 agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27

MR BITANGARO: Priority of security interest in proceeds. We propose to substitute for clause 27, the following;

“Clause 27. Priority of security interest in proceeds. 

The priority of a security interest in the collateral shall also be the priority with respect to proceeds arising from dealing in the collateral.”

The justification is for clarity and better drafting.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 27 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 28

MR BITANGARO: Priority of security interest in commingled goods -
(1) 	In sub clause (l), we propose to delete the words “and the security interests extend to the product or mass” appearing in the second line.
(2) 	We propose to insert the following new clauses immediately after sub clause (2); 
“(3) Where more than one security interest extends to commingled goods, a security interest perfected before the goods become commingled has priority over a security interest that is perfected at the time the collateral becomes comingled goods.
(4) 	Where more than one security interest in comingled goods is perfected before the security interest becomes comingled goods, the security interest shall rank equally in proportion to the value of the collateral at the time it becomes comingled goods.”

The justification is that this is to delete redundant words in subsection (1) and to prescribe for how priority ranking is in comingled goods.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 28 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 28, as amended, agreed to.)

(Clause 29, agreed to.)

Clause 30

MR BITANGARO: Clause 30: 
“Priority of security interests in fixtures -
In sub clause (1), we intend to substitute the word “may” for the word “shall”.
In sub clause (2), we intend to insert the words “tangible assets” that becomes (a) before the word “fixture”
We intend to substitute for the word “land” the words “Land Act, Cap 246”.

Insert, immediately after the word “Act” appearing in the last line, the words “Cap.229”.

This is to provide the full citations of the laws cross-referenced in the provision and ensure clarity and better drafting.

MR MAWANDA: Clause 30(2) “…perfected security interest in a fixture under this Act has priority over a competing interest in immovable property created and perfected under the Land Act and Mortgage Act.” A fixture on immovable property – like when office partitions were fixed in the office, they can later be removed and they are strengthened by the tenancy agreement. If there is default, how do you handle that kind of situation? How do you include the tenancy agreement in this aspect?

MR BITANGARO: Well, if they are classified as fixtures, then they fall under this.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that clause 30 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 31

MR BITANGARO: “Priority of security interest in crops -
    1) In subsection (3)-
    a)  We propose to delete the word “an” appearing in the second line.
    b) Insert immediately after the word “security” appearing in the second line the word “interest”.
 
The justification is to correct the grammatical and typographical errors in the provision.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 31 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 32

MR BITANGARO: “Rights of purchasers and other transferees”
    (a) We propose to replace sub clause (1) as follows -
    1) A purchaser, transferee, leasee or licensee of a collateral sold, transferred, leased or licensed in the ordinary course of business takes the collateral free of a perfected security interest created in the collateral, except where -
    a) the purchaser, transferee, lesee or licensee acquires the collateral free of the security interest and the secured creditor authorises the sale, transfer or lease to be free of the security interest.
    b) purchaser, transferee, lesee or licensee of the collateral does not have knowledge that the sale, transfer, leasing or licensing violates the rights of the secured creditor under the security agreement.”

(b)We propose to delete sub clause (2).
(c)We propose to insert immediately after sub clause (1) the following -

(2)For the purposes of this section -
    a) a purchaser of goods includes a person who acquires possession of goods by sale, hire purchase, under a contract of services or materials or through barter;
    b) A person sells, transfers, leases or licenses goods in the ordinary course of business if it is a business of that person to sell, transfer, lease or license goods of that kind or nature.”

Madam Chairperson, the justification is:

    1) To expand the provision to extend to purchaser, transferee, lesee, or licensee in all aspects dealt with in the provision. 
    2) To expand the provision to include purchase, transfer, leasing or licensing in ordinary course of business and other than in the ordinary course of business.
    3) Sub clause (2) should be a stand-alone clause since it does not relate to the headnote and sub clause (1) of the provision.
    4) To define what amounts to an ordinary course of business.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Chairperson, I disagree with the proposed deletion because the provision is necessary to protect rights of other parties not being purchasers, for instance, court or liquidator. The scope of sub clause (1) is narrow, giving rise to the need for sub clause (2). I agree with the insertion of sub clause (2) but it should be sub clause (3).

MR BITANGARO: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

MR AOGON: Where we are saying “…for purposes of this section:
    a) Purchaser of goods includes a person who acquires possession of goods by sale, hire purchase…” –

THE CHAIRPERSON: A court or liquidator – isn’t that where we are?

MR AOGON: “A purchaser of goods includes a person who acquires possession of goods by sale, hire purchase, under contract or services or materials or through barter.” I was trying to find out – This is sub clause (2)(a). It is after that provision which says “delete sub clause (2)”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think sub clause (1) was left intact. 

MR AOGON: It is just below that line which says, “delete sub clause (2)(b)” just below that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that below a new clause?

MR AOGON: Yes. I was trying to find out about the use of shares to gain possession of property. Somebody can own shares in a company and be able to use them to gain possession of property. Can’t we expand and include that in the list? That is what I wanted to find out from the chairperson. It could help.

MR BITANGARO: Are you saying you want to expand sub clause (1) to include the holder of a share? It can be included in barter.

MR AOGON: Shares can also be used as collateral. For instance, if I have my shares in the SACCO here, that can be used as collateral for me to gain access to credit.

MR BITANGARO: Yes, it is possible. It is correct. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clerk, read it.

THE CLERK: Madam Chairperson, I believe the honourable member is saying that the new sub-clause (3) should read, “For the purposes of this section A, a purchaser of goods includes a person who acquires possession of goods by sale, hire purchase, under a contract of services or materials or through barter or sale of shares”. Do you want to add the word, “sale of shares”?]

MR AOGON: Basically, my interest is how we can bring the aspect of shares. What I know is that shares have value and somebody can use them directly without converting to cash to gain possession. So, how do we bring it into play? Is it possible if technically we looked at it so that we capture it fully and give people access to get credit through what they already have?

If you restate it, I would like to suggest that you say: “A purchaser of goods includes a person who acquires possession of goods by sale, hire purchase, through shares, under a contract of services or materials or through barter”. 

I do not know whether it makes sense. If it does not, we can first stand over it and allow the legal team to look through it to see whether we can do something about it.

MR BITANGARO: We are talking of a mode of acquisition of goods and services. Would it not be probably possible for you to sell the shares and use any of these other modes?

THE CHAIRPERSON: What we are defining is who the purchaser of goods is. That is what you are defining.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, this is so that it is legal for somebody to purchase using shares because a share is a valuable asset to somebody. I can buy something without even exchanging for us. For instance, I am member of our SACCO here and have shares there. They can say that they are now selling plots. You can use your shares to own a plot and that is okay. That is what I need us to consider.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, goods are defined in the Sale of Goods Act. We cannot reengineer them. A share is not a good.

MR AOGON: For now, let me concede. I know that next time after two years, there will be an amendment. I will come back. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I think I have to put three questions here. I put the question that sub-clause (1) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Sub-clause (1), as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that sub-clause (2) stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Sub-clause (2), agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 32, as amended, do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, as amended, agreed to.

MR BITANGARO: On clause 32, priority of unperfected goods.
Immediately after clause 32, insert the following clause:

Priority over unperfected security interest

“Where collateral is subject to a security interest that is not perfected, a person who takes possession or control of the collateral without knowledge of the security interest takes the collateral free of unperfected security”.

The justification is to make provision for priority over unperfected security interest.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that a new clause – Yes, hon. Aogon?

MR AOGON: That is a touchy one. I would like the chairperson to plainly explain it in simple English on what he exactly means here. What do you mean by unperfected and perfected? What exactly do you mean so that we understand it properly?

MR BITANGARO: Is your problem perfected? (Laughter) It is defined in Section Two of the bill; the definition section and what is not perfected is the opposite of perfection. However, in simple terms, the perfected is the security interest that is recognised. Do you now understand? Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable mover of the bill, you did not define a perfected interest. We may have to address that in clause (2). Consider a definition of perfected and unperfected interest.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Chairperson, I will.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We shall come back to it when we go to the interpretation clause. 

New Insertion

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a new clause be inserted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, inserted.

Clause 33

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, we would like to replace clause 33 as follows:
“33.Acquisition security interest

    1) An acquisition security interest has priority over a competing non-acquisition security interest that is created by the grantor.
    2) For purposes of this Act, ‘an acquisition security interest’ means a security interest in a tangible asset or in intellectual property or the rights of licensee under a licence of intellectual property, created by a person who provides credit to the grantor, which secures an obligation to pay any unpaid portion of the purchase price of an asset or other credit extended to enable the grantor to acquire a tangible asset or rights in an asset to the extent that the credit is used for that purpose.”

The justification is for clarity and better drafting and to define what amounts to acquisition security interest.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the clause 33 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 34

MR BITANGARO: Security Interest in Negotiable Instruments
In sub-clause (2), delete the figure “5” appearing in the second line between the words “the” and “security”.

The justification is to remove figure “5” which was a topographical error. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 34 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, as amended, agreed to.


Clause 35

MR BITANGARO: We intend to delete clause 35. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 35 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36

MR BITANGARO: We intend to make an amendment to clause 36 - debtor and grantor not to waive rights before default. We intend to delete the words “or vary by agreement” appearing in the third line. 

The justification is that the words limit the grantor and secured creditor from agreeing to waive rights after default. Secondly, the words conflict with the general scheme of the provision, which appears to prohibit unilateral actions of the secured creditor or grantor.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 36 be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 37

MR BITANGARO: We intend to move an amendment to clause 37 - rights of secured creditor upon default. We propose to substitute sub clause (2) with the following:

“(2) Where a grantor defaults to perform a secured obligation, the secured creditor may enforce the security interest by exercising any right-
    (a) under this Act;
    (b) provided in the security agreement; or
    (c) provided under any other written law.”

We intend to insert, immediately after sub clause (2), the following:
“(3) Where a debtor defaults to perform a secured obligation, the secured creditor shall serve on the grantor a notification, in writing or in other form agreed between the parties, to pay the money owing or perform and observe the agreement as the case may be.

(4) The notification shall state the following matters -
(a) 	the nature and extent of default;

(b) 	if the default consists of non–payment, the actual amount and the time by the end of which payment must be completed;

(c) 	if the default consists of the failure to perform or observe any covenant, express or implied in the agreement, the act the grantor must do or desist from doing so as to rectify the default and the time by the end of which the default must have been rectified; and

(d) 	the consequence that if the default is not rectified within the time specified in the notification, the secured creditor will proceed to exercise any of the remedies available at law.

(5) 	Where the debtor does not remedy the default within the time period indicated in the notification, the secured creditor may-
(a) 	in case of a security interest perfected by registration, register a default and enforcement notice with the registrar; and
(b) 	in the case of a security interest perfected other than by registration, take any action as required under this Act.”

Madam Speaker, the justification is: 

    1. To prescribe when the secured creditor may enforce a security interest in a collateral; 
    2. To guide the enforcement of collateral; 
    3. To require a secured creditor to serve onto the grantor a default notification;
    4. To require a secured creditor to register a default and enforcement notification with the registrar where the grantor does not comply with the default notification.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 37 be amended as proposed.

MR AOGON: The amendment says, “Insert immediately after sub clause (2) the following: ‘(3) where a grantor defaults to perform a secured obligation, the secured creditor shall serve on the grantor a notification, in writing or in other form agreed between the parties…’” 

The problem I have here is, “other form agreed”. I know people who are very stubborn. Somebody can allege that you agreed with him and yet you cannot confirm that you agreed with him. What are we going to provide as evidence to show that there was an agreement? I would rather we stick to “in writing” and leave out “other form agreed”. I do not know what you think about this.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, what other forms do you envisage?

MR BITANGARO: Another form could be by social media or electronic communication; they can send you an email.

MR AOGON: In writing, somebody can have proof and acknowledge that he has received the notification. Now, if someone says, “I asked your son to tell you” and then he insists that he asked your son to tell you, how do you prove that?

MR BYABAGAMBI: I do not know whether writing will also include a message, WhatsApp messages or email. Will we call that writing or the other form? I believe writing means where you write and sign. When it is a message, that is the other form because you cannot sign the message. However, it can be used as evidence that you actually notified or informed him. As such, other forms should also be there. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to read for you the definition of “writing” under the Interpretation Act: “Writing includes printing, photography, lithography, typewriting and any other modes of representing or reproducing words in visible form.” Therefore, I think a message using the Short Message Service (SMS) is a form of writing.

MR AOGON: This then renders “in other form” redundant. That is my opinion. We should stay with writing because it is quite vast.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The definition includes other modes. 

MR AOGON: If you re-read this –

THE CHAIRPERSON: I am reading the Interpretation Act.

MR AOGON: It says, “…in writing or in other form agreed”. I suggest that we eliminate other forms. 

MS ASAMO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to disagree with hon. Aogon that there are no other forms. If you have a blind defaulter, for example, who does not write, you can have witnesses around him or her in the agreement and they will be the ones to witness that transaction. Thank you.

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to agree with the committee. You read the definition of writing from the Interpretation Act. Here it says, “in writing or in other form agreed between the two parties”. This means that there was an agreement prior. 

I will give an example, Madam Chairperson. If we agree that I will remind you through a telephone call, I think we have already agreed that I will notify you in that way. The key words here are, “agreed between the parties”. I therefore agree with the chairman. Thank you.

MR KAHIMA: I stand to object to the amendment because when you read the Bill, once the defaulter defaults the obligation, the Bill clearly states that the security interest becomes enforceable. These people have already entered a contract that the debtor will pay the creditor; now, why should they give notices and meander? Why shouldn’t it be directly enforced as it is provided here in the original wording of the Bill?

MR AOGON: We have to be fair. Madam Chairperson, notice is very important in any business around the world. I have seen even with National Water and Sewerage Corporation, when they have a bill with you, they first bring it to your door. If you are not around, they push it under the gate so that you are aware that they are going to come. That is what used to happen with Uganda Electricity Board (UEB) those days.

Therefore, it is a very vital provision that somebody is notified that this and that is happening. Sometimes you find that somebody has defaulted by a week but people can agree that yes, you have defaulted by a week but if you can make it good now, we will forget about that. Therefore, notice should be provided for.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not want Members to be very worried about this because the words, “in other form” means you will have agreed. It is in a form you two have agreed to. It is what you have agreed.

MR MAWANDA: Madam Chairperson, I agree with you but I have something to point out on the proposed sub clause (4)(b), which says, “If the default consists of non-payment, the actual amount and the time by the end of which payment must be completed” 

If the default is by non-payment, I suggest we need to specify the time. You might default and someone says, “if you do not pay within one day, we will go ahead and sell your property.” Some people give you two days and then they hide. If we can specify and say that if you will not have paid within seven days, we shall foreclose, so that we have something to do with time, but - 

MR BITANGARO: The preceding paragraph talks about agreements –sub clause (3).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 37 be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 38

MR BITANGARO: We have some amendments, Madam Chairperson. The clause is on the right of a secured creditor with priority to enforce a security. We intend to replace clause 38 with the following: 

“Right of secured creditor with priority to enforce a security interest 

Where the enforcement of a security interest is commenced by a secured creditor other than the secured creditor whose right has priority over that of the enforcing creditor, the secured creditor shall be entitled to take over the enforcement at any time before the sale of the collateral.”

Madam Chairperson, the justification is:

    1. To broaden the provision beyond a lien holder; 
    2. To limit the enforcement of the collateral through sale only; and 
    3. To remove the possibility of a secured creditor and grantor from privately agreeing to the sale or disposition of the collateral other than by sale of the collateral.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 38 be amended as proposed.

MR AOGON: What will the implication be in case of taxation where Government has a stake in this very collateral? We may have a secured creditor but Government needs to recover tax. Can you comment on this?

MR BITANGARO: It makes the whole transaction transparent, so your fears are covered. If those are your fears, it makes the whole transaction transparent. Justification No. 3 says, “To remove the possibility of a secured creditor and grantor from privately agreeing to the sale or disposition of the collateral other than by sale of the collateral.”

MR MAWANDA: Can I give an example? Thank you. As he says, in No. 3, where a grantor and the creditor connive – There is the case of African Textile Mills in Mbale where the owner of the property agreed with the bank and sold quietly and the rest of the people who had liens on the property lost out. This now protects the other security creditors from losing.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 38 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40

MR BITANGARO: We propose to delete clause 40 and the justification is: 

1. 	The provision will be open to abuse by the secured creditor. 

2. 	The provision is contrary to the principles of creating a security interest, which is, to secure payment. Allowing a secured creditor to take over the collateral upon default is likely to lead to the proliferation of security agreements that automatically result in the takeover of a security interest in case of default.

3. 	This provision will infringe on the provisions of the Money Lenders Act since it prohibits takeover of collateral without court process.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Chairperson, I disagree with the proposal to delete clause 40. Clause 40 should be maintained because it provides speedy, effective and inexpensive enforcement mechanisms, which are essential to promoting lending. Enforcement without dependence on a court process not only expedites the foreclosure process but also helps to preserve the value of the movable collateral.

This brings confidence to the creditors in that in the event of a default, they can avoid long and costly court proceedings to enforce their rights. Sometimes the value of the collateral may be less than the cost of the court process.

To avoid abuse, safeguards to protect the assets honour are built in clause 40(2) where secured creditors can only take possession of a collateral without a court order where – 

(a) 	the grantor consents, in writing, to the secured creditor taking possession of the collateral without a court order;

(b) 	the secured creditor gives a notice of default and a notice to take possession by the secured creditor to the grantor or the person in possession of the collateral, where the collateral is not with the grantor; and 

(c) 	possession or control of the collateral can be taken without breach of peace.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you still insisting on deletion?

MR BITANGARO: I have difficulty with this because the whole spirit of this Act is to make transactions transparent and not to give power to lenders to abuse the securities by selling them - where you have a lender having your security and upon default, he can sell. We do not want to create a situation where a security can be sold at will by the lender.

What I can consider, as a middle position, is that we can have a threshold where, for example, for goods that do not exceed Shs 5 million, the transaction can take place. However, where the security is about Shs 10 million, the committee’s position should stand.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if you look at sub clause (2), it sets the conditions under which the secured creditor can take action. First, the grantor will have consented in writing. Secondly, the secured creditor will give notice of the default and also give notice that, “I am entitled to take possession.” There are conditions; he has to comply with (2) (a), (b) and (c). 

MAJ. GEN (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Chairperson, I could provide an alternative to this because we would like to avoid costly litigation. In the alternative, I could introduce a new sub clause immediately after sub clause (3) to read as follows:

“(4) Subsections (1), (2) and (3) shall not apply to a secured transaction with a contractual value not exceeding five hundred currency points.” This gives a threshold on a secured transaction that can be enforced without recourse to court. I beg to move.

MR BITANGARO: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I put the question that sub clause (5) be introduced into the Bill as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you have a new clause to introduce to before clause 41?

MR BITANGARO: Yes. 

“Sale by secured creditor 
(1) 	Save as provided for under section 39, where a debtor is in default, a secured creditor may sell any or all of the collateral in its condition or following any commercially reasonable preparation or processing.

(2) 	The sale of the collateral shall be by auction.”

The justification is: To ensure that the disposal of collateral is only through a public sale.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Chairperson, I disagree with the explanation. The proposed amendment refers to a commercially reasonable preparation, which is not practically possible to implement. A public sale is already costly yet the collateral envisaged, in most cases, is of a very low value to incorporate this principle in the proposed amendment. 

We propose that we amend the clause by inserting, immediately after sub clause (2), the following:
“(3)(a) A secured creditor may dispose of the collateral by sale by private treaty where the contractual sum of the secured transaction does not exceed 500 currency points.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have already incorporated that. We have already amended clause 40 and that became sub clause (5) of clause 40.
 
MR BYABAGAMBI: There is something that I do not understand. Supposing the three parties sit and agree - the debtor, creditor and the person who is going to buy that item - isn’t it a private treaty or private sale? Can’t it be done? Do you need to go for public auction, which is costly and lengthy?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, what is the rationale for your proposal?

MR BITANGARO: It is to avoid abuse by money lenders.

MR AOGON: I need to support the chairperson. Money lenders have a tendency of doing things in hiding. It has been clearly put here that before you sell a product or item, put it in the media, for instance. Let people know that it is on sale for 10 days. If I am anywhere, I can be able to access the information that my product is on sale because of the debt. 

Therefore, it is necessary to follow the recommendation of the committee as that is the right way to go. Nothing should be in hiding - arm’s length transactions.

MR ABALA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I agree with the chairperson of the committee. With the chronic corruption and abuse that we are witnessing in many areas of this country, I think the proposal by the committee is an ideal proposal that we should buy and pass now. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you have just come. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I was here –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be inserted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the new clause stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

Clause 41

MR BITANGARO: We intend to substitute clause 41 with the following:

“(1) A secured creditor shall, at least ten working days before disposing of a collateral, give notice to the grantor, any other secured creditor, owner of the collateral or any other person as it deems fit and file with the registrar a disposal notice.”

In sub clause (2)-
    (a) delete paragraphs (d) and (f);
    (b) in paragraph (e), delete the words, “where the disposition is by a private sale” and the word “and” appearing at the end of the paragraph.

Further, we would like to propose insertion of a new sub clause immediately after sub clause (2) as follows: 

“(3)	A person may, within five days of receipt of a notice referred to in subsection (1), object to the disposition of the collateral.

(4) 	The objection shall be in the prescribed form and shall state the grounds of objection.

(5) 	The registrar shall, upon receipt of the objection, notify the secured creditor and suspend the disposition of the collateral until the objection is withdrawn or lapsed.

(6) 	The objection lodged in subsection (3) shall lapse after three months from the date of objection unless the person who objected it has within that time commenced proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction and has obtained and served on the registrar an injunction or order of court restraining the registrar from removing the objection from the register.

(7) 	No dealing in the collateral shall have effect if the same is carried out before the objection lapses or is withdrawn.”

In sub clause (3), we intend to delete paragraphs (c) and (d). In addition, we further wish to insert a new clause immediately after sub clause (4) as follows:

“(5) The minister shall, by statutory instrument, prescribe the procedures for disposing of collateral that is perishable.”

The justification is:

    1. The provision as it appears in the Bill did not elaborate how a person objecting to the disposition of the collateral would have notice of the disposition of the collateral.

    2. To prescribe how a person may object and the processes that arise from the objection of disposing of collateral.

    3. Paragraphs deleted in sub clause (3) would be open to abuse.

    4. To provide for the disposal of collateral that is perishable.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Chairperson, I see a problem in the proposed sub clause (6), which says that the objection lodged in subsection (3) shall lapse after three months from the date of objection unless the person who objected it has, within that time, commenced proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction and has obtained and served on the registrar an injunction or order of court restraining the registrar from doing so.

First, the problem I see is that three months is a long period. Secondly, it is going to be abused; when left with only one day, somebody can go back and put another objection and he prolongs the whole process because he does not want to pay. 

Why can’t he go to court immediately? If he has lodged an objection, why does he need three months? Why can’t he do it like in other laws, within fourteen days? Why do you give him three months and he can go on repeating it in order to delay the whole transaction and justice?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chairman, I would like to know why you want to delete sub clause (2)(d) and (f) about notice of disposal. Paragraph (d) says, “state the method of the intended disposition.” Why do you have an objection to the creditor indicating the method of disposition?

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Chairperson, I do not agree with the deletion of paragraphs (d) and (f). The provision should be left as it is with the modification of clause 41 by inserting, immediately after sub clause (2), the following:

“(3)(a) A secured creditor may dispose of the collateral by sale, by private treaty where the contractual sum of the secured transaction does not exceed 500 currency points”. This is because a public sale is too costly yet the collateral envisaged, in most cases, is of very low value. 

Madam Chairperson, I accept the insertion of a new sub clause (2).

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, I concede.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, he should tell us why we are talking about three months - what could be the reason behind that - and not one day or 10 days?

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, I wish to explain to the honourable members who are objecting to three months. We took into account our clogged court systems. It takes a bit of time to get an order and therefore, if you made it 14 days, you might not get an order within 14 days in the court system.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think there is no harm because the person who lays an objection, if he takes no other action, it will lapse. 

MR BITANGARO: Yes, like a caveat lapses.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I have seen strange things taking place in courts of law. He may wait maybe for three days before the lapse and then puts in another objection and the process is prolonged. I have seen strange things taking place in courts of law and people have lost money, property and businesses. We should not only be looking at the person losing the property; the person who is doing business should also be protected.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, to support the honourable colleague, like you have seen in Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (PPDA) dealings, most times when somebody has advertised, they award a contract but somebody comes and asks for administrative review. That is why we are having problems. 

The conditions are already spelt out; if you fail to abide by the obligations, the next step is to notify you and after notification, sale. Why do we need all these objections here and there? The creditor is also using money and we cannot impede their business. The conditions are already there; if you fail, up to when should we wait for you? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think hon. Byabagambi has a point. If you read the proposal under sub clause (5), it says, “The registrar shall, upon receipt of the objection, notify the secured creditor and suspend the disposition of the collateral until the objection is withdrawn or lapsed.”

MR BITANGARO: Maybe I can concede. Let us first find a middle ground, Madam Chairperson, and reduce the days to 60 days.

THE CHAIRPERSON: If I am to wait for three months for you to either take action or for it to lapse, I am losing. The registrar will not take action; he will not dispose until either the objector withdraws or the three months expire. Should I wait for three months?

MR BITANGARO: No, we can find a middle ground.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On the issue of borrowers and lenders, I think we should not only look at borrowers and leave out the lenders. When they come, they want money. The reason we are trying to make this law is that those who have movable property can borrow money.

My brother, Eng. Byabagambi, has talked about this and I would like us to cure it. How do we do it? I will give an example. There was a money-lender who died in Mbale. He would wait for the due date, switch off this phone and then disappear because he wanted to acquire someone’s property – (Interjection) - I think that is why he died, you are right. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your proposal? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I think we should be very strict in the sense that if you object, you must first pay me a percentage, which you will forfeit, because I can wait. It will cater for my interest, if I have lent money.

My proposal is that if someone objects, you pay 30 per cent of the debt as we are waiting for the matter to be resolved. If you lose, you forfeit the 30 per cent. It can also take care of the interest. 

Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose that we give 45 days because the other one was 90 days. We should give 45 days but one must pay 30 per cent of the outstanding balance. 

The justification for this is to take care of uncertainty like interest, and also movable properties can deteriorate. When you sell it after the prescribed time, you can knock off the 30 per cent and your interest so that you take the balance. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I am just looking further at the proposals. The objector is required first, to commence proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction but also to obtain and serve on the registrar an injunction or order restraining the registrar from removing the objection. 

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, do you find any contradiction? If we are to take into consideration the fears of hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the Member for Kumi Municipality, and hon. Byabagambi, we could indeed reduce the time to 45 days, as proposed by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. We could also make it conditional that in the event of failure, there should be some kind of sanction. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I am coming back to your rationale that because of the speed at which our things work, you may commence proceedings but getting an injunction – Maybe we should leave it as it is. 

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, you have practised in our courts; it is not so easy to – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You may commence but to get the injunction is problematic. The 45 days would probably be too short.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Chairperson, much as we are trying to protect the borrower, the person doing business should also be protected. Some of this money is borrowed money from the banks and it is doing business. In this case, you are subjecting him to three months and he is paying interest for three months. Even the collateral that you are using is depreciating and losing value. 

Therefore, I think we can compromise on the balance of 45 days, which had been struck by my good friend, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. 

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, given the current situation, 45 days are too many. Remember, there is the issue of inflation and the interest that you must pay. Secondly, why are we entertaining this element of objection? I need to understand this, at this stage. If somebody knows his obligation, why should we give him leeway? Thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, what you are saying is very important, but if you heard what Eng. Byabagambi said, in most cases – Let me give an example of Members of Parliament. You have the capacity to borrow from banks but why do you go to money lenders on this street? It is because you need quick cash and you want to solve your problems. 

The person who is on Parliamentary Avenue will go to the bank to borrow money because he knows there will be those who will want to borrow. He is also paying interest. He will have borrowed money to lend you because you were not able to borrow from the banks. It therefore does not make sense that you do not pay him. 

I am not a money lender but what I would like to put across is that we must protect you, the owner of the property. We are saying, in 45 days, you must resolve the matter. If you have not resolved the matter in 45 days, then we can sell. However, what does the one who gave you money get? This is because in 45 days, you might be expecting a deal from Dubai and you will pay back. Sometimes you may have gone into business and it has collapsed. What we want to do is to protect both the lender and the borrower. In 45 days, you can resolve your problem.

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, I conceded. It is not a monologue. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: He conceded to 45 days. Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 41 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 42

MR BITANGARO: We have an amendment to make, to delete sub clause (4). 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 42(4) be deleted.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43

MR BITANGARO: Clause 43 is on application of proceeds. In subsection (1), we intend to substitute paragraph (a) with the following: 

“(a) to payment of the reasonable expenses of retaking, holding, preparing for sale, selling, and to the extent provided for in the agreement, the reasonable legal costs incurred by the secured creditor calculated on an advocate and client basis.” 

In sub-clause (3), insert the following words immediately after the word “grantor” as follows: “or owner of the collateral”.

Delete sub clause (4). 

The justification is: 
1. 	To control the expenses for holding, selling as well as client costs that can be paid out of the collateral;

2. 	To ensure that the owner of the collateral has also accounted for any surplus arising from the sale of the collateral.

3. 	Sub-clause (4) is misplaced since it relates to a different subject matter. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Not everybody will employ a lawyer and incur legal costs. The moment you include the advocates’ costs, then we are in problems because theirs are set by the law. 

I do not have a problem with what the Bill has provided for: “payment for the expenses of taking possession, holding, storing, repairing, valuing and preparing for and disposing of the collateral, including the legal expenses incurred by the secured creditor.” I think that is good enough. To say that advocates’ costs are put here will land us in big problems; we are going to make this thing very expensive. 

The other point I wanted to put across is that at least we should set a minimum. I would like to give an example. Recently, somebody bought a car and he failed to pay for it. This car could have been driven from Mbale to Kampala. The man suggested that he should drive his car to Kampala to where it was wanted. However, they said no, they should hire a carrier to take the car. When they brought it on the carrier, they charged him Shs 2.5 million yet if he had driven it, he would have spent about Shs 300,000. Therefore, the costs to be incurred should be the minimum not the maximum.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you going to stop me from hiring a lawyer?

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, we just wanted to set a standard, not to leave it vague. What is minimum? How minimal is minimum or? Who determines what is minimal?

MR MAWANDA: The process of sale is not centred on the lawyer alone. If you are going to sell a property, you will value it and you need a professional valuer. Are you going to subject the fees of the valuer to the advocate-client bill arrangement? 

What we are objecting to is that you are subjecting the entire legal costs to the advocate-client bill. You will need a valuer, an accountant and you will not subject their fees to the advocate-client bill.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I do not know whether the words “secured party” are defined. Under paragraph (a), they are saying, “payment of reasonable expenses”. Why don’t we stick to the words consistently used and that is “secured creditor”, if that is what we meant to say, instead of using “secured party”, which I am not sure is defined? Somebody will be looking for it and it is not defined. Consistency is very important.

ENG. BYABAGAMBI: Madam Chairperson, can’t the whole application of proceeds be left to the two parties to make in their agreement?

THE CHAIRPERSON: What about claims? There are obligations that come with those claims. There may be claims even beyond that person.

MR BITANGARO: Negotiation has some risk in it because the parties may disagree and you again have to go to court, which causes more delay in resolving disputes. Therefore, if you set a standard, you have solved the problem for all the parties.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do we do? 

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, we take my position. (Laughter)

MR BYABAGAMBI: I see a problem. Hon. Mawanda raised a very pertinent question. We have valuers who have not been taken care of. To cure this, I think we can add, “legal costs and others incurred by the secured creditor” and we stop there. This will ensure that other professionals who are mandatory are included. There is no way you can know the value of an object or an item without a quantity surveyor or a valuer. These are necessary and must be included.

MR MAWANDA: Madam Chairperson, further to that, this law is not going to work in isolation to other laws. We have the Insolvency Act, which prescribes the procedure of foreclosure where you need all these players - auditors, engineers and surveyors - and you have to take care of them. Therefore, you will not be able to leave them out in this law when they are being catered for in other laws.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you propose?

MR MAWANDA: I propose what hon. Byabagambi has proposed.

MR BITANGARO: The wording, “reasonable costs” does not exclude them.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, the proposal avoided the valuer and I think the valuer is an important player. Your proposal was talking about retaking, holding, preparing for sale and selling. You did not talk about the valuation, which was in the original one. You did not even talk about repairing.

MR BITANGARO: I thought “preparing for sale” also includes the valuer. It does, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you saying that it is implied?

MR BITANGARO: Yes. I am not saying that it is only legal costs. I am talking of the scale we may use in determining the expenses to be paid. I am not saying that only legal costs should be paid.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I have a feeling that it does us no harm to stand over this and we proceed with the rest. This will enable us to get the right words to provide for an alternative instead of sticking to advocates. If we ask you to give an option, what are you going to say? (Laughter)

Madam Chairperson, let us stand over this, give a chance to thought and we come back when we are okay. Do you have an objection? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you not okay? (Laughter)

MR AOGON: Yes, I am not okay with this. Thank you.

MR KAHIMA: Madam Chairperson, in my opinion, when you refer to expenses relating to preparations to sell, they include all the costs that are involved in the transactions to sell that particular security. So, I would propose that we go by the position of the committee chairperson.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, my proposal is that this should take care of all the professional fees instead of wasting time naming one item after the other.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do we take up the proposal about professional costs?

MR BITANGARO: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, in sub clause (1) we shall introduce the sentence “legal and other professional costs incurred by the secured creditor.” I put the question that clause 43 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43, as amended, agreed to.

New clause

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have a new clause after clause 43 “Treatment of deficiency after sale.” Do you still want to propose it?

MR BITANGARO: Yes and to read as follows: 

    1) Unless otherwise agreed, a debtor is liable for any deficiency arising from the proceeds of sale.
    2) Where a transaction is a sale of receivables or a lease, the debtor is liable for any deficiency specified in the agreement creating the security interest.

This is to make provision for treatment of deficiency after sale.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You mean I first sell and say “by the way this thing is not very good?” You want people to create new claims? What is the rationale?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Chairperson, this is when we have put it on public auction but we do not recover all the money. For example, if one has sold a TV set but they do not recover all the money, who bears the liability? It must be the debtor to cover that gap.

MR KABERUKA: Madam Chairperson, I had wanted the committee chairperson to clarify on this point. At the time of selling the security, it would have been valued and found to be worth the money equivalent to the amount demanded. Therefore, if you have chosen to sell it yourself at a lower price, how can I come in when it was agreed that it is the security that is equivalent to the money I owe you?

MR BITANGARO: The evaluation of a commodity is not exact science; it is by approximation. When you sell by public auction and you do not raise the money, the deficiency should not be vested on the person who lent you. You should take the responsibility and that is what we meant.

MR KABERUKA: Really? So, when should the property be valued?

MS OSEGGE: Madam Chairperson, it is usually assumed, in borrowing and lending business that before the lender gives out the money, they have satisfied themselves that the security they have acquired from the borrower is adequate. Actually, they are always advised to get something that is of a higher value than what they lend out. 

Therefore, when they decide to auction the security, the whole burden is now shifting on them to recover their debt. If they decide to get a deficiency, it is still up to them because they have sold the security upon which they agreed to lend and so, they cannot return the burden to the borrower.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It can continue in perpetuity – the lender can easily say, “Bring some more.”

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, that is the position I support. I have personally borrowed. You stake a plot worth Shs 30 million just for a loan of Shs 5 million. The period of payment is always known and all that is taken into consideration. There is no need. It is very clear. So, somebody should not come and say I got little money from the market. What if you connived with the buyers? How can the debtor get to know that?

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you don’t want this new clause? Okay, let us go to clause 44.

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, I need your guidance. What happens to this one?

THE CHAIRPERSON: The Members do not want the new clause.

Clause 44

MR BITANGARO: In sub-clause (1), we propose to substitute the words “to the person entitled to notice” with the following words: “grantor, owner, any other secured creditor or person with interest in the collateral.”

This is to specify the persons who have to be given account upon the sale of the collateral.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we have refused the insertion of the new clause but when you look at clause 43(4), it says: “A debtor is liable for any deficiency in the proceeds due.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Wasn’t that deleted?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is still there. No, that was an insertion.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It was deleted.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: In the main Bill, clause 43(4) says “a debtor…” If we do not deal with that –

THE CHAIRPERSON: That particular one was deleted.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, now I can go to the other one. Madam Chairperson, I would like the committee chairperson to help me understand what he is trying to propose here because as far as I can see, this is clearly covered under sub clause (1).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which one, the statement of account?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The one where he talks about –(Interruption)

MR BITANGARO: It is not a major thing. We are just specifying which people are to be given notice – grantor, owner or any others.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it harmful? It is only enumerating the people entitled to get notice. It is just unpacking the words “persons entitled.”

Members, I put the question that clause 44 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.) 
        
Clause 44, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you have a new clause?

MR BITANGARO: Yes, there is an insertion of a new clause. We propose that immediately after clause 44, insert the following new clause: “Effect of sale: (1) when collateral is sold to a purchaser for value, the seller- 

(a) 	transfers to the purchaser all the rights of the data in the collateral; 
(b) 	discharges the security interest; and 
(c) 	discharges any security interest or lien subordinate to the security interest.

    (2) Sub-section (1) applies even where the secured creditor fails to comply with the requirements of this part, where a purchaser-
    i) has no knowledge of any defect in the sale; 
    ii) does not buy in collusion with the secured creditor, other bidders or the persons conducting the sale; and 
    iii) acts in good faith.”

The justification is to prescribe the effects of sale of the collateral.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, do you have anything to say?

MAJ. GEN (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Chairperson, I disagree with this proposal because this provision is necessary to cure instances where the collateral may not have ready market and chattels depreciate at a rapid rate and should therefore, be disposed of as soon as possible.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what are your objections to the new clause 45, under effect of sale? You have no issues?

MAJ. GEN (RTD) OTAFIIRE: No issues.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be inserted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, inserted.

Clause 45

MR BITANGARO: We propose to delete clause 45. The justification is that it is open to abuse and conflicts with the principles of creation of a chattel; being that a chattel is only created to secure payment and should not operate as a transfer of the collateral to the secured creditor. That is what we have been labouring with all along.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what do you say about the deletion of clause 45?

MAJ. GEN (RTD) OTAFIIRE: I concur. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 45 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 45, deleted.

Clause 46

MR BITANGARO: We propose to delete clause 46. The justification is, it is a consequential amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 46 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 46, deleted.

Clause 47

MR BITANGARO: Redeeming collateral

We propose to amend sub-clause (2) to delete paragraph (a) and in paragraph (b), delete the words, “contracted for sale or disposal of” and to delete paragraph (c) as well as sub-section (4).

The justification is that paragraphs (a) (b) (c) and sub-clause (4) conflict with the principles of creation of a chattel, being that the chattel is only created to secure payments and should not operate as the transfer of the collateral to the secured creditor.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why do you want to delete 47 (1) (a)?

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, it is because we have all along said that the sale can only be after a public sale.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The headnote is about “redeeming collateral” and the proposal by the minister was that if one tenders performance of the obligation secured by the collateral, they can redeem it. That was his proposal; it is about redeeming - see the headnote.

Okay, you are proposing deletion of (2) (a)? Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 47, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 47, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 48

MR BITANGARO: Rights acquired in collateral

We propose that in sub-clause (1), delete the words “except the rights that have priority over the security interests of the enforcing secured creditor.” 

We further propose amend sub-clause (2) to delete the words, “except as against a creditor with priority over enforcing secured creditor.”

The justification is that the deleted words were promoting an absurdity, considering that if the provisions of the law are complied with, the interest they want to survive a disposal would have been catered for, making the provision redundant.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that clause 48 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 48, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 49, agreed to.

Clause 50

MR BITANGARO: We have minor amendments in sub-clause (1), to insert the word, “may” after the following words: “In addition to or as an alternative to the prescribed penalty.”

We also propose to insert a new clause immediately after sub-clause (2) to read as follows: “(3) The administrative penalties imposed in sub-section (1) shall carry interest at court rate from the date they are imposed until when they are fully paid.”

This is in order to clarify that the administrative penalties are imposed in addition to the penalty prescribed for breach of a provision of the Act.

MR AOGON: I have a concern with the word “court rate.” I do not know whether it refers to the same when one says “ruling rate.” This is because when one talks about interest, it is always proper to refer to the Bank of Uganda rate as the ruling rate. I do not know whether it means the same thing as court rate. Does it? I do not know which one sounds and helps us better.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. I think we must be specific. The court does not have a rate to deal with in commercial transactions.

MR BITANGARO: Actually, court rate is six per cent.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is where we are coming now. This is a commercial transaction and so one cannot subject that commercial transaction to a court rate. This should be at the Bank of Uganda rate. 

The justification is to avoid people going for a court rate, which is lower than a commercial rate. It can take ten years with court charging at a rate of six per cent when the commercial rate is 20 per cent.

MR BITANGARO: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, are you a money lender? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, are you sticking to your proposal?

MR BITANGARO: Since it is a business transaction, we can use the phrase, “commercial rate.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why are you introducing interest? The owner of the Bill did not discuss interests. Why are you introducing it? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, you know court is really good but it does not deal in commercial transactions. A person who is holding somebody’s money but because they don’t want to pay, they will run to court. Now, when they are in court, they will prefer to pay at six per cent for one year yet the creditor lent it out at a commercial rate. For purposes of balancing the Act, we should say that when one takes the money it should be at the central bank rate. 

THE CHAIRPESON: Honourable members, they are dealing with administrative penalties. This has nothing to do with the courts. 

MR AOGON: Madam Chair, be it administrative penalties or not, these rates should be based on the Bank of Uganda rate because that is official. Anybody can go to the board and get to know the ruling rate. That is better than dealing with a court rate. Somebody can tell you the rate is 60 per cent yet the ruling rate at the date is 13 per cent. What will you do with the difference?

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chair, I need to be guided. You know these learned people have something they call taxing the Bill. I do not know whether the court rate they are referring to of 6 per cent is the taxation Bill. If it is not yet that is the rate he is supposed to pay, then I see a problem here because everybody is going to run to court in order to pay low interests.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the person who is going to court here is not everybody; it is the registrar. Where you have breached my rule and failed to pay the administrative penalty, I, as the registrar, will take you to court. It is not a commercial transaction; I will take you to court for failing to comply with my instructions. This is the power of the registrar to -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, you are right it is the registrar. However, I thought the money the registrar collects goes to the Consolidated Fund.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: After their expenses, they are supposed to remit the balance to the Consolidated Fund. It says, “The registrar may impose an administrative penalty, which will be under the regulation.” Now, if the regulations say that before a case is heard, one has to pay one currency point. The case is heard but you do not pay for two years - people are good at dodging paying Government debts. The best thing to do here is to make sure even Government debt is paid on time.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What are your proposals?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We are saying that if the person does not pay, he pays the penalty at the Central Bank at its interest rate. If one does not want the interest -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why are you tying the hands of the court? Give the court the opportunity to listen and decide. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Chairperson, I think the one that is to provide remedy after they have disagreed is the court. Now, if one wants to take it upon themselves then, that is different because when we fail in the other, we go to seek remedy from the court of justice for justice to prevail.

Therefore, I support the chairperson on this provision of the court rate. 

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, that is not okay because the interest is specific. It is prudent for us to think wisely about this because across the world, people take their central banks as the determiners of the rate. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes but in the circumstances you are deciding for the courts. There is no need for the court to sit because you have decided from here.

MR AOGON: Of course, the courts will decide over other things but when it comes to the rate, the interest rate should be the one of Bank of Uganda; that is the right one. 
	
THE CHAIRPERSON: If you put it in the law, then there will be no need for the courts to intervene. Let us give the courts opportunity to hear and determine, depending on the circumstances. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If that is the case, then we need to leave it as it is so that when the court is determining the penalty, it will state a certain interest. We do not need to say mention the phrase “court interest.”

So, I think clause 50 should not be amended; it should remain as it appears in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, let us go back to -

MR KABERUKA: If I may seek clarification to understand hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s point: is he saying we should leave it the way it is in the Bill? This is how it reads: “Non-compliance with part by secured credit” in clause 49.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are on clause 50.

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, I concede to the clause as it was before.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 50 do stand part of the Bill?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 50, agreed to.

Clause 51

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson of the committee, do you have a new clause?

MR BITANGARO: Yes, I have an amendment under 51 on the general penalties. We propose that, “A person, who breaches any of the provisions of this Act for which no penalty is provided, shall be liable to a fine not exceeding 1,000 currency points or a term of -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it a new one?

MR BITANGARO: I do not find it tenable. It offends principles of penal law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you abandoning it?

MR BITANGARO: I abandon it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 51 do stand part of the Bill?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 51, agreed to.

Clause 52, agreed to.


Clause 53

MR BITANGARO: We would like to replace clause 53 with the follows:
“
    1. The Chattels Securities Act, 2014, Act No.7/2014 is hereby repealed.
    2. A prior security interest that was perfected or made effective against third parties under any other law, shall after the commencement of this Act remain perfected under this Act in accordance in subsection (3).
3) 	A prior security interest shall remain perfected or effective against the third party and shall be deemed to be perfected under this Act until –
 (a) 	the time it would have ceased to be perfected or effective against third parties under any other law; and (b) the expiration of a period of 150 calendar days after the effective date of this Act.
4)	If a secured creditor satisfies the requirements of this Act for perfection of security interest before the perfection or its effect against third parties, would have ceased in accordance with subsection (3), the perfection shall be deemed to be continuous.
5) 	The prior security interest that is not perfected under this Act within the period specified in sub section (3), shall be deemed to be unperfected security interest thereafter.”

The justification is for completeness and to make provision for the continued perfection of security interest created under the repealed Chattels Securities Act, 2014. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 53 be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 53, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR BITANGARO: Is it only clause 17?  I think there are clauses 2, 4, 13 and 17. Clause 17 is about the person identified in the notice.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Haven’t you harmonised it yet? Okay, honourable minister, can you move the House to resume?

MAJ GEN (RTD) KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: Madam Chairperson, we have harmonised clause 17 but I would like to recommit clause 18.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You will recommit from – so, if you have harmonised, what is clause 17? What is the harmonised position? May be I first ask the minister to move the House to resume?

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.16
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (MAJ GEN (RTD) Kahinda Otafiire): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House Resumed, the Speaker Presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.17
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (MAJ GEN (RTD) Kahinda Otafiire): Madam Speaker, I would like to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Security Interest in Movable Property Bill, 2018” and passed clauses 18 to 53 with amendments. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
6.17
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (MAJ GEN (RTD) Kahinda Otafiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the House adopts the report of the Committee of the Whole House. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question that the Report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, earlier I had indicated that I was amending the Order Paper to allow the laying of the reports of the Public Accounts Committee. We shall also receive a small report from our ad hoc committee. Let us first do this.

LAYING OF PAPERS

6.19
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Ms Angelline Osegge): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the report of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2016 together with the minutes of the proceedings of the committee that resulted into the report. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to also lay on the Table the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the Auditor-General’s report as at 30 June 2017 together with the minutes of the proceedings of the committee. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson and the Public Accounts Committee. We thank you for bringing up to date the reports of the Auditor-General. (Applause) We thank you for the recoveries and the commitment to work. I now invite hon. Gureme, sorry! Anyhow, Mr Gureme is your father.

6.20
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba County West, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to inform the House that the select committee inquiring into sexual violence in institutions of learning has gone to the report writing stage. We were supposed to finish tomorrow; unfortunately, we will not be able to. We underestimated the work that we had to do; we found that it was much more than we thought.

We visited 25 districts –(Applause)– yes, we did. We did five weeks of going to districts every day. For example, for the first week we went to Jinja, Kamuli, Tororo, Serere and Moroto. We kept doing that every week for five weeks –(Interjection)– well, when we are doing the report presentation you will see the criteria.

We also had five weeks here of a desk inquiry in the ministries and other organisations that came in. I would like to commend the team. We have worked hard but we found that we had underestimated - this is actually the draft report; I cannot show it to you. It was to show you that we are doing something.

Madam Speaker, for the avoidance of doubt, I request that you give us up to the end of February. I know that may be a week before that we will have finished but we do not want to come back and ask for more time. Can we be given up to the end of February? No, do not say, “two weeks.” I say this with a heavy heart. You will be happy with the results –(Interjection)– we have not benchmarked yet but –(Laughter)

We desire to benchmark but we want to write this more. I would like to present this request before the House to allow us up to the end of February so that we can give you –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the ultimate would be the end of the month but if you can bring it in two weeks, we would be happy. We will give you the month but we would be happier if you worked so quickly and brought it within two weeks. 

MS RWAKOOJO: Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Anyhow, thank you for the work, in the meantime, together with your committee. (Applause)

6.24
MS ADONG LILY (IND, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Madam Speaker, you gave, about an hour, for the House to reconsider the point of procedure raised by hon. Lucy Akello on the issue of Apaa for the Prime Minister to come but up to now we have not seen him. 

However, I would like to state that it is unfortunate that the issue raised by the Leader of the Opposition depicted that we want to fight. I do not think that is the position we would love to take. 

I beg for your indulgence and that of the people in this House. We have been provoked by the issue of Apaa for nearly five years. We know the issue started in 2012 where the Madi came and attacked our people under the disguise of Uganda Wildlife Authority. This House has debated it several times but our people have never fought back. They are being slapped on one side and they are turning the other side of the cheek. We still reiterate our position that we will continue seeking dialogue because we know that is our right, our land and it will not go anywhere.

However, we have requests that we would like to put to this House. We had a debate for three days in this House; I was made to understand, and there were resolutions that were made. I am speaking as the Vice Chairperson of Acholi Parliamentary Group. We still request that the boundary be re-opened using the United Kingdom (UK) Map because we all know how maps are being manipulated in this country. 

The minister went and declared but our position is: that if Apaa is in Adjuman, does it not mean that the Acholis cannot live there? We have two parishes in Amuru District that are being occupied by the Madi. I would like then to know or the Government should know - if it is the Government making people to fight – that this is not an issue of Government. It is not even a Madi and Acholi thing; we have an invisible hand. 

If the Madi people allow themselves to be used - we have two parishes - Bibia and Pacilo West occupied purely by Madi but it is in Amuru District and we have never raised a finger. That is why we would like this House to know that we a peaceful people. 

When you go to Omoro District there is Bobi Sub County, which is being occupied by the Langi but we have never raised a finger. In Nwoya District, where I come from, Lee Sub-County and parish are purely occupied by the Langi. We have never raised any finger. Instead we are fighting to protect the rights of those people. We also have them in Agago.

Therefore, I would like this House to know that we are not violent to people who are living with us peacefully. Why are they exceptional in this case? 

Madam Speaker, after this House made resolutions, the President went to the ground, a committee was formed and tasked to go and handle this issue. There were some three proposals that were made by the President, which this committee is working on. The President ordered that the evictions should stop but they are still going on. Right now, they have even gone to the extent of exhuming remains from all the graves so that there is no sign that people lived there.

I am forced to make this statement: Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali is behind this. This country and Government should be able to stop Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali from killing Acholi people; it did not start today. In different fora where we have met –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you are now going to very slippery areas. Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali is not here. I do not know whether you can lay evidence that he is actually killing people.

MS ADONG: Madam Speaker, I can bring it. I have made this statement in different fora. I would like to give you this information. In 2012, during the World Tourism Day where Gen. Moses Ali was a guest of honour, he made this statement - it was recorded - let me say it. Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali said, “I came through Anaka, I found so many people. I reached Alero and found so many people. I came to Lachwa and found so many people and I said, ‘These were not sleeping in the camp, we did not finish them.’” He made that statement.

Madam Speaker, we tried to contact the Chief of Defence Forces (CDF) and the 4th Division Commander but he said those soldiers were not under his command and that they were coming from Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali’s home. Are we in Uganda?

THE SPEAKER: But now, honourable members, my difficulty is that I do not see the Leader of Government Business here. There is no one taking notes. I do not see the Minister for Security. We are talking to ourselves.

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, we can give some information to enrich the House.

THE SPEAKER: No, because how are we going to debate?

6.30
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to seek your guidance. We very much appreciate the effort and the struggle that this Parliament has so far made in regard to the issues of Apaa. The reason we are seeking your guidance is how we should proceed. As we speak now, at about 11.30am, there was an attack on the people of Apaa led by some paramilitary group comprising of the guards of Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali.

Actually, he called the 4th Division Commander Col. Bonny telling him not to interfere and not to listen to any politician. Now when the CDF gave instructions to Col. Bonny to deploy, Bonny was finding a lot of difficulty because - I believe Maj. Gen. Otafire here can affirm what I am going to say that one cannot take full control of the command of soldiers that are not under their deployment.

Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali’s guards are from Military Police with Headquarters in Makindye. Col. Bonny is in charge of the entire north. There was a lot of difficulty until the CDF had to prevail. We are happy that there is a temporally deployment, which is being done this evening. Our worry is that it may not take more than a day or two.

Given the fact that Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali is not even respecting the President’s directive, we want to seek your guidance, Madam Speaker, on how should we proceed in that kind of situation where the Commander-in-Chief gives a directive, the CDF tries to intervene by instructing the 4th Division Commander to intervene but this commander finds himself in a lot of difficulty because the soldiers on ground are not under his command? How do we then proceed, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that it is difficult to proceed in the absence of the relevant people. In particular, I want the Minister of Defence to confirm the issues that hon. Oyet has raised. The Minister of Defence should come here tomorrow and advise us on those issues then we shall know how to move.

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, this is important information – allow me give it to this House. As we talk, the people of Apaa are living in camps. You realise that camps were no longer in the Acholi community but as we speak, it is the UPDF forcing our people to live in camps again.

THE SPEAKER: Are they forcing them to leave?

MR OLANYA: They are now in IDP camps as I speak.

THE SPEAKER: I think that is what the Minister of Defence should come and tell us tomorrow.

MR OLANYA: Secondly, there is some non-governmental organization called Gulu Women’s Economic Development and Globalization (GWED-G) that wanted to supply food to our people in the camps. However, the resident district commissioner of Adjumani ordered that particular NGO never to step in Apaa. Right now, their houses have been burnt, property destroyed and being denied food rations offered by the NGOs. 

Madam Speaker, we are saying this out of tears, not that we like war or fighting but because we pray that those who are disturbing our people be brought to book. The situation is so alarming, Madam Speaker. 

We are only praying to this Government - what is going on is so alarming. Finally - 

THE SPEAKER: Now, you are contributing yet you were giving information. 

MS ADONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have nowhere to run to. This is where we are employed to work and it is where we are supposed to bring the voices of our people. If this Parliament cannot help us, where else can we go? This is the only hope.

Madam Speaker, we have only about two requests as of now. One is that our people should be allowed to access food offered by that NGO. They are in real IDP camps created by soldiers and Uganda Wildlife Authority, headed by Gen. Moses Ali.

Madam Speaker, they are not being allowed access to food. We are mobilizing food from NGOs to take it there but they are not allowing that to happen; no one goes there. They should allow free movement of people. 

Madam Speaker, if you do not see us in the House next week, we shall be with our people until Government acts. We should not be pushed that far. It is too much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I just want to reiterate that I think this House has all along supported the Acholi people; we have and this is for all the parliaments. We even sent committees there. I know things are hard but we need people who can explain and whom we can direct. There is no defence minister here, there is no internal affairs minister; the Prime Minister is not here yet we need someone we can direct to take action.

The Clerk, please look for the Minister of Defence so that he is here tomorrow. There are issues for the Prime Minister and the UPDF; the Minister of Defence should come here to answer to the issues raised by the honourable members.

6.36
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, today in the afternoon, you ably said that the Prime Minister should come because it is him trying to mediate talks between Madi and Acholi committee put in place by the President. 

The President was in Gulu Barracks where the talks started but people have continued to suffer. Even behind my own home, the Apaa people came to United Nations Commission on Human Rights and spent there a lot of time. Where should we go? Parliament has tried to put pressure. I do not know if the President was really doing it with all his heart or trying to make us see that he is acting while from down, he is also fueling it. I am saying this because it looks like the plight of Apaa people is not receiving any fair hearing from - Parliament put a lot of pressure but no response from the people of Madi and more especially Gen. Moses Ali. He knows what he has been doing to the people of Acholi. The people of Acholi have co-existed with the Madi without any problems. Why now?

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I wish we could have this debate when the concerned people are here so that we really take resolutions and give directions.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me give information to the honourable Leader of the Opposition. 

Madam Speaker, we were told by the local people in Apaa that the events that are happening, following the encampment of the people are a result of sections of the people from Madi, who are coming to build on that land that is supposed to be a forest reserve. The people of Adjumani are building on it; their names were mentioned, for example, hon. Jesca Ababiku.  
Since hon. Ababiku is here, we request her to stand up and clearly say her interests. We were told that after chasing away our people, they ferry iron sheets and building materials to construct temporary buildings within a short period. Our people are being evicted – hon. Jessica Ababiku is here; maybe she could probably tell us more on what they are trying to do because the President’s directive was very clear. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, since she is here, let her say something. 

6.40 
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to thank my colleague for mentioning my name. First of all, I would like to say, as the people of Adjumani, we do not want to generalise every Madi in this country. We love peace and we do not support any violence in this country. 

One of my prayers is that all these allegations must be justified. That is the fairness I am requesting. It is not the first time Gen. Moses Ali’s name has been mentioned on the Floor of Parliament. 

However, for the sake of informing this House, I would like to be honest - and I know, Madam Speaker, if you do not have this information, it is probably by mistake. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister has not been out of this country for a long period of time. He has never even gone to Adjumani but that is private information that I cannot reveal; administratively, you can confirm that – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Deputy Prime Minister is on leave with my knowledge. He is actually out of the country and that has been for some time.

MS ABABIKU: It is not the first time these issues have been attributed to him. Madam Speaker, as the people of Adjumani, this time we need evidence –(Interjections)– that is my prayer. 

When Gen. Moses Ali was not here, people spoke against him - I am speaking as a Member of Parliament from Adjumani. I request the Government to bring a comprehensive report on how all these issues started in Apaa. It is true that we were informed by the Deputy Speaker in this House that the President’s intervention was needed. The President called us to Gulu. He even went up to Apaa and so, he knows where Apaa is. The root causes of these allegations must be put out to the public.
 
As the people of Adjumani, we are quiet but not because we are happy; we are also unhappy. We have also not sent messages on WhatsApp not because we enjoy what is happening. Let Government also inform us about the destructions that have taken place in Adjumani. 

Madam Speaker, houses of the people of Madi were burnt and people were arrested. And as I speak now some are still in prison. So, we also have issues. 

On the allegation against me, I request that hon. Franca Akello presents evidence. I do not have any plot of land in that area. All these allegations are intended to divert us. You can go trace them but I do not have a plot of land in Apaa. 

Therefore, unless we speak the truth and let independent people bring a report here - we are also not happy as the people of Adjumani; we should not be taken for granted. Thank you so much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, earlier, I had been requested to adjourn the House in protest. However, I thought that we should stay and the Government comes to tell us what is happening and also to reassure the people of Apaa that they are taking charge of their interests. 

I waited for the Prime Minister; he has not yet come. I would like to adjourn the House to tomorrow. The Prime Minister must come because the President cannot come here. Let the Prime Minister come and explain what the President said and did. 

The Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs should also be here to explain the conduct of the Uganda People’s Defence Force (UPDF). That will be the first item before we go to the other business. So, House has been adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 6.46 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 31 January, 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 

