


Thursday, 17 January 2019

Parliament met at 2.41 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to remind the committees that had items related to the Bills on the Order Paper, which were deferred to next week, to work on them expeditiously, so that we close the legislation chapter and concentrate on the budget process.

Secondly, we have been looking at the report from the Equal Opportunities Commission in relation to compliance with the Certificate of Gender and Equity. Although some progress has been made, we still have to do more to achieve the objectives; for instance –

    a) in the financial year 2018/2019, the agriculture sector was at 70 per cent complaint but in the projections for 2019/2020, they are at 64 per cent; 
    b) lands and housing was at 53 per cent but the projection for 2019/2020 shows their compliance at 32 per cent; 
    c) the energy sector stands at 63 per cent in 2018/2019 and they are projected to be at 45 per cent, which is a drop; 
    d) legislature is also static. We have remained at 68 per cent. I think we also need to do better; 
    e) works and transport was at 59 per cent and now it has reduced to 50 per cent; 
    f) security has remained at 55 per cent for both 2018/2019 and 2019/2020; 
    g) the health sector dropped from 73 per cent to 70 per cent; 
    h) public sector management has remained constant at 59 per cent; 
    i) social development reduced from 90 per cent to 80 per cent.

Therefore, I would like to invite the committees to take interest in the Certificate of Gender and Equity so that we can improve the planning aspect in this country. Thank you very much.

There were a few issues of national concern. 

2.45
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

There are rampant accidents happening in one of the areas in my place called Kyankonwa. I would like to appreciate that Government has gone ahead to construct roads in this country. When Gulu Highway was being constructed, there were places at trading centres and towns where they widened the road and put reserve parking areas. However, in that particular place, they did not put an area for reserve parking. The road is very narrow and this has claimed several people’s lives. 

People like Kasadha, Kaberuka, Otila and others have died at that very blackspot. There are also famous Ugandans like the late hon. Francis Ayume, a former Speaker of this Parliament, who died at that blackspot. Hon. Odonga Otto, our brother here, got an accident recently at that same spot. This place has become a terrible blackspot. 

When I met my people of Kyankonwa, they requested that when I come to Parliament, I present this issue to this House for guidance. I would like to appeal that Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) goes back and widens the road at that blackspot, puts reserve parking in the trading centre and also puts humps at that blackspot and other trading centres and towns which I mentioned here last time.  

They should begin from Wobulenzi. There is a bad spot at a place called Kikoma where there is a market and another at a place called Balikyewunya in Luweero. If a bus gets stuck there one day, we shall have challenges. From Kakooge, Katuugo, Ssasira up to Migyeera, we need those humps. I am happy that they have put some humps around Bombo and another place called Janan Schools, but they have not reached our place. My humble prayer is that they go up to where Nakasongola ends or up to Gulu where those humps are needed. 

This blackspot at Kyankonwa should be taken as a serious matter because it has claimed a number of Ugandans’ lives. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for according me the opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: I see the Minister of Works and Transport. I do not know whether he has any comments for now on this issue.

2.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I take note of the concerns by the honourable member. However, the Ministry of Works and Transport, together with UNRA, have set up a team to revisit the issue of humps. At one time, people complained about humps, especially on highways. They said that we are constructing highways and then putting humps, some of which are not well constructed.

What we are doing now is to first set up a team to revisit what kind of humps we should put on the roads, to see if they are necessary. Once we do that, then we shall revisit those dangerous spots and do the improvement countrywide, not only on that road.

I also want to appeal to Members and the public to be more disciplined on the roads. We complain of narrow roads, but these roads are not going to widen tomorrow. We cannot say that we are going to widen the roads tomorrow, but people are still getting accidents even on wider roads. So, there is an element of indiscipline on the roads. We also need to be disciplined and control how we behave on the roads to avoid accidents.

We called for Fika Salama, but it cannot be everywhere. We should not have a policeman breathing down our necks all the time for us to be disciplined on the roads. I still call upon the public and all of us to behave while on the road. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, in the public gallery we have members of the public who are here to attend the Parliament Week. You will be seeing groups of people coming in. We welcome them. (Applause)

Secondly, honourable members, one of the commitments we made during the Parliament Week is that we are going to plant one million trees across the country to reforest and protect the environment. We started in Moroto last year and we are now going to plant 20 acres in Namanve. We are, therefore, inviting donations from Members, staff and all our friends. There is a tent in the South Wing parking lot; please, contribute so that we can support the environment in the country.

2.50
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a matter of national importance. Before I do that, however, I am sure Members can see me dressed in a uniform that symbolises that this week is dedicated to the Parliament of Uganda. We have so many stalls which will give you details of what every department in Parliament is doing. So, I would expect all of you to appear like this at least once this week.

The reason I have decided to raise a matter of national importance is because the Prime Minister responded to several questions raised by Members concerning the cut-off age for the members of our community who are supposed to benefit from the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE). We, particularly from northern Uganda, have been very concerned that lifting the cut-off age from 65 years to 80 years will disadvantage our people. 

Recently, I had Christmas festivities with old people. When you see a woman of 69 years, she cannot even walk. The reality of the situation is that when you reach advanced age, you are attacked by diseases like high blood pressure and the people in the rural areas do not even know they have high blood pressure. They are attacked by diabetes and yet they do not know they have diabetes. Therefore, by the time they reach 70 years, they are really disabled. 

I do not know the rationale the Government used to raise the cut-off age to 80 years from 65 years. Maybe I am crying because I come from the north and I have seen with my own eyes how the people who are younger than 80 years are suffering. However, I am sure this is happening all over the country. Therefore, we still want justification. We cannot have two sets of communities where one set is being paid at the age of 65 years and – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you saying there are different methods for different parts of the country?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, recently, an official of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development wrote an article in the newspapers and said the Government decided that the cut-off point is now 80 years. They further said that those who started in the pilot scheme will continue at 65 years. It is only the Karamoja Region that will have their cut-off point at 65 years.

My concern is: Can we, as Parliament, allow that kind of disparity to be practised among our people? Secondly, what is the rationale of lifting the age cap from 65 years to 80 years, which puts our people in a worse situation? 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether it is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to explain this discrepancy. Tell us why you are discriminating. Last session, we rejected discrimination in the education sector.

2.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, this matter has been discussed in this House four times and we have resolved it every time. The last time we discussed it, I do not remember whether hon. Cecilia Ogwal was in the House, but you were here. The issue is that resources to roll out the programme-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what we discussed was universal coverage. We have not discussed differentiation in regions. That is our concern.

MR BAHATI: The issue, first and foremost, is resources. We were paying the elderly up to the age of 65 years and this was piloted in several districts. I think under your directive, Members said this programme must be rolled out to the entire country. 

When this matter was sent to the committee, we had different scenarios come up. If we are to roll it out to the entire country at the age of 65 years, we would need over Shs 300 billion. The other scenario was that if we increased the age to 80 years, we would be able to roll it out at below Shs 100 billion. This matter came to the House and we built consensus over it. We agreed to roll it out to the entire country but raise the age limit. 

This matter will, however, come again during the debate on the ministerial policy statement; maybe, we can have another resolution. However, as we stand now, -(Interruption)

MR EDWARD OTTO: Thank you. I had the opportunity to discuss this matter on NTV. It is true, like the minister said, that a committee reported to this House and a resolution was made and the target was to have the programme rolled out throughout the country. Their reasoning was that over Shs 300 billion was required but if the age cap is put at 80 years, it will bring the cost down to about Shs 142 billion. 

However, the issue of the discrepancy, which the honourable colleague raised, is that in some parts, the age cap is going to be 80 years and yet in other parts of the country, it will be 65 years. This is because in the 67 districts where SAGE was piloted, it was decided the age cap should remain at 65 years so that those who are already benefiting are not removed. However, in the areas where they were expanding to, moving forward with that resolution they were going to go to 80 years and above.

Madam Speaker, this is the problem as hon. Cecilia Ogwal put it: From the statistics we know, and I did some work in Agago, it is hard to get people who are 80 years old. Therefore, if you are going for people who are 80 years and above, you are going to find such people in urban centres like Kampala where the standard of living is okay. In most of the rural areas, to put it at 80 years –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I saw a lady of 103 years old in Karamoja who was being ridden in a wheelbarrow to collect her money. 

However, if the decision on this matter was taken in this session, we cannot come back to it until a new session. So, we cannot debate it. Thank you. If it has not been rolled out, then let us wait for the budget. Let us look at the policy statement and then we can come back to it.

RESPONSE BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION ON THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FINANCIAL YEARS 2019/2020 TO 2023/2024

3.00
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker and honourable members – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you. Unfortunately-

THE SPEAKER: How did you jump in?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am raising a procedural issue because I had come to your office on a matter of national importance –(Laughter)– but I did not hear my name mentioned. So, I wanted to find out –

THE SPEAKER: I do not think it was you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Who was it then?

3.01
MR WAMAKUYU MUDIMI (NRM, Elgon County, Bulambuli): Madam Speaker, I am raising a matter of national importance. 

There are many public servants outside there who are suffering on the account of interdictions. Many are interdicted and the Public Service Standing Orders say that once a person is interdicted, he or she must stay on interdiction for not more than six months. However, we have seen many Ugandans who are on interdiction for more than six months. 

I have two examples of such cases. One is Mr Apollo Kazungu, who is the Commissioner for Refugees. He was interdicted in February 2018 but up to now he has not yet been reinstated. There are reports of investigations which cleared him. The Solicitor-General wrote that he should be reinstated but up to now, it has not been done.

Another person is Mr Sasaga Godfrey Wanzira, the Director Citizenship and Immigration Control in the Ministry of Internal Affairs. He was interdicted on 23 February 2018, purportedly on account that this was a directive from the President. Investigations have been going on and I am reliably informed that the Inspector General of Government’s report is out and he has been exonerated. However, before the interdictions can be lifted, we heard media reports that his position was occupied by an army officer.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like the minister to tell this House - Last week, the Deputy Speaker raised the issue of equity in this House –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you and I would like to thank hon. Wamakuyu for raising that matter of national importance. Public Service was formed in 1947. The purpose was for remuneration and making sure that public servants are treated fairly. The appointing authority, under Article 172 of the Constitution, is the President or any service commission or other authority delegated for that function. 

However, it is very interesting because if you hear the names of the people on interdiction for more than one year, they are either from eastern or northern Uganda and partly Buganda. For those in western Uganda, if they are interdicted for one week, by the next week they are back in office. We are talking about Ongaria, Gubi, Nelson Okumu - those are from the other region. Can you name for me westerners who have been interdicted? -(Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Is it in order for the hon. Nandala-Mafabi to tribalise an issue of this nature? Well, if you talk of the north and east, everybody is aware of what you are talking about. We all know that it is not true and we have evidence that even people from other regions are interdicted. In the Ministry of Internal Affairs, for example, Mr Anthony Namara and his boss were both interdicted. Mr Namara is from the west while Sasaga is from the east. Is he in order to tribalise an important issue like this in this important House?

THE SPEAKER: You know you should not make wild allegations. Can you substantiate?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. You have seen the inquiry taking place in the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE). If the Governor Bank of Uganda and Ms Bagyenda were from the east or north, they would have been suspended by now, but because they are from that region, they are still in office.

Madam Speaker, out of the seven people who were suspended, it is only Namara who comes from the west; the other six are from other regions. Hon. Jeje Odongo is a minister from eastern Uganda, yet he has sat on his people because he wants to please one appointing authority; you can imagine! This matter is very serious and the earlier it is settled to give equal opportunities, the better for all us-(Interruption)

GEN. JEJE ODONGO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for raising this matter. However, I would like to inquire whether he is in order to insinuate that I am deliberately sitting on a matter that concerns people from the east when I should have done otherwise because I come from the east?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, substantiate if you have information; if you do not, then withdraw.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am not going to withdraw. The Inspector General of Government (IGG) has handed over a report about this inquiry. Instead of the minister acting, he is sitting on it and he is aware of the date when he got the report. It is very unfortunate that you are sitting on a report when you should be taking action –(Interjections)- If I am lying, don’t you have the report from the IGG? (Laughter)

MR WAMAKUYU: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for the information. My prayers are that the ministers responsible should inform the House why it has taken so long and secondly, those people should be reinstated to their positions.

3.08
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Jeje Odongo): Thank you, honourable colleague, for raising the matter of interdiction of officials in the Ministry of Internal Affairs. 

It is true that two officers - the director of immigration and the commissioner of immigration - were interdicted around April 2018. 

I did take the liberty and responsibility as the minister responsible to request the IGG to carry out investigations to establish whether the circumstances and grounds for interdiction could stand and what course of action should be taken.

In November 2018, it is true I received a report from the IGG responding to my request. Upon receipt of that report, I wrote to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Internal Affairs, directing him to take appropriate action on the report because there were two items that were of interest. One was the clearance and another was pointing out the need for an additional inquiry for one of the officers. 

That is the situation as it is in relation to Mr Geoffrey Sasaga, the Director Immigration and Citizenship and Mr Anthony Namara, the Commissioner for Immigration.

Later on, in November last year, again three officers were interdicted. These were the Acting Director of Immigration and Citizenship, Mrs Ekwang Ali; the Commissioner for Passport Control, Mr Ongodia; and a Principal Immigration Officer, Mr Jabel Male. Their case was in relation to an allegation of inappropriate conduct vis-à-vis the Public Service Standing Orders. Their matter too was presented to the Inspector General of Government for investigation. I have not yet received a report although I have had occasion to go and request that this matter be handled expeditiously.

That is the situation. I am not sitting on any report. I have received the one concerning the two officers, I have processed it and there are appropriate officers to handle it. 

Secondly, regarding the matter of military officers being appointed to replace the officers who have been interdicted –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural issue I would like to raise is that the minister got a report from the IGG who said that there was an issue that needed to be investigated. I thought that you sent a request and you expected a report; can the IGG again say that you need to investigate yet she was the one responsible for investigations? 

Is it procedurally for the minister to come here and say that the IGG has requested him to again investigate the matter, yet the same person had been told to investigate it? Secondly, is it procedurally right for the same minister not to talk about Mr Kazungu because he is now in charge of Mr Kazungu’s investigation, the way I see it?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not know whether you are suggesting that the report you got was interim and the IGG was to continue making the final one.

GEN. JEJE ODONGO: Madam Speaker, the IGG did not give an interim report but in that report, she indicated that this was the outcome of the matter but on one of them, they discovered an issue yet to be concluded. The matter of financial inappropriateness in conduct is the one the IGG said she needed to conclude but she had concluded the report for the others. 

On the matter of military officers being appointed, it is true I am aware that names have been forwarded to the Public Service Commission for interviews. I do not interview these officers, so I am waiting to be informed by the public service that the officers whose names were forwarded to me have been interviewed and they are forwarding them for appointment. As of now, I am not yet in receipt of that information.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that was the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Hon. Mudimi said that in respect to Mr Apollo Kazungu, the Solicitor-General said he should return to his office. He has also spent more than six months on interdiction - it is coming to a year. He was cleared but it seems that the Public Service Standing Orders have been sent to sleep by the Government.

3.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (Mr Moses Kizige): Madam Speaker, it is true that the Office of the Prime Minister has received reports from all the investigating authorities. However, the matter of refugee responses involves so many stakeholders. We are carrying out fervent consultations but within a short time, the matter will be resolved. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, join me in welcoming a delegation from the Parliament of Ghana Table Office: Mr Frank Tse Diaba, Assistant Clerk; Mr Joseph Armo Ndah, Assistant Clerk; Mr Paul Baka, Assistant Clerk also. Maybe Baka has a relative in Uganda because we have that name here. You are welcome. (Applause) 

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Mudimi and hon. Nandala-Mafabi for bringing this issue forward. These are just few indicators, but there are so many interdictions in abeyance beyond the statutory requirements. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right to ask the Minister of Public Service to bring us a comprehensive report on all interdictions that are in abeyance, so that this House gets to know about them precisely?

We have issues of governance, especially with multi-sectoral ministries like the Ministry of Internal Affairs where a department within the same sector is autonomous or semi-autonomous. We have issues of governance in the enterprises. Look at Bank of Uganda where the Governor is also the board chairman and at the same time, he is supposed to report to himself. The Criminal Investigations Department (CID) of the police, which was for Bank of Uganda, has been disbanded. Only a few security bodyguards of the Governor now perform the job of the CID.

The governance issues in this country are therefore by-passing all the laws, even the standing orders. So many people are suffering injustice. Somebody’s son or daughter has studied through hustle, climbed the ladders of employment through promotions and is now being frustrated deliberately because somebody has vested interest in their job. It goes to the core of our conscience.

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the Minister of Public Service to bring to us a comprehensive report on all interdictions so that we know which ones have been overstayed and for what reasons, so that we can address them once and for all. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have the Minister of Public Service and maybe there are few Members who would like to raise issues.

3.20
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I heard the Minister of Internal Affairs saying that there is a communication seconding names of officers to take up the offices of the people who were interdicted. I would like to know what the provisions of the Public Service Standing Orders are in these circumstances. 

Is it that when someone is interdicted, before they are even heard and their matters concluded, you replace them? Does it therefore mean that you have already suspended or sacked them? Before you conclude the matter, how can they be replaced? Do these officers still have a way forward in as far as this department is concerned? I would like to know what the Public Service Standing Orders provide in such a circumstance. Where an officer is interdicted, is the officer replaced or someone can just act in that position? Let me be clarified on that.

3.21
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. To elucidate on the same point, people are interdicted to allow space for investigations to find out whether actually, they are culpable for whatever has been alleged against them or whether they are innocent. For the department to forward names, it means these people have already been adjudged guilty and condemned. Now, we have information that has been given to us that some of these people have been exonerated in these investigation reports. What would be the basis for their positions being forwarded for interviews?

I want to know whether the standing orders are still working, or whether the laws are still working or whether the statement by hon. Nandala-Mafabi that some people are being favoured is true. Otherwise, what would be the basis of taking up positions or people going for interviews for positions of individuals who have been interdicted and a decision has not yet been taken for them to vacate their positions. Thank you.

3.22
MR LAWRENCE MANGUSHO (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue raised by hon. Mudimi is to do with equality before the law. If somebody has been interdicted for more than one year, it shows that the law is not being applied equally to all Ugandans and yet all of us must be equal before the law.

When you find the public concerned, for example in this case, then you know there is something wrong. First, after the investigations, what happened? There is no action and silent recruitment is taking place. 

We are complaining because the Public Service Standing Orders must be applied to these people. If they committed a crime, have they been taken to the courts of law or have they been terminated? What is happening? Interdiction for six months is always the maximum for a public officer; otherwise, the next action must have been disciplinary action or the officer is terminated.

Therefore, it is a concern by the people. We have heard these complaints and when you hear people talking in the streets about an issue of a public officer, then you know there is something wrong. We want all Ugandans to have equality before the law. That is my concern. Thank you.

3.24
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is great that hon. Mudimi and hon. Nandala-Mafabi brought this issue up. 

There is something more than overstaying on interdiction. There is a group of people, either from the office of the Inspector General of Government or somewhere, who after somebody has been interdicted or even terminated, they go and arrest that person –(Interjection)– I do have the evidence, whoever wants evidence. I cannot stand to raise something I do not have evidence about; they go and arrest that person and torture them. 

There are two cases that I know of where they arrested people, tortured them and picked some few things from them saying that they are still investigating this and the other. They are not identified clearly but they were saying they were from the office of the IGG.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, as we say the Minister of Public Service should either give us a list of those that have been interdicted or something, as Parliament we need to interest ourselves in this and do something more so that we can dig deeper –(Member timed out.)

3.25
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NMR, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. From what the minister has just presented, I feel Sasaga was intentionally sacked so that the minister can replace him. He has just put it very clearly; they have not finished investigations, Sasaga is still battling with his issues, yet the minister has gone ahead to replace him.

Secondly, there are a lot of issues surrounding the Ministry of Public Service. Madam Speaker, I would request that an audit be taken in the Ministry of Public Service so that we know exactly who the people occupying these offices are and where they come from because - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there a report by the Equal Opportunities Commission and it makes very interesting reading. I think one of these days we should debate it. 

Hon. Dhamuzungu, I forgot to welcome you back. Honourable members, join me in welcoming our colleague, hon. Dhamuzungu, who has been sick. Welcome back. (Applause)

3.27
Ms ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also wanted to comment on the Public Service Standing Orders and whether the Ministry of Internal Affairs is following them by having somebody replaced before the investigations are over.

The minister contradicts himself; when hon. Nandala-Mafabi asked him whether the report of the IGG was interim or whether it was complete, he said it was complete. Later, he said they investigated and brought a report in which they said there were some issues still pending, but interviews are still going on; surely, is it fair? Is it human for people to be put aside, then the IGG investigates and says it is half done and there are other issues to be investigated but behind the scenes, there are interviews going on? Can the Minister explain; was the report completed? Did it say interviews can take place or is something else going on behind every body’s back?

3.29
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, the office of the Ombudsman was started to help civil servants who were being victimized. In this case, we have Mr Namara, Mr Sasaga and the rest. The IGG carried out an investigation and gave a report and in that report, you raise two issues - clearance and an inquiry - and you directed your permanent secretary to act. Since November, have you asked the permanent secretary to bring a report? 

Secondly, you go ahead and submit names to be verified for recruitment in the ministry; did you advertise these posts in the newspapers or you were just given names to recruit in the service? (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude, you know we have other work

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When there are vacant positions in ministries, the posts are submitted to the Public Service Commission and they are advertised in the papers for those who qualify to apply. However, Mr Minister, you have gone ahead to try to fill these positions before the verdict on the officers is given. One can therefore see that there is something being done unfairly to the civil servants, which is not proper at all. 

Ombudsman, according to the Scandinavian system – Hon. Ruzindana came here to help Ugandans and Lady Justice Mulyagonja is doing a great job. Therefore, please do not victimise the innocent people. If there is a case, then it should have been pointed out, but somebody being on interdiction for more than six months is very unfair, honourable minister –(Member timed out.)

3.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that the public service is governed by the Public Service Standing Orders and we have interdictions. However, by nature of the offences, every case is unique. 

What is provided for in the Public Service Standing Orders is that you are supposed to be interdicted for 60 days. During that time, you are on half pay. It is presumed that within the 60 days, the investigations should be conclusive. However, there are some very complex cases by nature, especially those involving fraud. These necessitate extension of investigations so that you can come up with conclusive evidence, especially when you have the Inspectorate of Government involved. We have had cases taking even two years. 

Madam Speaker, under such circumstances, where you have complex cases, the period of interdiction goes beyond the six months provided. The whole idea is that you should be away until the investigations are done and concluded. This is because if you come back, you may jeopardise the investigations. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I know a little about this young man called Apollo Kazungu. Apart from being told to report to the police every month, nothing else has happened. I think there is even no intention to take a statement from him or to try him. The United Nations did their investigations and exonerated him; the Solicitor-General also said that he should go back to work but there is silence from the Permanent Secretary and the Prime Minister; life goes on. We shall soon hear that the new – 

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Speaker, I think the case of Mr Kazungu is one of those complex ones because there would be no reason as to why an officer would be kept on interdiction. Indeed, when a conclusion is made, officers are taken back. So I think that case must be one of those complex ones. There must still be – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, in that case, come on Tuesday and tell us the complexity of those cases here on the Floor of the House. 

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It has become a syndrome by some players in Government to interdict people continuously, like you have said. My request, in tandem with yours, is that the Minister of Public Service comes up here and presents to us how many persons or public officers are interdicted and the status of their interdictions. 

I ask this is in order for us to come up with a comprehensive discussion focusing on the matters, because they are 20 or 30 in number. Therefore, let him give us a clear number and status so that these people can know that they have also been heard and something is taking place or something serious about their cases is being done. That would be fair.

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Speaker, I am most obliged to your ruling on detailed information. However, I would like to add that every vote has a rewards and sanctions committee. It is not entirely the Minister of Public Service responsible for it because we cannot be everywhere. We have decentralised votes managing their human resource; so every vote has its own rewards and sanctions committee. 

I would also like to clear the perception raised by some Members about the central appointing commissions. I have heard from some colleagues that recruitment is not transparent. What I can say is that these central appointing commissions carry out their recruitment processes in the most transparent way. So we should not really trivialise this issue because the appointing commissions do their work in the most transparent manner. 

THE SPEAKER: Were these jobs advertised? Did those applicants respond to an advert? 

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Speaker, I am requesting for some time to look at these particular jobs so that I can come and give further clarification at a later date.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we expect your answer on Tuesday.

RESPONSE BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION TO THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FINANCIAL YEARS 2019/2020–2023/2024

3.38
THE SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Wilfred Niwagaba): Madam Speaker and honourable members, this is a response from the Opposition in respect of the National Budget Framework Paper of the financial year 2019/2020. It is already uploaded on your iPads and I will just summarise it. 

This particular response is brought under the provisions of rule 52 of our Rules of Procedure, read together with section 6E(2) and (4) of the Administration of Parliament Act. 

We respond to issues of economic growth. We do point out that although the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth is shown to be at 6.2 per cent in the next financial year, this coupled with the rising inflation, soaring poverty levels among our people, the widening income gap, escalating unemployment, depreciation of the Ugandan shilling and the soaring national indebtedness shows that the economic growth being hyped is actually not growth in the people’s pockets. 

We also talk about the issue of the middle income status. We noticed that yes, considerable effort has been undertaken to develop physical and institutional infrastructure. However, there has been little effort geared towards empowering the citizens to economically utilise the infrastructure. This will, in a way, constrain the attainment of the middle income status. 

We are looking at the current poverty rate at 27 per cent as against the middle income target of 14 per cent. In view of the high levels of corruption, ineffective utilisation of borrowed funds, inadequate planning, among others, it will be impossible for this country to attain the middle income status in the projected period of time.

We are looking at misalignment of the development budget and programmes. We have shown in our response how out of the 135 ministries, departments and agencies of Government, only 89 have had their development plans aligned to the National Development Plan. Out of these, 18 had draft plans and 10 had no plans at all. Honourable members, this is an area we need you to interest yourselves in, to see how we misalign our objectives. 

The National Budget Framework Paper indicators have also been considered by the Opposition. We noticed that the National Budget Framework Paper does not comply with section 9(4) of the Public Finance Management Act. It is silent on key areas which should be giving us real information and these areas are: the rate of employment and unemployment, the interest rates, money supply, the petroleum revenue fund, the ceilings of the total budget funding from the petroleum revenue holding account, and the alternate fiscal framework. It is accordingly difficult for this House to track our past recommendations since the Government has never laid before this august House a National Budget Framework Paper duly approved. 

We have also considered the resource envelope and we have noticed that, with an estimated population of 39 million, only Shs 10.9 trillion of the proposed budget will be available for non-wage service delivery. If you allocate this to the population of Uganda, it means each Ugandan expects to receive a sum of only Shs 281,541 for drugs, medical equipment, water, scholastic materials and others. Considering the haemorrhage in Government in terms of loan repayments, interest, arrears, domestic refinancing including the money that is stolen, you will realise that the resource envelope available and the money available for service delivery is almost not there. We have also shown that in the matrix, which you will read on your own.

Misrepresentation of allocations: We noticed that the allocations to various sectors in the sum of Shs 25.5 trillion - translating into 75 per cent of the total proposed national budget of 34.3 trillion - does not reflect the true budget share allocation and gives a wrong reflection, particularly on our debt obligations. We have established in our research that debt obligations, particularly interest payments, external loan repayments, and what is normally termed as domestic refinancing, which will be due in this financial year, will amount to Shs 9.58 trillion. This translates into 27.9 per cent of the proposed national budget.

As you may realise, this particular debt obligation takes a huge chunk of the money that would ordinarily go into service delivery. We have also shown a table on how the allocations are made and the share for each sector vis-à-vis the national budget. 

We have further noticed a decline in concessional financing. Honourable members, especially the Committee on National Economy that ordinarily receives requests for loans, due to the financial and economic crisis that affected most of the developed world in Financial Year 2008/2009 and the budget constraints in donor countries, concessional financing has gradually declined. This is making it harder for countries such as Uganda to finance their infrastructure development projects. 

As such, our Government is increasingly relying on non-concessional loans and budget deficit borrowing through commercial banks - majority being foreign-owned with a high risk of profit repatriation - to realise its ambitious spending plans. The increasing non-concessional nature of new debt increases Uganda’s debt service obligations in the present and the near future. They do not satisfy the Public Debt Management Framework.

We do recommend that non-concessional borrowing needs to be resorted to only in respect of value addition projects with high social or socio-economic impact return such as agro-processing industries and cold-chain facilities as well as development of strategic tourism sites. Efforts should be placed at the maintenance of developed physical infrastructure as more funds are geared towards revamping the primary growth sectors.

Furthermore, a public debt repayment schedule needs to be developed and published to guide the debt management in Uganda. Our response also looks at the resource mobilisation and we noticed that our tax per capita is gradually increasing but at the same time, the poverty levels are escalating and the borrowing rates are high. 

Therefore, with the tax revenue of Shs 14 trillion in the financial year 2017/2018 and an estimated population of 39 million people, our tax per capita is estimated at Shs 361,000. The increasing reliance on external financing to complement domestic revenues worsens the current account deficits, the balance of payment and macroeconomic instability.

It is worrying to note that tax arrears so far exceed the new tax policy measures. For example, the tax policy measures adopted in the last financial year yielded Shs 212.9 billion compared to tax arrears of Shs 2.6 trillion in the same period. 

The tax arrears for Financial Year 2017/2018 are greater than all the proposed sectoral budgets apart from education, interest payments, works and transport. This is a concern and an area that we need to take critical examination on - the issue of the tax arrears. Accordingly, the Opposition proposes that we develop a stringent law not only on campaign financing, so as to abate the leverage and influence of a tax policy by political and economic elites who, through business associations and lobbying groups, obtain preferential tax treatment and obtain political positions or finance political parties. All tax proposals and projected revenue that would accrue from them should be explicitly indicated in the National Budget Framework Paper so as to be approved as tax measures.

We also looked at the gender and equity responsiveness. We do realise that the National Budget Framework Paper was assessed to be compliant by 61 per cent but the certificate indicated does not specify the measures undertaken to equalise opportunities for women, persons with disabilities and other marginalised groups. 

We note that this contravenes Section 9(6)(b) of the Public Finance Management Act. We noted that the failure to articulate improvement measures points to lack of a systematic assessment of gender and equity concern in the country as well as lack of clear reporting benchmarks. These undermine the essence of the Certificate of Gender and Equity Responsiveness.

We do recommend a need to undertake national gender and equity gap mapping to guide budgeting and assessment by the Equal Opportunities Commission so that the sectors are guided in addressing gaps that have been identified and to facilitate better impact assessment. 

Recommendations on the Assessment Report and What Should Be Provided

Constitutional Imperatives: We recommend special expenditures to marginalised groups, the vulnerable, the least developed areas and social protection, especially for the elderly. 

On gender-specific expenditures, we recommend allocations to programmes and projects that are specifically targeted to issues affecting specific groups of women and youth, especially the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme, the Youth Livelihood Programme and Uganda Reproductive, Maternal and Child Health Services, among others.

We also looked at the issue of equal employment opportunity expenditures and recommend programmes and projects that promote equal representation in the management and decision-making across all occupational sectors as well as occupational conditions, including the matter we have just been discussing on Public Service. We also recommend mainstreaming the budget expenditures of Government so that the entire community is served equally.

We have also looked at contradictions in the sector priorities and the key sector we identified is agriculture. We noticed that although there has been a proposal to increase the availability of funds for extension workers – which we commend – this single spine extension system is operating below the optimum capacity because so far only 3,257 (65.1 per cent) extension workers have been recruited against the target of 5,000. 

If we are to maintain this capacity of 3,257 extension workers, it would mean that if the total of Shs 25.5 billion is distributed equally among extension workers, each will be allocated only Shs 7.8 million a year or Shs 653,617 per month. We find that this is inadequate to equip extension workers with means of transport and fuel. As a matter of fact, 88 per cent of the budget is meant for a project on agro-economic impact deepening in the Albertine Basin. Therefore, the largest part of the budget is targeted for the Albertine Basin and not the entire country.

We have also addressed the issue of the Uganda National Oil Company. We noticed that Government indicated that the Uganda National Oil Company will be financed to realise its equity contribution to the development of a refinery, the pipeline and petroleum storage terminal. However, the budget allocations have remained at Shs 15.2 billion as was the case in Financial Year 2018/2019. Going by this fact, it means the undertaking by Government is in vain. 

This is because when you look at financial requirements for the Uganda National Oil Company to engage in these projects, almost over $100 million would be required. This, compared with the Shs 15 billion allocated, is inadequate for it to participate. The impact is that it would mean that the Uganda National Oil Company will not have the resources to participate in these projects and that will leave the project in the hands of the foreign companies, which will have the financial muscle. At the end of the day, the repatriation of the profits will continue.

With respect to the energy sector, we have also looked at artisanal mining. We noticed that there is a huge contribution made by artisanal miners but they also undergo a lot of risks when carrying out their business and trade. However, Government has given inadequate attention to this particular part of the economy. We looked at the budget proposals and found that a sum of Shs 2.5 billion will be allocated for mineral beneficiation centres; Shs 650 million for field vehicles; Shs 174 million for office equipment and Shs 1.4 billion for lab and exploration equipment. 

With these financial requirements, it becomes difficult to know how much of it will be targeting the artisanal miners. We would recommend that Government puts up a mechanism, not only to identify and register them but also help them to form cooperative societies and increase their regulation in order to be catered for in respect of occupational safety, market access and negotiation with companies, among others.

We have also looked at the question of market access for goods manufactured in Uganda. We commend the Government’s effort to support the private sector but we have noted that for many years, Uganda has defaulted in subscribing to the organisations where our goods would have access. From our research, we found that a sum of $2.8 million (Shs 10 billion) has accrued as a contribution to the COMESA Secretariat, the COMESA Court of Justice and the Laser Institute.

Uganda has over the years also defaulted on the subscriptions to other international organisations such as the PTA Bank, the East African Development Bank and the African Development Bank, among others. We are quoting authorities for these findings and observations. We find that these defaults make our access to specific markets inadequate and at times impossible, especially the COMESA. 

We have also looked at the issue of enhanced pay for civil servants. Government indicated in the National Budget Framework Paper that it intends to enhance the pay of public servants so as to improve their morale and subsequently service delivery. However, you will note that there has been no additional allocation in Financial Year 2019/2010, for, the wage bill has been maintained at the same level as in Financial Year 2018/2019 at Shs 4.24 trillion. It is, therefore, not possible for Government to claim that it is going to enhance pay for civil servants when the wage bill remains the same. 

We have looked at critical areas that need alternative priorities. We are recommending reforms in the education system and you will read our proposal on the education system.

We have also looked critically at competition regulation. The indiscriminate competition places Uganda at risk from the rising incidents of unfair trade practices by dominant market players that lead to market distortions, particularly on price fixing and abuse of dominance. This necessitates development of competition laws so as to ensure fair trade and consumer protection in Uganda. You will notice this across sectors – be it the telecommunications sector, the banking industry and almost all those that are controlled by foreign companies where our bargaining power is low. 

Due to monopolistic or oligopolistic tendencies of some of the market players, the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives has on many occasions sought to control the escalating prices of cement and sugar in Uganda. However, there have been operational constraints arising from Government’s lack of a comprehensive law to effectively curtail the unfair trade practices arising from monopolistic tendencies. We recommend that Government comes up with a law to control and contain unfair trade competitions.

We have also looked at the question of unemployment and we do agitate for a comprehensive skills development strategy. You will read this alongside our proposal on reforming the education system because we do believe that skills development is one of the best ways to control and minimise unemployment. 

We have highlighted many issues on agriculture, which I do not intend to go to. You will read it.

Lastly, we have looked at the National Health Scheme. Government has over the years made several commitments to establish the National Health Insurance Scheme, but the commitments do not translate into allocations. We find that although the quality of health services in Uganda is inadequate, the majority of the citizens are constrained in affording them. This hampers attainment of Sustainable Development Goal No.3 that advocates for healthy lives and wellbeing.

Efforts to develop a legal framework for the National Health Insurance Scheme are commendable. However, a national health financing policy should be developed to guide sourcing and allocation of financing or towards the health sector. We find that this has been effective in countries like Nigeria and Rwanda. We believe that this should have been a foundation base for the now running health financing strategy. So, we do advocate for a quicker passing and implementation of the National Health Scheme.

Honourable members, there are many other issues we have identified. 

Madam Speaker, with those observations and key areas, I beg to lay the Opposition Response to the National Budget Framework Paper. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition. The response will be sent to the Committee on Budget, as well as all the sectoral committees because the paper touches on all of them. It can assist you in your interrogation and reporting.

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT OF THE UGANDAN PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO THE 2018 WORLD POLITICAL LEADERS’ SUMMIT, HELD FROM 6 TO 9 JUNE 2018 IN VILNIUS, LITHUANIA

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal, please give the highlights.

4.02
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. If you would allow me, I will summarise the report because it has already been uploaded on our iPads. 

This is a report of the parliamentary delegation which participated in the World Women Parliamentarian Leaders’ Summit 2018 held in Vilnius, Lithuania, between 6 and 9 June 2018. This was a summit of women in top leadership in their respective countries. It was co-hosted by the Seimas, the Parliament of Lithuania, and held under the patronage of the President of the Republic of Lithuania, Her Excellency Dalia Grybauskaite. 

More than 400 women political leaders and other experts and partners from around 80 countries joined to celebrate 100 years since women in Lithuania gained voting rights. The Women Parliamentarians’ Summit, 2018 provided an opportunity for prominent female leaders in the world to participate, engage, learn, network and evaluate progress on the global influence of female decision makers on democracy, good governance, rule of law, service delivery, transparency and accountability.

On the delegation, our delegation should have been led by the Speaker herself but because of her engagement on national issues, she was not able to make it. This was a summit of women who have already reached the top level of political leadership. I was privileged to lead that delegation. You nominated hon. Monicah Amoding, the chairperson of Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA), to be part of that delegation. We also had a member of staff who accompanied us.

In regard to the background to this delegation, Members will recall that the World Parliamentary Leadership Summit is a global gathering of female political leaders. It convenes around 400 participants - women political leaders from around the world - every year. Among the leaders, we also find that people who are already holding positions in Government, like cabinet ministers and some parliamentarians and mayors, are also invited to attend the summit. Quite often, the participants meet in the Parliament of the host country. 

The WPL Summit is always organised as a result of cooperation between WPL and the host country's Government and Parliament and international institutions such as the United Nations, Organisation of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), the World Bank, Council of Women World Leaders (CWWL), the European Union and other partners. The summit event addresses today’s intertwined global challenges and offers the opportunity to exchange best –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, it seems you are actually reading every paragraph.

MRS OGWAL: I wanted to lift out the key issues and then go through to summarise. However, if that is what you want, it is okay, Madam Speaker. Women issues are known. 
Allow me to mention the issues raised by the President of Lithuania in her address. I think that will be relevant for us. That is on page 4, paragraph 3.1. 

The WPL Summit 2018 was addressed by the President of the Republic of Lithuania, Her Excellency Dalia Grybauskaite. She stated that it was highly symbolic that prominent world leaders convened in Lithuania at a time when the Lithuanians were celebrating two important occasions: 

    1. A hundred years of modern Lithuanian statehood; and 
    2. A hundred years since Lithuanian women won their right to vote. 

In her address, which is on page 5, she said that-

    1. Family should be based on equality; 
    2. Same payment should be given for the same work, without any discrimination in gender; 
    3. Women housework and the education of children at home should be considered the same as a man's earnings to support the family outside the family.

That is a key issue which is quite relevant in Uganda. The occasion was also addressed by other prominent leaders like the Speaker of Parliament and also the head of WPL.

The key issues that emerged during the discussions, enumerated on page 7, paragraph 1.4, included:

        a. Embracing technology to create a shared future. Women must take interest in technology; 
        b. Healthy women or the health of women; 
        c. Building coalitions and women caucuses to develop a legislative agenda;
        d. Partners in economic empowerment;
        e. Equal access to maternal healthcare; 
        f. Women as a powerful force in preventing and countering violent extremism;
        g. A woman’s place in politics;
        h. Gender budgeting;
        i. Social media;
        j. The girl-to-leader programme and
        k. Trust and leadership.

The trust and leadership discussion was led by Uganda because globally, Uganda has registered a very good profile in the way Parliament conducts its business. As a result, we were honoured to chair that particular session.

The other issue that could be of interest to us are the lessons we learned during this engagement:

    a. The women all over the world, coming together in summits such as WPL, provides a great opportunity. 
    b. Gender mainstreaming should be embraced internationally as a strategy to realising gender equality through design, preparation and implementation.
    c. Traditional gender roles and stereotypes continue to have a strong influence on division of roles between women and men in homes.
    d. ICT and digital technologies are key drivers in the economic development for both advanced and less developed economies. 
    e. Women must be deliberately taught and encouraged to learn sciences at school in order to take employment in areas currently dominated by men.
    f. All leaders, men and women, must inspire and encourage young women to take up leadership at all levels. 
    g. Parliament must deliberately strengthen women caucuses as a tool to build capacity.
    h. The Girl2Leader programme must be embraced by all countries. 

Madam Speaker, it was recommended that parliaments all over the world must- 

    1. Create and dedicate a department or a unit for gender analysis within the Parliamentary Service to support the work of UWOPA, committees and individuals. This is what we agreed must be done. So, the world Parliament is requesting that we must consciously develop this.

    2. Conduct a comprehensive gender sensitive analysis of the Parliament of Uganda using tools developed and applied in the European context.

    3. Introduce awards and recognise schemes for leaders that have supported the gender discourse in Uganda and the world at large.

    4. Introduce the Girl2Leader programme and campaign to nurture young women leaders.

Madam Speaker, the Parliament of Uganda recently recognised your assumption to leadership at the global level. This is one of the initiatives that we would like to encourage in this Parliament. Where women have made a breakthrough in the world, we must own and celebrate it. This is one way of encouraging our women so that wherever they are, they should know that their roles are being recognised and appreciated.

Madam Speaker, I appreciate you for giving me this opportunity. I would like to share with our Parliament that your leadership has really exposed Uganda at a very high level. People appreciate that the quality of discussions and presentations that Ugandans make at the world level is commendable. We touch on issues that actually make a change globally. That also implies that the presentation I made was appreciated. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Commissioner Cecilia Ogwal for representing us effectively. I direct the Clerk to address the recommendations on page 11 and present a paper to the Parliamentary Commission. I am also instructing that the report be sent to all committees because the deliberations touch on many issues; the committees can pick out what is relevant to them. 

4.15
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you. I am very impressed by the report. The most notable point, which I felt did not come out very clearly in the recommendations, is on technology. This took me quickly to see how our women in the rural areas suffer while cooking using the three-stone cooking stoves. This is an intervention, which Government can manage. In the revolution in Europe and elsewhere - there is what is called, “the microwave revolution” - men were also enticed to love cooking. 

I did an experiment in my constituency by chasing the three-stone cooking stoves. I promoted that new technology, which made me dear to women. In my study, I found that after bringing in the energy saving technology, 30 per cent of the men who could not cook started cooking. Therefore, I just wanted to passionately add this point so that we can stop our women from suffering with the three-stone cooking stoves. 

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, I could just remind the Members that when we had the science and technology exhibition here, a number of stoves were brought which could really help our women to get out of the smoke. They were not very expensive because they were a one off - you pay once and you cook with it forever. I hope Members can follow up on those issues so that our people can breathe better. You know when the women are in the smoky kitchen, the children are usually there with them. So, both the mother and the children take in the smoke, hence causing diseases. 

MS AMEEDE: Madam Speaker, this report touches on women issues and one of its major goals is to encourage women participation in public offices, especially in leadership at all fora. I wonder why it has not attracted debate for us to articulate issues facing women leadership in this country.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when the presentation is done and now that you have shown interest, you can appoint a date for debate. All that was required of hon. Cecilia Ogwal was to lay the report on the Table and give highlights. However, we shall arrange a date to debate the report - maybe next week before we get busy with the budget. 

MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI: Madam Speaker, whereas hon. Cecilia Ogwal has presented the report, there is one mishap; she has not laid it on the Table. I do not know whether in the future, we can have a reference on the matter. 

MS OGWAL: As a Commissioner, I know the procedure. The Clerk to Parliament ought to have brought a copy to be laid on the Table. Since, by oversight, it has not been done, I beg to lay on the Table my personal copy of the report. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. EDWARD OTTO ON THE SECURITY OF AGAGO DISTRICT OCCASIONED BY INCURSIONS OF KARIMOJONG HERDSMEN

4.19
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Jeje Odongo): Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to beg for your indulgence because what I have is only preliminary information in relation to both Agago and Ngora.

In Agago, for example, I know of a young man known as Santo Okot who was killed. His body was later found mutilated. Meetings have been held and continue to be held, and local security officials are involved. I wanted those processes to be completed before I can give a complete report.

This is equally the matter with Ngora versus Pallisa around Lake Nyaguo that separates them. I request that you permit me to give a full report on these two matters on Tuesday afternoon.

4.21
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the minister for attending today and updating us on what has been going on. 

This is an ongoing matter and it is a matter that I raised last year. However, equally, on 20 December 2018 when the minister presented the report here on the Floor of Parliament, when we discussed hon. Kyagulanyi being stopped from performing, I raised this issue and made prayers thereto and I warned about the developing security situation.

For the benefit of the minister who was not in the House at the time when I raised this matter of national importance on 5 January 2019 - he has tried to describe the situation - it was a gruesome murder. This young man, Okot Santo’s, neck was cut; they speared him four times and there are very disturbing images I have tried to share.

I know this has happened and I understand for a lasting solution, it will definitely require time. However, the situation we had at the time - Madam Speaker, I know you were not the presiding officer at the time for the second matter that I raised on the Floor, but if I may highlight; this issue has caused ethnic tension to the extent that I fear that innocent Acholi or Karimojong who may not be involved in this criminality are at the risk of being victimised. 

We had a situation where people were no longer sleeping in their houses. They were internally displaced in a number of villages in Adilang Subcounty as a result of this matter. They were afraid of coming back to sleep at home. They would sleep in the centre and go back in the morning to their places. 

I had the benefit of going for a meeting last weekend on Saturday and I adjudicated that the district officials had been overwhelmed by this situation, following animals to Kotido, given the cost of going with motorbikes and the fees they have to pay among other things.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, what do you want us to do?

MR EDWARD OTTO: Madam Speaker, I was trying to give the background. However, our prayers were that the numbers of the officers of the Anti-Stock Theft Unit were only five to three -

THE SPEAKER: Wouldn’t that depend on the - because you are now moving ahead of the minister.

MR EDWARD OTTO: Madam Speaker, if I could finish –

THE SPEAKER: You are now giving an evaluation of what was done. We don’t know what he was doing. You are talking about the numbers which should have been many -

MR EDWARD OTTO: But the gap there right now is part of why we have this alarming situation and – (Interruption)

GEN. ODONGO: Madam Speaker, for the information of my colleague, I have indicated that there are activities taking place and investigations are taking place. 

On 9 January 2019, for example, we had a meeting with the local people and the local leaders. On 12 January 2019, we again had a meeting. On 22 January 2019, we have planned a meeting which will include Members of Parliament, the UPDF, the police as well as the local leaders. I would like this process to be done so that when I report, I can also say this is what happened, this is what is happening and this is what we have put in place to stop this problem.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, report on Tuesday. We shall speak on this issue on Tuesday. You will add after he has brought a statement. Now everybody is going to raise an issue.

RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. SARAH NAJJUMA ON THE OUTBREAK OF AN UNKNOWN DISEASE IN NAKASEKE DISTRICT, WHERE INFECTED PERSONS SUFFERED BLOOD LOSS THROUGH THE EARS AND NOSE

4.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, hon. Sarah Najjuma the Woman Representative, Nakaseke District, raised an issue regarding an outbreak of an unknown disease in Nakaseke District.

A suspected viral haemorrhagic fever female patient was admitted to Kiwoko Hospital on 11 January 2019. Samples from the patient were taken off and taken to the Uganda Virus Research Institute (UVRI) for testing. The patient was isolated as results were being awaited. The results from the Uganda Virus Research Institute tested negative for the viral haemorrhagic fever. She was however given supportive treatment for symptoms and she improved and was discharged. I would like to indicate that she was also tested for malaria and of course other diseases and they were all negative. However, the full blood count was done and it was established that she had a low white blood cell count.

We had another suspected case yesterday, 16 January 2019. A 31-year-old farmer from Mijumwa village, Wakyato Subcounty, developed similar symptoms of bleeding in the gums and the nose. He was picked after hon. Najjuma informed me and I informed the technical team. The District Health Officer was contacted and they traced the person at his home. He was picked after these alerts and brought to Kiwoko Hospital in Nakaseke District where he was admitted yesterday. He is currently in isolation and as usual, the practice is that these are just suspects. Therefore, the samples have been picked from him and sent to the Uganda Virus Research Institute.

We are waiting for results from UVRI but the patient is undergoing general supportive treatment for fever, diarrhoea, nausea and appetite loss. If the results are positive for any viral haemorrhagic fevers, the country will be informed accordingly.

I, therefore, would like to assure hon. Najjuma, the communities in Nakaseke and the country that there is no cause for panic.  Our teams from the Ministry of Health are working with the district leadership and they are on the ground in Nakaseke continuing with the surveillance.

In assurance, the Ministry of Health with support from the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) Atlanta has over the years developed strong mechanisms and systems to detect, prevent and respond to disease outbreaks. Therefore, as I indicated yesterday, Nakaseke District lies in the cattle corridor and this region has been prone or is at risk of the Crimean Congo Haemorrhagic Fever.

Under the One Health Approach, we are working with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to deal with the resistant ticks and tick diseases not only in Nakaseke but in the entire cattle corridor because this is where this challenge comes from. We shall inform the country once the results are positive. However, if they are negative then there is no need; the patient will be managed and discharged accordingly. Thank you.

4.30
MS SARAH NAJJUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for her report. It is true she has done some work and the ministry has intervened in the situation. That is why I am seated here, I wanted to know if they went on the ground but her report is – (Interjections) – I am not afraid.  

By the way, I give credit to hon. Opendi because yesterday when I contacted her she contacted someone. I am here to appreciate her because when I raised the issue yesterday, she took a step to see to it that we are rescued. Thank you, honourable minister.

THE SPEAKER: On behalf of the House, let me thank the Minister of Health for the very effective response to this issue. (Applause) 
This was not a general statement but a question from hon. Najjuma.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I wish there was a training school where the Minister for Health, hon. Opendi could take people like Gen. Jeje Odongo to learn and come and fight cattle rustling – (Laughter) – because she is very effective. They should copy her. 

I would also like appreciate her; she is better than a whole Gen. Jeje Odongo who has –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, please – (Laughter)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (LOCAL GOVERNMENTS) ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017 ON 115 DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, 41 MUNICIPAL COUNCILS AND 63 TOWN COUNCILS

4.33
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (LOCAL GOVERNMENTS) (Mr Okin Ojara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You will recall that this report was already laid in this House before; about two weeks ago. The primary purpose for this motion is to allow the House to adopt the report. 

You will also permit me to make a summary because I think it is already uploaded on our iPads. However, we did not have the opportunity to go through the recommendations and some of the observations. Could you permit me go through it in about 10 to 15 minutes and we also expect Members to be able to respond.

THE SPEAKER: Do you have an executive summary?

MR OJARA: Yes. As I go through the executive summary, let me thank the out-going members of the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Governments) for the good work done. I can see a few Members here; I do not know whether they will be designated to go back. 

Rule 179 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament mandates the Public Accounts Committee (Local Governments) to examine the audited accounts in relation to the report laid before Parliament by the Minister of Local Government under Section 88(8) of the Local Government Act Cap. 243.

The committee considered the detailed audit reports of 115 district local governments, 4l municipal councils and 63 town councils giving a total of 213 entities. The committee interacted with the audit entities in the audit regions of Arua, Gulu, Fort Portal, Kampala and Masaka; while the audit regions of Mbarara, Mbale, Soroti and Jinja were considered from within the precincts of Parliament. The committee also conducted visits to some of the selected infrastructure projects, mainly in the municipalities, and it now presents its findings in a summarised way.

The overall approved national budget for the Financial Year 2016/2017 was Shs 26,360,000,000,000. For the local governments, it was Shs 2,596,000,000,000 for the Financial Year 2016/2017. Out of the approved budget, Shs 2,537,000,000,000 was released representing a performance of 98 per cent of the total approved budget. 

This budget allocation showed an increment of Shs 235,000,000,000, which is 10 per cent in comparison to the Financial Year 20I5/2016. This is in nominal terms. However in terms of percentage share of local government grants to national budget, it was the same for both financial years at 9.85 per cent.

Conditionality of Local Government transfers
The committee observed that out of the funds released in Financial Year 2016/2017, 65.890 per cent was towards wages; 22.60 per cent towards non-wage and only 11.51 per cent towards development. Therefore, 88.5 per cent of the local government transfers are towards recurrent expenditure, leaving very meagre resources for development.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should adjust the budget ceiling for local governments to allow for more funds to be allocated to the development component of the budget with a view to improving the level of service delivery.

Budget Overview

The Committee observed that:

i)  	Out of the 213 entities, the Auditor-General isolated 67 local government entities and established that although Parliament approved funding totalling to a trillion, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development released only Shs 862.52 billion leading to a shortfall of Shs 147.82 billion.

ii) 	Failure to implement budgets as approved by Parliament hampers service delivery and subsequently hinders the attainment of virtually all sustainable development goals. Furthermore, it is difficult to attain international targets, that is, the Sustainable Development Goals if local and national targets are not met.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure that all funds appropriated to the local governments are released in a timely manner to ensure effective service delivery.

Overall Revenue Performance

Observations

The committee notes that:

i) 	Low domestic revenue collection could hinder the achievement of Sustainable Development Goal II, which is about "zero hunger". A strategic review by the Economic Policy Research Centre in 2017 indicated that four out of 10 Ugandans are unable to meet the required daily dietary intake. Uganda's inability to meet the targets set out in Sustainable Development Goal II shows that suitable financing for implementation is still lacking.

ii) 	The Central Government has continued to interfere in matters of local revenue management. This is especially in the transport industry and in markets where it has prescribed the levy to be charged as park fees and directly influenced allocation of market stalls in selected municipal councils, thus directly affecting the amount of local revenue collected. 

iii) 	Just like in the previous report, the committee found a number of districts exuded laxity in the collection of debts contrary to section 2.3.2.3 of Local Governments Financial and Accounting Manual 2007, leading to accumulation of receivables.

iv) 	Many local governments have entrusted the task of compelling individuals to meet their financial obligations to Council to Law enforcement officers who have on many occasions exuded errant behaviours including protecting defaulters at a fee.

v) 	Revenue assessment should be done annually but many local governments are using results of outdated revenue assessment exercises and others do not even have revenue registers or updated property valuation lists.

Districts like Moroto, Namayingo, Kabale, Isingiro and Buhweju that would otherwise benefit from loyalties from minerals are not certain of how much money in royalties is due to them. This arises from the incapacity of the line Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to know the types and quantity of minerals being mined either out of deliberate negligence or outright corruption.

The committee noted that whereas the divisions are administratively equated to sub-counties, divisions do not contribute revenue to the district local governments yet sub-counties do.

The committee recommends that the Central Government should desist from interfering in areas of local revenue collection in the local governments that are otherwise decentralised.

The Ministry of Local Government should procure an independent company to conduct local revenue assessment in the Local Governments. This, however, calls for a review of the Local Government Act.

The Ministry of Public Service should, in the restructuring exercise, provide for enforcement officers in the district establishment.

Accounting officers together with finance officers should ensure that all debts are collected in a timely manner and that where debtors fail to pay, court redress is sought.

There is need to revisit the tax tendering system and adopt the
centralised receipt system as has been adopted in neighbouring countries like Rwanda and Tanzania.

The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development should share information on all licensed mines and make sure they share royalties as per the law and within predictable timelines.

The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development should install weighbridges on roads exiting the mines so that the quantities of minerals can be established.

Districts and municipal authorities should, in collaboration with the Uganda Revenue Authority, conduct tax sensitisation workshops/seminars among local communities with the view to enhancing revenue collection.

Government should streamline the financial relationship between the district local governments and municipal councils, as well as between municipal councils and division councils by amending the existing law regulating the sharing on revenues, in the alternative. 

Government should consider granting municipal councils total autonomy to enable them cater for their own councillors and the members of the statutory bodies such as the Land Board, Procurement Unit and the Service Commission.

Financial payment systems used by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
The committee observed that the system has gaps that cause delays.

In the local governments, a number of staff are not conversant with the Integrated Financial Management Information Systems (IFMIS). Some entities are not properly equipped with the requisite necessities like the internet and reliable electricity the IFMS.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should carry out capacity building of the system end-users and effectively communicate on the upgrades to the system.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, in collaboration with the Ministry of Public Service, should expedite the rollout of the both the IFMS and the Integrated Payroll System in the local governments.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should expedite the process of equipping the local governments with the necessary accessories to run the system.

Health Sector

Health Service Delivery Minimum Standards

The committee observed that most health units in local governments are insufficiently equipped in terms of the requisite machinery needed to provide the services expected of them.

Some of the poor infrastructure in the health sector arose from the recentralisation of the Primary Health Care Development grant which further limited the capacity of the districts to do even minor repairs in the health facilities as the funds are now hardly felt in the local governments.

More than two thirds of districts in Uganda do not have district hospitals. 

The committee was further concerned that a number of Health Centre IVs functioned like Highway Hospitals yet they still get supplies meant for Health Centre IVs.

Some districts on the borders of Uganda with South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of Congo are hosting a high number of refugees from the said countries, an aspect that has caused a strain in the health care services. The health centres near these camps have experienced a huge influx in the number of patients without a corresponding increment in medical of supplies.

Many local governments do not have ambulances to transport patients to and between health units.

All the above conditions compromise Uganda's ability to achieve Sustainable Development Goal III which urges States to ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should provide sufficient funds to the district local governments and municipal councils with a view to improving infrastructure, staffing and equipment in all health centres to meet the set standards. Special attention should be given to unique situations like high way hospitals, health centres serving as District Hospitals and health centres in refugee-hosting districts.

Additional resources should be allocated to cater for emergencies in Highway health facilities.

Utilisation of Medicines and Health Supplies

Lack of Accountability of Medicines

The committee observes that there have been numerous reports of embossed medicines from Uganda being found in drug shops in some of our neighbouring countries. 

The committee notes that poor record keeping could be the deliberate loophole that is being used by individuals in the health facilities to channel medicines away from the intended beneficiaries.

Lack of medicines and medical supplies accountability may lead to stock outs which in turn deny the population service delivery.

Lack of medicines and medical supplies accountability may also lead to the build-up of expired drugs in health facilities.

The committee recommends that accounting officers should ensure that all necessary records for items are properly maintained, monitored and any variances investigated and where deliberate mismanagement is confirmed, the culprits are prosecuted.

The Ministry of Health should put in place a clear mechanism of tracking medicines from the National Medical Stores to the health facilities and finally to the consumer. This will help in tracing fictitious consumption of the medicines and medical supplies.

Stock Out of Medicines

The committee observed that there were discrepancies and delays in drug supplies by the National Medical Stores against the entities requisitions.

Sometimes the requisitions from the health facilities were not properly done. There are instances where the drug stock outs arose from the fact that some health units had insufficient funds at the National Medical Stores.

Some drugs at the National Medical Stores are overpriced in comparison to the market price of the same drugs from the same manufacturers. For example, Paracetamol costs about Shs 3,000 to Shs 6,000 depending on the brand, but National Medical Stores (NMS) put it at Shs 8000; a tin of 1000 capsules of amoxicillin costs Shs 20,000 on the market while NMS put it at Shs 25,000 and Ciprofloxacin costs Shs 4000 in the open market but the NMS charges about Shs 6000 for the same quantity.

Recommendations

    i) There should be a review of the memorandum of understanding between Government of Uganda and the NMS, with a view to reversing the monopoly of the NMS.

    ii) National Medical Stores should ensure that health units are supplied with the exact drugs they requisition for and at the right time in line with the last mile delivery requirement.


    iii) The cost of drugs at NMS should at no time be more than the market price of the same drug from the same manufacturer.

    iv) The accounting officer should ensure reconciliation of drug orders and drug deliveries at the time of drug deliveries to the health units.

    v) The accounting officer should ensure that the requisitions for drugs are properly done.

    vi) The accounting officer should ensure that drug stock cards are properly kept.

Non-Disposal of Expired Medicines

I am about to finalise. I just want to make sure that I make a summary of this because this is very important. I will skip others. Let me finalise with this issue of medicine. 

The committee observed that:

    i) National Medical Stores uses the push system for supply of medicines to Health Centre IIIs and IIs, which results into supply of unwanted drugs, hence expiry of medicines with shorter shelf life.

    ii) Some of the expired medicines were donations to the health units outside their requisition and some in-charges requisition for wrong medicines.

    iii) The mandate of NMS should be amended to include the disposal of expired drugs since the entity already has the infrastructure to carry out this activity. Currently, the trucks that deliver medicines return to NMS empty.

    iv) M/s Green Label that was contracted by the Ministry of Health to collect and dispose of all expired medicines from the health units does not have the capacity to efficiently collect expired medicines.

Recommendations

    i) National Medical Stores should stop using the push system but rather supply according to the established requirements of the different health units.

    ii) Health units should not accept donations of medicines that they do not need.

    iii) The mandate of the NMS should be amended to include disposal of expired medicines, since the entity already has the infrastructure to carry out this activity.

Madam Speaker, I would like to skip the issue of Sustainable Development Goal No. 3, which was mentioned at some point in our report. 

Understaffing at the District Local Government 

Observations

Understaffing in local governments constrains service delivery. The Ministry of Public Service, in a restructuring exercise, came up with new staffing structures for local governments to address the problem of understaffing. However, the problem still persists.

Districts have failed to attract some cadres due to low remunerations and yet, high qualifications were required, especially for the posts of district engineers, district health officers and chief finance officers.

The committee noted that there is a practice of ring-fencing some jobs for the individuals born in a respective district. 

Recommendations

    i) The Ministry of Public Service, Ministry of Local Government and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should set up clear staffing standards and finance them appropriately.

    ii) The Ministry of Public Service should come up with guidelines aimed at equalising the staffing levels among local governments by halting recruitments of non-vital staff in entities that are above average and using the resources to bring the local governments that are below average to the average level. This should be done progressively from year to year and when all entities are at averagely the same level, the ministry should work towards ensuring that staffing levels in all local governments reach 100 per cent.

    iii) The Ministry of Public Service and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should make known to Office of the Auditor-General the expected levels of recruitment in a financial year, with a view to having queries raised on only entities that failed to recruit for the available vacancies against the wage bill for that financial year.

    iv) The Ministry of Local Government should work with the Ministry of Public Service to waive some non-critical requirements for positions like district engineer, which has continuously failed to attract candidates and also increase the remuneration of district engineers so as to synchronise the pay with that offered by other competitive Government bodies.

    v) The Ministry of Local Government, in collaboration with the Ministry of Public Service should intensify its supervision of local governments in regard to staffing.

Low Recovery and mismanagement of Youth Livelihood Project (YLP) Funds

The committee observes that:

    i) The programme was highly politicised, especially with it being introduced during an electioneering period. The politicians influenced the choice of youth interest groups in many districts and in some instances even gave a false impression to the beneficiaries that the funds were not recoverable.

    ii) Ghost groups have been formed by some Community Development Officers (CDOs), with the intention of defrauding the Fund.

    iii) The programme document is good but with politicians involved in the implementation, it is bound to fail. That is a subject for debate. Technocrats need to be given a free hand in choosing the beneficiaries.

    iv) Non-compliant beneficiaries of the Fund should be arrested to ensure that the groups make all efforts to recover the funds.

Recommendations

    i) Government should sanction recovery of funds from persons implicated in mismanaging the Fund.

    ii) Government should review the structural objectives and guidelines of the YLP with the view of realising value for money and creating decent employment for the unemployed youth pursuant to Sustainable Development Goal 8, which advocates for promotion of sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all.

Madam Speaker, if you could allow, I would like to comment on this. Normally, the statistics, in terms of recovery, vary between the districts and the ministry. If you go to the district, you will find that the recovery rate will be at 40 per cent but the ministry will present a different figure of 80 per cent to allow them disburse that money and this keeps on compiling. Therefore, you will find that the district recovery rate is very low compared to what the ministry presents. We do not know where that kind of mismatch is coming from and its intention.  

Lack of Land Titles

The committee observed that:

    i) Local governments do not have the financial capacity to have all their land titled.

    ii) The committee noted that Government institutions in some of the districts and municipalities in Buganda and Bunyoro regions are sitting on cultural land.

    iii) Most cultural institutions are unwilling to allow local governments process freehold land titles for the land they are sitting on. This has made it difficult for the Local Governments to process land titles for their facilities.

    iv) There is an urgent need for the central Government to facilitate local governments countrywide to secure land over which they can operate.

    v) A number of districts have not demarcated the boundaries of their land.

Recommendations

    i) Government takes up the responsibility of securing land titles for its land country wide.

    ii) Government should provide land for service delivery in its entities that are located on cultural lands. 

    iii) Districts and municipal council authorities should, in the meantime, institute measures of demarcating Government land within their jurisdiction.

I now go to education - the other ones you can read because the report is uploaded. I am just trying to select the most appropriate and important one that appeals to all of us.

Education
 
The committee observed that: 

i. The Ministry of Education and Sports has failed to facilitate the attainment of the above standards. 
ii. The budgeted capitation grant Shs 7,100 per child per year that is provided for UPE aided schools is inadequate and it is often not fully released. 

iii. Some classes were housed in overcrowded and condemned structures, learners use filled up pit-latrines, which are a high risk to both the learners and the teachers.

iv. 	The above scenarios are compounded by lack of a functional school inspection system, which does not provide feedback to policy makers.

v. 	Cases of lack of pupils and teachers’ attendance registers were rampant. 

vi. 	The transition rates for pupils were only 10 per cent for all the children who enrolled in Primary One. Ninety per cent of the learners dropped out before completing primary.

vii. Schools in refugee hosting districts were heavily congested. The affected districts include Kiryandongo, Adjumani and Koboko among others. 

viii. 	From the committee's interaction with the districts, it established that a number of Government-aided secondary schools and tertiary institutions receive a lot of public funding, including donor funds, yet, they have not been audited over time. 

ix. The current situation of the education sector in Uganda hinders the attainment of Sustainable Development Goal no. 4 that requires countries to ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that: 

    i. The Education (Pre-primary, Primary and Post Primary) Act 2008, should be implemented in its totality with all the stakeholders meeting their stipulated obligations. This will lead Uganda towards the attainment of Sustainable Development Goal no.4. 

ii. 	The budgeted capitation grant Shs 7,100 per child per year should be increased and released in a timely manner. 

iii. 	The Office of the Auditor-General should carry out a special audit on all the Government-aided secondary schools and tertiary institutions, that received donor funding 

iv. 	The Auditor-General should audit Government-aided secondary schools as required by law. 

Madam Speaker, we have found a very big loophole in terms of auditing the tertiary institutions as well as secondary schools, yet, normally funds are released to these entities. 

Non-Compliance with the Procurement Laws

The committee observed that: 

    i. A number of local governments breached the procurement laws with impunity, which curtails achievement of value for money and affects service delivery to the public. 

    ii. Grounded vehicles in local governments belong to Government bodies at the Centre notably, Ministry of Health and Ministry of Works and Transport. The centre gives local governments vehicles but they retain the log books and the necessary documentation.

	The above practice denies the local governments the authority to dispose of vehicles whose documentation is with the Central Government.

iii. 	The local governments foot the bills of the Chief Government Valuer and the chief mechanical engineer in instances where valuation of assets in the local governments is required. The committee noted that the practice is very improper.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that: 

    i. Accounting officers together with procurement officers should be held responsible for non-compliance with procurement regulations. 

    ii. Local governments should be allowed to dispose of grounded vehicles and other assets without recourse to the log books. I do not know how possible this is.

    iii. The central government should own up the responsibility of valuing all Government assets, be it used by the Central Government or local government.

Non-compliance with statutory obligations

Non-Deduction and Remittance of Pay As You Earn (PAYE), Local Service Tax and Withholding Tax

The committee observed that: 

    i. Non-compliance with the tax law attracts fines and penalties.

    ii. It is negligent of accounting officers not to remit tax after the deduction.

    iii. The practice is a result of weakness in internal audit units in the districts which would have otherwise detected flaws in the systems.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that: 

i. 	Accounting officers should remit the tax deductions promptly on a monthly basis. 

ii. 	The accounting officers should be held liable for non-deduction and remittance of taxes. 

iii. 	Uganda Revenue Authority should routinely interact with the tax entities for regular updates on their obligations.

Road Fund

Observations

The committee observed that:

    i. Some districts, like Kole, did not have functional district roads committees, which are responsible for the planning and allocation of road funds. 

    ii. The allocation of road funds to the local governments is said to be premised on the length of road network. However, this criterion is disregarded as evidenced in the table above that shows a comparison of district local governments allocations. It is clearly seen that there is unfair disparity in road fund allocations to districts with similar conditions.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that: 

    i. Any district found not to have a functional district road committee should not access the road fund. 

    ii. The road fund should be distributed equitably.

Theft through electronic money transfers from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to some local governments.

Observation 

The committee observed that the issue of unauthorised transfers of public funds from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to officials for example, in Apac District and to Duhaga Secondary School bypassing approved channels points to fraud.

Recommendation 

The committee recommends that the matter be referred to the criminal investigations department for further investigations with a view to prosecution.

Pension Management

The committee observes that delayed payment of pensions contravenes Article 254 of the Constitution.

Recommendation 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Public Service should effect automatic transmission of results from the active payroll to the pension payroll and immediate payment of gratuity upon retirement. Madam Speaker, I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) for this comprehensive report. Honourable members, there are two areas for which I would like to get clarification.

First, in this report, it is said that we have not had money to survey the mineral areas. However, I know that last year, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development undertook to provide money. I hope the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development will confirm whether that money is going to be provided to do the surveys.

The second one is to do with a recommendation by the committee that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development constructs weighbridges on the roads leading to the mines. I am not sure if it is their work or it is for the Ministry of Works and Transport. We would like to get clarification whether the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development can establish weighbridges on some roads.

Those are the areas I quoted which I thought the minister could help us with before we start the debate.

5.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank my colleague for a very comprehensive report. 

There are those three areas and the first one is actually to do with the level of royalties accruing to the local governments. It has been reported that we are not capable of knowing how much but as much as possible, we monitor the royalties. First of all, we monitor the extraction of the minerals and the royalties in accordance with the law. For this particular case, we will study and see why this time, it was not possible for us to know what was accruing to the local government.

Madam Speaker, you have already observed that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development has no capacity to handle roads and this is the matter for the Minister of Works and Transport. 

The third issue was to do with the geological surveys. In the past, we did 80 per cent of the country but for this region in question, it was not possible because of the security problems that time. However, Parliament has approved money but by the time this report was being made, I think they did not pick this. We now have money approved and we will now proceed to do the remaining part of the country. Thank you.

5.11
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the committee chairperson for a very good report because it has actually brought out what is happening in our local governments. 

My biggest concern is about the health conditions in our districts. The medical centres have a very big problem and when it comes to the distribution of drugs, NMS decided to use a system where they informed leaders when drugs were being delivered because they knew that people on the ground cannot even read delivery notes. When they started doing that, you would realise that I, who comes from Kajara, would get information for Ruhama and the ones for Ruhama would get information for Kajara. Therefore, I get to know when drugs are being delivered in Ruhama but when drugs are being delivered in my constituency, it is the Ruhama MP who gets to know. Maybe, it was done intentionally. There is very big confusion there.

Another problem is that you remember we had this constituency health committee fund where we would get a chance to interact with our people and make sure we have meetings and talk about such problems. That fund was scrapped off and when I asked the Minister of Health, she told me the fund was mismanaged and the District Health Officers could not give reports about that fund and, therefore, it was scrapped off and they are using that money for other services. You will realise that our people can no longer talk to their leaders or bring out whatever is really not going well in those health centres. Our people are suffering. This report is really timely.

When we go to the district payment system, it is actually bringing a lot of problems because the CAO of Ntungamo is not in office because of that problem. People could not be paid in time and the council was not happy with that and they made a resolution that the CAO should step down. The problem was not actually the CAO but the system. The people in local governments do not know how to use those systems. The people at the Central Government are also taking that chance to manipulate the system and sometimes, they defraud those people in local governments by using the system, which the people there have not understood. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, the problem down there is still very big and the Ministry of Local Government has got to fight for the local government officials and people down there.

5.15
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Unfortunately, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not here.

This is one of the best reports that has been presented to Parliament. It is very accurate. (Applause) We have been generating very good reports as Parliament but there is a fundamental problem. When this country adopted the decentralisation system, it became one of the best models on the continent. However, over the years, the whole decentralisation system has been totally undermined. (Applause) These are the glaring results that are on the ground. The fact that the ministries have set systems that have recentralised the powers, they have rendered these local government entities impotent.

Therefore, I urge that this report – actually, I do not know why people in the Opposition cannot use such a report to convince Ugandans. (Laughter) If you really meaningfully engage, there is enough menu to show alternatives and make Government perform effectively.

Madam Speaker, I would like to make it clear that these local governments are not performing and if you engage locally, the burdens that are as a result of the failure of local governments are coming back to us as Members of Parliament. We are shouldering the burdens unnecessarily. Therefore, I would propose that we make a very strong resolution to see how we can force Government to go back and support the decentralisation system. Without that, we shall continue looking at symptoms.

5.18
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to appreciate the committee for the report that is very rich with information. I will comment on two things and the first one is about health service delivery minimum standards. At the moment, most of our local governments still have an issue with health centre II’s where up to now, these have not been elevated to health centre III’s. This means that we continue to get drugs for health centre IIs instead of health centre IIIs.

Some districts have taken the initiative to put up some health facilities but we have a challenge that up to now, we have failed to get these health centres registered by the ministry. This disallows us from accessing drugs from NMS. We continue to depend on other health facilities to get drugs to be able to run health facilities.

On the health centres that border districts, you find that a health centre III located at the border with another district gets an influx of patients from the other district yet, when we are requisitioning for drugs, the population that is being targeted is only that population within the vicinity of that health centre. This is something that needs to be addressed by the Ministry of Health. Drugs and other facilities need to be increased for border health facilities.

I have a challenge regarding the issue of local governments’ dependence on central Government. As a committee, did you find out the level of local revenue collection in these local governments? It seems local governments have given up on the issue of revenue collection. They do not care to increase the revenue base. All they look at is what is coming from Central Government. My colleague indicated that it is as if they are now redundant. Whether money comes or not, they do not care. We need to style up. 

Local governments must be told to increase their revenue base or else, more effort is needed to make sure that the local governments actually try to look for other avenues to see how some of these health or education services are going to be implemented in some of our health facilities and institutions.

Otherwise, if we do not do that, we are going to have a very big problem. If Government fails to release money in time, that means that a local government will not be able to operate. As Government, the committee and Parliament, we need to make sure that issues of local government are revised to ensure that revenue collection is addressed in a more holistic way. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Before I invite hon. Achia, honourable members, one day, I was meeting the local governments during one of our outreach programmes. They told us that the central Government went to the districts and took over all the lucrative sources of revenue. The districts are left with scrap. That is what they told me. They said they have scrap. Government comes and takes the markets, the hotels; everything goes to the central Government.

5.22
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the committee and chairperson for a very detailed report. I will start with the issue of weighbridges. We have had about 20 meetings. The day before yesterday, we were at the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development meeting the State Minister of Mineral Development, Mr Peter Lokeris, on the issue of weighbridges.

Every day, about 40 to 60 heavy trucks, which people call magulu kumi, pass through my constituency carrying marble from Kosiroi and Moroto. We have struggled to ask the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to help us, first of all, to know our royalties as they put these weighbridges. They told us that is not their work and that we should speak to the Ministry of Works and Transport.

When we met the Minister of Works and Transport, we were told that they do not have a budget to put weighbridges. We are at a loss. They send some money as part of our royalty but I am wondering, how do they know how much has been extracted? We have deep excavations there, almost the size of this House of Parliament. Cows have fallen in some of these pits. At the same time, when you go to the compound in Tororo where this stone is offloaded, a whole mountain has been created. I do not know whether we should give it the same name as where it has come from because there is a hole there and a mountain in Tororo. This is the reality.

I do not know why the Ministry of Works and Transport does not care about their roads. The newly tarmacked Moroto-Nakapiripirit Road has now developed cracks because the Ministry of Works and Transport does not care about the axle load and the business people who have been hired to transport these materials carry any amount on the lorries. This is a brand new road. We now have a motion to approve more money for Muyembe-Nakapiripirit road to connect it.

These roads may not survive for the next nine years because the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development have failed to agree on who should procure the weigh bridges. We have even gone to people in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Uganda Revenue Authority (URA). At least, URA has a weighbridge along the road from Busia and Malaba and it is manned by people from URA and Ministry of Works and Transport. Madam Speaker, I appeal to you to help us to help this country and that region.

On the issue of surveys, the minister says that they have the money for the aerial geophysical surveys. In their presentation to the committee, they do not have money. They need Shs 90 billion but what they have in the budget is Shs 20 billion to do the geophysical surveys. We have over 130 companies, if you click the geo-cadastral map of Exclusive Prospecting Licences (EPL). 

Very many people are now in Karamoja extracting gold and other types of minerals. The region is very rich in minerals. I am even told that they are even prospects for oil and there are very good preliminary results by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development that there is oil. They were telling some of us that maybe, some of the towns will need to be moved as there is a lot of oil in that region. My own voters are digging gold even behind my house. I might be forced to move from where I am in my village.

This is a big issue. Why have weigh bridges become a ping-pong game between us, Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and Ministry of Works and Transport? No one wants to take a decision but wealth is being carried out without this Government wanting to know how much these private entrepreneurs are taking out of that region.

I would like to agree with the committee that this push system by NMS is very bad. If you go around the villages in my constituency, you find heaps of family planning pills in the dump pit outside the manyatas. When women go to the health centres to get special feeds for malnourished children, they are also given family planning pills. In that region, you have not sensitised people. You find a lot of the pills in a dump pit. They say they are taking them just because they want the milk for their children. In Nabilatuk Health Centre IV, for the last –

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying that people are given pills, which they do not need so they can get milk?

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: They do not need them. They just get the pills so that they can get food for their children as well. They get these drugs but when they reach home, they tell their children to throw them in the dump pit. I have informed people and even gone to NMS. They are supplying tonnes of condoms to Karamoja but you find them in the dump pits. Why are we being given things that we do not need? (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, right now in my constituency, which lies at the border with Kenya, there are over 3000 to 4000 Pokot from Western Kenya. The Division Commander called me and I will leave tonight to go and attend a meeting tomorrow. The Health Centre IV in my district is overwhelmed. The Turkana and Pokot are there and I do not know what to do. I hear my brother from Agago District is complaining about the Karimojong the other side. I am also wondering – I am not even talking about Ugandans; I am talking about thousands of Kenyans who are permanently in my constituency. 

Ministry of Health, how do you fund health centre IVs in districts where there are no hospitals? Where there is only one health centre IV in the whole district, what do we do? Why should we receive the same amount of drugs compared to a district, which has a hospital and two or three health centre IVs? In my district, there is only one health centre IV, which caters for the people from the district and from Kenya. There is not enough medicine in that health centre.

Lastly, decentralisation is a very good policy. Last year, I visited Lodwar County in Kenya, which receives an equivalent of Shs 13 trillion. Actually, the budget of Turkana County is the highest after Nairobi. Its budget can run this country; pay the civil servants and do everything else. The money, however, remains at the county level and the county headquarters is like in Mbale. There is no connection between the people at the headquarters and the people in the village. I find our system hanging because even if there is little money, there is a conditional grant that goes to the county, sub-county and parish. The grant goes deeper.

We have a very good system but how do we ask our Government to interest itself in the recommendations of that report? The NRM manifesto talks of service delivery but the reports are telling us that there is no service delivery. Can we do something with the Shs 20 billion? Health centre IIIs receive Shs 900,000 for an entire quarter -

THE SPEAKER: I suspect that our people downstairs are not timing the contributions because you have spoken for more than three minutes.

5.31
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you. I would like to thank the committee for the report and to appreciate the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for releasing 98 per cent of the budget. However, it is unfortunate that only 11 per cent went towards the development budget – (Interjections) – I have a voice problem today. 

When you consider the 11 per cent that went to the development budget, I would like to specifically look at Community Agriculture Infrastructure Improvement Programme (CAIIP). This programme was good but in my constituency, I would like to report that there was conflict of supervision of some of those projects, most especially bridges. These were awarded from the centre and the supervision was not being done by the engineers on the ground. As a result, shoddy work was done. I thought that should have also been reported.

The other challenge that I expected the committee to tell us was on the releases from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. In some instances, certain districts get challenges in as far as releases from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development are concerned. Money gets to the district late and in some instances, it is even returned. 

Today, from my interaction with the people from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who are here for Parliament week, I was told that has been improved. They now release 33 per cent of the money in the first and second quarters and the last quarter’s release is mainly for development projects. I think this is good.

On the side of revenue for the districts, town councils and sub-counties, you have heard that Government has taken most of the responsibilities of revenue collection, especially for town councils, which rely on taxi parks and other parks. I would, therefore, implore that Government moves very fast. The collection of this money should start so that what is remitted to the town councils is felt. Otherwise, most of the revenue from the taxi parks, which was very good for most of the councils, is now in the hands of Government.

Madam Speaker, I also wanted to ask the Minister of Health about health centres – (Member timed out.)

5.34
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. I would like to comment on two areas; the first one is about health facilities. We appreciate that Government has turned counties into districts. Just like my colleague said, some districts do not have hospitals and only one health centre IV. When these counties became districts, we had an influx of people coming into the town councils yet, the amount of drugs and medical supplies being given to these districts cannot serve the increasing population. 

I, therefore, would like to urge the Ministry of Health to look into the supplies vis-à-vis the increasing population. In the same way, the number of health workers that are in these health centre IVs are not adequate enough for the increasing population. 

The other issue I would like to comment on is the YLP It is true that this programme was politicised. I know that in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, there is a department for monitoring and evaluation. What are they reporting to the Government? Can’t there be a review on how this programme should be managed? When you go to the districts, there is nothing to show that – (Member timed out.)

5.36
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I request you to visit your health centres. Often, when I leave here, I go to my health centres and what I saw there is very alarming. First of all, all the health centres in Uganda are underfunded. Secondly, the little money, which is sent, is also delayed or stolen. The drugs are also stolen. 

Last week in Muyembe Health Centre IV, the RDC arrested two health workers who had faked a list of patients. These health workers are now battling their cases in Bulambuli Magistrates Court. This is very unfortunate. What do we do now? As members of Parliament, it is our role to supervise and carry out oversight visits and bring back reports. 

I would like to suggest that we set up a select committee to visit all the referral hospitals in Uganda, come back and report to this House so that these health centres are funded in a special way to improve our people’s health. 

The second point I would like to make is about the YLP which is another challenge. I requested the minister in charge to go and visit my district. Indeed, he went there, only to find out that Shs 150 million meant for YLP had been stolen. 

This young man, the desk officer who is in charge is –(Interjections)- I need to be protected, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Allow the Member to speak.

MR BURUNDO: The young man who stole the money is free. Nobody is following him up; the money has been stolen, nobody is concerned and the youth are complaining. Honestly, what are we doing as members of Parliament?

Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Burundo, regarding the issue of referral hospitals, our Committee on Health went round, they brought a report and we debated it. Therefore, we cannot do it again.

5.39
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Local Government Accounts Committee for a very good report.

Madam Speaker, these are the issues, which we have been raising again and again. I am happy that the Local Government Accounts Committee has come out very clearly. I beg that these resolutions be implemented.

I am very happy that they have mentioned hospitals or health centre IVs, which are bordering other countries and also host refugees. Their funds should be increased because they are serving too many people at ago. A typical example is Koboko General Hospital. We follow the drugs, which are given to us and after two days, they are dispersed to the sub-counties. However, after two days, the drugs are finished. It is very clear that too many people attend to that hospital; refugees plus those coming from Sudan and Congo. Definitely, those drugs are not enough.

Koboko General Hospital is called a hospital only in name. This is now the third year that we are receiving the same amount like any health centre IV. There is no difference between a health centre IV and Koboko General Hospital. Therefore, I would like to beg the Ministry of Health to give Koboko General Hospital what it deserves because of its position. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here and can listen.

Regarding drugs and the National Medical Store (NMS), the PUSH issue was suggested by members of Parliament. We agreed that they push essential drugs, which are required like Coartem, Piriton, Aspirin and other basic drugs. However, they have taken advantage of this and push all the drugs that they do not need in their stores, plus those, which are about to expire. Within a week or two, all the drugs have already expired. They have accumulated in many health centres and hospitals. 

I like the recommendation that they should come and collect these drugs and burn them here rather than leaving them in hospitals because we –(Member timed out.) 

5.42
MR ASHRAF OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also wish to thank the committee for the job well done. Our committees of Parliament take time to investigate and interrogate witnesses in regard to issues of corruption. However, when it comes to real implementation, we are let down. I would like to know whether it is the courts or we ourselves who are letting us down. Somebody is suspected to be a culprit but at the end of the day, he gets off the hook. I get surprised with what happens at the end. 

I know of only one team that mismanaged funds from Ministry of Public Service and suffered for it. We all saw it and I wish the same could happen to everybody involved in corruption. People will find corruption very expensive once their property is sold and they are detained. However, we work hard and at the end of the day, nothing takes place. How do we implement such measures so that people who are involved in such scandals are not brought back?

We have unemployment in Uganda. Once you spoil your job, go away. Let us get fresh graduates from university to join the service. Otherwise, we are running around. I was here since the Eighth Parliament and we have been talking about such people but some CAOs are being swapped and moved from one place to another. They continue working.

What are we doing? It appears that we are wasting our time. Let us be firm on this and come with a law such that if someone is involved in corruption, his property should be sold to recover the money. That way, people will find it difficult to practice corruption.

The other point I would like to rise is about decentralisation. We are now trying to know the advantages and disadvantages of decentralisation. When the CAOs were under local government, corruption was very high in this country. However, when they were brought to the Centre, things improved a bit.

Let us find a way of handling decentralisation properly; the advantages and disadvantages. Right now, we have failed to get engineers because we want our own and so, we ring-fence the jobs. How do we get the engineers? Let the Central Government take over and get us professionals who are going to serve people at the grassroots. We cannot now make bridges on our roads because the engineers are locally found and employed by the people. How can you work like that as a country? Let us find a way of getting professionals from the Centre and go on so that we can improve the policy of decentralisation.

My last point is about youth livelihood. This is a good strategy to support our youth because many of them come from universities without jobs. However, before we give them the money, we should train them. Once –(Member timed out.) 

5.46
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee. We get concerned about NMS, especially regarding the highlights of the committee where instead of doing the right thing, we continue hearing information, which is not right.

I often go to Kassanda Health Centre IV to find out what the problem is because women are dying but even the simplest requirements that they need to operate on a mother are not provided. They tell you that they tell NMS what they need but they supply as they want. This defeats the opinion of this House, which recommended a pool system. Even the ministry will tell you that they are using a pool system but it is not functioning the way it should.

I would like to thank the committee for highlighting the issue of congestion in schools, especially in refugee camps. However, beyond that, even in our UPE schools, the congestion is too much. You find a school has 800 children with only five teachers. You find a school with 700 children with only six teachers. There is no way these schools are going to compete. That is why you will not find them among the schools that score first grades in the results that were released today. This is despite the fact that majority of our people cannot afford private schools.

The more we continue and think that a school can survive on five teachers - We are a big joke to this country. We are creating an economy where there are those that can get education and those that pretend to be getting education.

On the issue of funds for the youth, as Parliament, it is high time that we reviewed the impact that they are creating among the youth. We allocate this money but it has turned out to be political money with no impact –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. What you forgot to mention is the congestion in the sanitation. You find 1000 children using three latrines in a school.

Before I invite hon. Abala, join me in welcoming Cyberknights Club of Soroti Municipal Secondary School, represented by hon. Ariko and hon. Osegge. If you have been to the exhibition, these are the children who have a robot. Please, find time and visit them at the exhibition. It is the only school there. Welcome, we are happy to see you here. (Applause)

5.49
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to welcome that team from Soroti to this Parliament.

I thank the committee for the job well done. If the ministries were serious, they would just get this report, implement it and Uganda would be transformed. This is what I can say, in simple terms. For example, when you talk about over pricing of medicine by NMS, it is a big challenge. I am shocked that an institution of Government is charging a higher price than a private entity. That means that people are now putting more trust in a private entity than a Government institution.

Secondly, there is this thing of understaffing. The ceiling in schools and that of the health sector is crippling service delivery at the lower levels. This country is suffering because of understaffing. Unless we stand firm to say that there must be recruitment in the health sector and primary schools, every year, we shall always be getting wrong results. For example, today, some of the districts do not have a first grade in Primary Leaving Examinations. That is a shocking matter. Parliament and Government must come out clearly to address this matter because it is very critical.

In addition, if we are talking about development, the report is telling us that only 11 per cent of the whole budget was for development. What is 11 per cent in transforming an impoverished community in Uganda? Poverty has increased; in Teso region it is at 40 per cent. If we are talking about 11 per cent, what results are we going to have in the next few years? That means poverty is going to continue increasing and people will be crying. That is why, at the moment –(Member timed out.)

5.52
MR JOHN NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me also add my voice to that of my colleagues to salute the committee for this good report.

Year in, year out, districts conduct boards of survey to dispose of grounded vehicles and other assets by even hiring the services of the Government valuer and mechanical engineers. However, at the end of the day, they cannot dispose of these grounded vehicles because of lack of log books and other necessary documentation. 

I am at odds with the committee’s recommendation that disposing of these assets and grounded vehicles could be done without recourse to log books. The recommendation should be about the law, which should be amended, like you have recommended that the Local Government (Amendment) Act, 2015 could be amended so that interferences in collection of taxes by the Central Government is stopped. It is about amending the law.

Regarding understaffing, districts that are hard-to-reach have serious challenges that they grapple with like attraction and retention of staff. The Minister of Public Service is here; a number of districts, including Bududa, were captured among those to benefit from the 30 per cent Hard-to-reach Fund but implementation has remained an issue. 

Speaker, I wish you could prevail over the minister to tell us why. Is it the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that is failing to release funds or have they merely cosmetically included districts on the list of beneficiaries when they are not going to benefit?

The other issue regards Primary Health Care Development Funds. When they were still at the districts, these funds helped a lot in infrastructural developments. The report has brought out the challenges that are being faced in the districts because of re-centralising this grant. Even minor repairs cannot be done. In the past they could –(Member timed out.)

5.55
MS OLIVER KATWESIGYE (Independent, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to take this opportunity to thank the committee for the good recommendations. I have a few observations.

When Government decided to phase out health centre IIs, we were promised that health centre IIIs were going to be made functional and equipped. However, as other Members have said, I think we are doing a disservice to this country. Recently, I saw a petition coming to you that the whole of Northern Uganda does not have a CT scan. This is a serious problem because the health service is very bad in this country. With the recommendations of the committee, the country needs to do something on the health service. 

I also noticed something about the road equipment that was given to the districts. This equipment is parked at most district headquarters and the reason is that they do not have fuel. We were given the equipment but the budget was not increased for fuel. This equipment is there doing nothing. I think we also need to do something about that.

I would also like to talk about these Community Agriculture Infrastructure Improvement Programme (CAIIP) roads. When these roads were constructed, there was no maintenance framework because even the districts abandoned them saying that they are not their roads and that they do not have the budget to maintain the roads. These roads are there but are not being maintained and I think this is also a problem that we need to look into. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, this is a procedural issue. The report we are discussing is one where we have already given money and it has been spent. The issue is the accountability of that money.

The way I am seeing it, people are discussing issues, which should be done in the local governments, under funding and yet we are asking them, what did you do with the little that we gave you? Therefore, Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for us to leave the Auditor-General’s report and discuss policy statements?

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members. In the end, we shall vote on the recommendations that we take and that is what shall be taken. This is for better information.

5.59
MR ANDREW KALUYA (Independent, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to add my voice in thanking the Chairperson of the Local Government Accounts Committee for the very wonderful report and also bring to the attention of this House that we thank the Government for supplying drugs to the health centres and hospitals, although these drugs are really not enough but there is something that has been done.

I think we need to follow up, as MPs, on the actual distribution of these drugs because we realised that even when the drugs reach in the required amounts to the district, the distribution down there is where the drugs are disappearing. Therefore, we need to look into that vice and curb it.

Madam Speaker, I would like to bring to your attention another issue that is happening in the health centres. We happened to get a new RDC in Iganga and this lady has become very tough, especially in the health care department. She has followed up the doctors in the hospitals and how the drugs are being distributed to the health centres. She realised that the doctors in the hospitals, especially Iganga hospital - There is one doctor that was caught getting money from patients and once the RDC caught this doctor, he was suspended for some time and then reinstated. However, what is happening is that all that frustration is being pushed to the patients. 

The doctor just locks himself in the office; he comes at 8.00 a.m. as required and locks himself in the office up to midday. He says, if you want to complain, go to the RDC. Therefore, we really need to look into those vices that are cropping and this is not only in Iganga. In Jinja, the same thing is happening. 

The doctors in Jinja are saying, if you have any issues, go to the RDC, after all, he is the best doctor. We need to curb this vice that is coming up. The people are complaining and making noise about it and we have to do something, at least as Government or the ministry itself. Such people should leave work because they swore to do work for the people and they are not performing.

On the issue of the Youth Livelihood Programme, I think we need to ascertain which groups are actually getting the money because you find that in a sub-county, over 100 groups are getting money but they are connected to some individuals. That one –(Member timed out.)

6.02
MR SILAS AOGAN (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted to start from the issue of road equipment. The Government of Uganda spent a lot of money to acquire equipment for working on our roads. However, based on the highlights of this report, you can notice that the roads are not in a good state. Yes, I am aware of districts, which do not have road committees but that aside, there should be some work on the ground because districts receive money.

My concern is that the equipment that was transferred to districts was transferred when it was new. However, when you look at the output, in most of the places, the roads still have potholes. What is the problem? Even here in Kampala, in the place where I stay, for you to reach my place - I should let you know that the road is so bad around Kira Municipality. I thought that they also have this equipment so there should not be any potholes on any road because the equipment is there. Therefore, that problem needs to be addressed.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of pensions, this is a right for somebody who has already worked but you find that somebody spends over five years and they have not been settled. For goodness sake, who are the people who are eating money for the poor who have toiled for their money? Madam Speaker, I would propose that automation of the system for paying pensions should be done urgently so that we save the situation and people get their money timely.

Madam Speaker, the Youth Livelihood Project is not helping a lot. This money is distributed towards elections - Government must stop this thing of bringing projects and programmes towards elections. Those are just for deceiving the public and I am being very honest about this. For instance, when you come to Teso, compensation for animals becomes a reality towards elections and after elections, it evaporates. Where does it evaporate to? It is a problem.

I would urge Government that if you are going to compensate the people of Teso, do it now. Do not come towards elections because we shall mobilise - I will not be happy with that.

Madam Speaker, I am so concerned about issues of land titles and physical plans. I come from a municipality. We need to have physical planning for all the new urban councils but this is not there. We are busy approving loans everyday but nobody is approving loans for any urban council to do proper planning for utility corridors, the roads and everything. Tomorrow, we shall have a similar thing like Kampala, Kumi, Mbale and other places where roads are just three meters. When the other car is coming, you have to reverse to let it pass - (Member timed out.)

6.05
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a few questions and some issues to rise but I shall seek your indulgence. 

First, according to the report, which we have received from the committee, it seems that local governments got unqualified reports because there is no issue being raised on them but now you are raising issues to the centre. I need the committee to assist me; did all local governments have unqualified reports so that they look good while they were pushing the blame to others?

Secondly, regarding the National Medical Stores (NMS), this push down should be stopped. NMS is the one making the cost of medicine and the budget to go high in response to drugs. I think the earlier we decided on NMS, the better and also this push down so that the drugs, which go there are burnt because they are not used and expire. I think the earlier we stopped this corruption in NMS, the better for us.

Madam Speaker, procurement at local district level is wanting. That is why they are talking about roads and the Road Fund. Road Fund committees are not working, why? It is because the district engineers do not want the Road Fund to work. I think the earlier we did this and empowered - I think the PPDA should come to answer. Why is it that they are not doing their work as far as the audits are concerned in districts?

Madam Speaker, the issue of internal audit has been raised. The corruption at district level is too high because of internal audit. Internal auditors have become part and parcel of the corrupt system. The audit committees are not working and I think the earlier we dealt with Internal Audit - because it should be the one telling us what is wrong in the districts.

For example, a road is not done and money is eaten. Who should report? It should be the internal audit. We continue sending money every now and then - I will give an example of a place in Sironko where the engineer has eaten money for five years on one road; 38 million per year. When we asked, he started working on it and they were saying, “What about the balance?” I think we should deal with internal audit and procurement. You get somebody working on a road as a contractor but he does not even have a motorcycle of his own, no spade, no knowledge in road construction but he is the one who gets the contract to construct the road. What is happening? We have a lot of qualified people that can do the job and are locals but they are not being given the opportunity because of corruption at district level. 

In fact, the leakage is too high at the districts and output is too low. That is why, in most cases when some of the –(Member timed out.)

6.08
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for presenting a comprehensive report.

I concur with the committee regarding understaffing in local governments, which is a very big challenge. In this country, some local governments at –(Interjections)– no, I left. I am now a member of the Budget Committee and not this one. I am giving information. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi has explained – 

THE SPEAKER: No, are you a member of this committee or not? 

MR MUGUME: Madam Speaker, I left the committee. 

THE SPEAKER: When did you leave? 

MR MUGUME: I am not a member now. I left that committee and I am now a member of the Budget Committee.

MS NAMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I am a member of that committee and my colleague also belongs to that committee – 

MR MUGUME: But I have left -  

MS NAMUJJU: He has not left; he is a member of that committee.

MR MUGUME: I left that committee and I am now a member of the Budget Committee.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mugume, when the report was being discussed, I understand you were still a member so this is your report. You will speak on something else. 

MR MUGUME: But I did not sign – 

THE SPEAKER: No, our rules do not allow it. Do not tempt me by standing. If you know you are a member of the committee, do not stand. Is hon. Komakech also a member of the committee? 

6.11
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, for purposes of clarity, I am a member of both the Human Rights and Foreign Affairs Committees. I do not know what intention is being generated across there. 

I rise to commend this committee for this excellent performance. If this could be the standard to be set for many committees then I think this is one of the models that we need to take on board for other committees to see how to do their work. 

I speak on the issue of education. While we appreciate the Sustainable Development Goal Number 4 in this report, in terms of implementation, under education, we have a very big challenge. 

If you went to Unyama National Teachers College in Northern Uganda, you will discover that it was directly implemented and supervised by the Ministry of Education and Sports from the centre. The district engineers were only told to go and oversee it without touching anything. You can see that decentralisation is not functioning the way it should have been since 1993. 

Is there a way that we can review the journey we have made to date? Can we also study Kenya in terms of the devolution they are implementing? This is because it is working so well and it has de-concentrated power downwards. Through the Ministry of Local Government, we need to review decentralisation and see how best we can implement it. 

Regarding education, take a look at seed schools that are supposed to be functioning in northern Uganda and especially in Gulu Town. Laroo Seed Secondary School, which is next to Gulu University, has operated for two years and the teachers’ salaries have not been paid. The one in Paicho Division is also not functioning. Therefore, I think there is a lot to be done in terms of Government implementing what it is supposed to be doing. 

At present, we see that the decentralisation policy is dysfunctional and we should seek a way of reversing this process. It should not just be on paper, we should be seen to be doing what should be done. Otherwise, we look forward to generating a strategy of following the recommendations because we should often see treasury memorandum coming so that we see a way – (Member timed out.) 

6.14
MR FRANCIS GONAHASA (FDC, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Sitting next to hon. Komakech, it looks like he got some ideas from what I was going to say. First of all, I would like to say thank you very much to the committee for this very good report. 

Decentralisation is not working. As part of the political class in this country, it falls right back to us. All these widespread weaknesses have been pointed out but nobody said anything about agriculture, where I belong. The agricultural extension system has died, farmers are producing what they are producing based on what they have or what they have learnt. 

I just want to end on this note; realising that everything seems to be dead – maybe that is extreme. Is it right for us to think - I have heard many district councils saying, “Maybe we should create another district, another constituency, another administrative unit, a municipality here and there because the service delivery that we already have in our hands is not working.” I would like to agree with hon. Komakech that we should rethink the way things are working in the local governments before we even think about creating new structures down there. 

We talked about the road units; equipment has been sent down but there is no fuel. A new district will need its equipment and they will ask for it. They will demand for it until it is given. Do we have the money to provide these things? I think we may be running this country on a model that I will call “a fool’s paradise.” Everybody is a boss or a chief. I think the time has come when we should rethink these things and reconstitute Uganda. I am not saying that we should remove what we have but we should slow down on creating new structures because we are not managing what we already have. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.16
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the chairperson and members of the committee. 

I would like to address myself on one of the issues that have been highlighted – 

THE SPEAKER: I hope the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is not leaving. Is he here? 

MR KIYINGI: Madam Speaker, regarding the issue that has been highlighted by the committee on the inflated costs of drugs for National Medical Stores, when you look at this financial year’s budget, which is to the tune of Shs 32 trillion, you will notice that the Ministry of Health is allocated about Shs 2.3 trillion, which reflects about Shs 1700 per person in Uganda. Therefore, when somebody inflates the cost of drugs to a tune that is above the cost, which has been allocated to an individual in Uganda, this is a serious issue that must be addressed. 

In our local governments, there is a very big problem of absenteeism in our health facilities yet these people are paid. I do not think there is value for money when somebody is paid and that person does not appear on the job.

Madam Speaker, it is almost a taboo for somebody to fall sick on a Saturday, Sunday and a public holiday because the staff are not there to attend to the Ugandans. I do not know whether we need to sensitise our staff at the local government level and the public at large – the moment the public gets information that drugs have been delivered by the National Medical Stores to the health facilities, everybody converges at that particular time regardless of whether somebody is sick or not; to make sure that by the time somebody falls sick, he or she has some medicine which is kept a side to cater for the –(Member timed out.)

6.19
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I would also like to add my voice to the position that Central Government should review the structures and mandate of local governments. For example, the issue of understaffing - local governments are obliged to recruit but they are underfunded. Therefore, they do not take some of these areas like in health or education as a priority. This leads to poor service delivery. In a way, the Government is abdicating its responsibility to provide quality services; who sets the standards, so to ask? 

The other issue is about corruption in the local government. Whereas Central Government has tried its best to provide resources, most of it is wasted. 

I would like to request central government to review its position on fast-tracking its programmes other than waiting for the post-mortem of local governments; the internal Auditor-General should be part of this syndicate. I have talked informally to the State Minister of Local Government that the start-up funds for Butebo District were misappropriated. Have you made a call? I told her there is confusion in that place and asked how she would help Butebo?

Furthermore, I would like to request central government to take a lead in inducting local governments because it is not in the interest of the chief administrative officer to have an enlightened local government executive.

The other area that we have no value for money is the water sector. Honourable members, you will concur with me that one of the headaches we face is spoilt boreholes. Why are boreholes getting spoilt every day? It is repaired today and tomorrow, it is spoilt. There is no value for money. Someone promised to give me information undercover unfortunately I have not followed up that issue. Please, investigate the money allocated to water in the districts.

The other area is health. Everybody who has been recommended for surgery in the health centre has to pay money. The minimum fee is Shs 400 –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, more than 20 Members have contributed. I would like to hear from the minister before we conclude. However, I do not know where the minister in charge of works and transport has gone? I think we really need to resolve this issue of the weigh bridges. The roads are ours and when they are damaged, it is our money that is used to repair them. Why can’t we agree on how to do this? 

Ministers, do you have any comments? Minister of Health, there were a number of issues for you and the minister in charge of local governments had quite a number too.

6.23
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee for presenting this report and to thank the honourable members, for their inputs. 

Obviously, listening to all the honourable members, gives me hope because I know that they take health as a very important issue and people must be healthy. However, you are also cognisant of the challenges we face in providing health services to the people in the country.

I would like to start with the issue of National Medical Stores (NMS) - since the majority of the questions have been raised regarding that. Let me state here very clearly that the amount of money that we provide to the NMS for medicines, for the entire population, is not even a quarter of our needs. We carried out a national quantification exercise and shared the report with the committee to the effect that NMS would require Shs 1.3 trillion for medicines annually but we only get Shs 267 billion. This money has to be shared among all the over 6,000 facilities; it is not an easy job. 

However, let me state here that there are some medicines that are procured outside that money and these include: antiretroviral drugs, antimalarial drugs and reproductive health items.

Madam Speaker, all the other items we group them under essential medicines and they are pulled. It is only the ones that are procured under this money that are pushed and I would like to explain this. The pulling in the lower health facilities - health centres IIIs only; their procurement plans are predetermined by the district health officers every year and signed off because of lack of personnel to place in orders every quarter. For the health centres IVs upwards, they make their procurement plans and order. Their medicines are supplied as per their orders. If there is any facility that is saying medicines are supplied outside its order, I would like the honourable members to provide me a copy so that I can verify with NMS. 

However, for the items that are pushed, the quantifications are made by the district health officers together with the facility and our implementing partners that are in these districts, with whom we have signed Memorandum of Understanding for them to support the districts. This brings me to the issue of Karamoja where there are complaints about condoms and oral contraceptive pills.

Madam Speaker, if this is true - and I am going to follow up - we shall revise what we are sending to Karamoja because there are other districts like recently, Masaka lacked condoms yet it is not being required in Karamoja. The oral contraceptives - we shall look at this and revise whatever they are getting to suit what the district requires.

On the issue of indiscipline and absenteeism of the medical people as highlighted, I agree this is true. It is a big challenge but also to state here that these officers are recruited and supervised by the local governments.             

The minister in charge of local governments will substantiate more on how they are carrying out disciplinary measures. Otherwise, we offer supportive supervision and when we do, we share the challenges with the districts and request them to implement our recommendations.

On the issue of constituency health assemblies, Madam Speaker, I would like to report that though funding was provided, this funding was requested for the health sector on the basis of increasing the primary healthcare non-wage to the districts because they were receiving very little money of about Shs 200,000 per quarter; it was an embarrassment. When this money came, we sat in the ministry and members agreed that we first try supervision to see if it can improve and so, we came up with this. 

The design and restructuring were a challenge. When we started giving out the funds for constituency health assemblies that were to be chaired by honourable members and the district teams had to be available, up to date I have not got accountability for any of that money. That is why I requested the committee that instead of wasting this money when the facilities are getting very little money; let us give them money to them. I said that perhaps it would improve on maintenance and carrying out some of the services instead of it being not accounted for.

For districts that are having influx of patients and refugees, our policy on refugees is clear: we accept and support them. That means that we need to share what we have. We have been bringing this to the attention of everybody. 

We are working with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to see that support that comes externally also improves on this facility. The Government is also processing a loan, particularly for the refugees-hosting districts to improve on their services. I hope that moving forward, things will improve.

Madam Speaker, the issue of attracting and retaining health workers is a major problem that we need to address head-on because the salary we are offering is not attractive. We have tried but even when salaries were increased recently, we are still faced with the problem of attracting and retaining and it is worse with the specialists.

On the issue of Koboko Hospital and the amount of money it is receiving, Madam Speaker, Koboko Hospital is in the process of being upgraded from a Health Centre IV to a general hospital. It is not yet a general hospital. We are committed to providing funds to ensure that it becomes a general hospital and we will give it what is due to it. I agree that the process has delayed but it is because of inadequate funding that we get. 

Lastly, on the issue of providing wrong information to the honourable members, Madam Speaker, I will follow this up with the National Medical Stores and ensure that the constituencies are corrected and the honourable members receive the right information. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Minister of Health. Let us hear from the Minister of Public Service.

6.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the wonderful work done. 

I would like to address the issues that pertain to our ministry. The first is about low staffing levels. Our ministry normally gives the local governments enough time to prepare their recruitment plans and we normally have 30th September of every year as the last date for submission of their recruitment plans for the next financial year. 

Of course, we have a limitation from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development which normally gives us the wage ceilings. Therefore, in consultation with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development we are going to see how we can address some of these challenges.

The local governments are sometimes encouraged to trade off some positions – as the committee raised – which they feel are not critical so that they can attend to critical functions. That leeway is provided by our ministry and some local governments have been doing that. Our minimum provided staffing level is 65 per cent though some local governments are operating at below that minimum. 

Madam Speaker, the committee also raised the issue of failure to attract staff in some positions like the district engineers, district health officers and chief commercial officers because of the requirements and the committee was requesting the Ministry of Public Service to lower the requirements. 

We have looked at these positions and realised that they demand high technical skills and in some instances even subscription to professional bodies. The Ministry of Public Service also realised that some local governments, for reasons known to them, have not opened up for recruitment. We realised that there are many people who would want to take up these positions but often times you find them having some ping-pong over some of these positions. Our ministry cannot relax the requirements for those positions because they are technical in nature.

The committee raised the issue of inclusion of enforcement officers in the structures of the district local governments, especially the urban authorities. Yes, as Public Service we have received this request, especially concerning Wakiso and some other urban authorities, which need serious enforcement services. We are going to take that one with those local governments. However, we feel that not all local governments need it. It is more critical with the urban authorities.

The committee raised the issue of officers who are implicated in some cases being transferred. On this, we have always wanted to deal with these officers but you also realise that there is a challenge. For example, the report we are discussing is for some years ago. When we get the recommendations we act but many times we do not get the recommendations, for example, pointing out names of the staff. 

I have seen the payment through, for example, channels which are not approved. The committee raised schools like Duhaga. Therefore, we request the committee to be pointing out names of those officers so that we can go after them individually. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, is about the automation of pension. Our ministry has been faced with challenge of working with a system which lacks seamless integration with the IFMS payment system at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We are in the process of procuring a system that will promote seamless integration. When the procurement is done, some of these issues are going to be eliminated.

On the other hand, it is important to note that our ministry decentralised payment of pensions to the various votes. We have realised that the votes do not take it upon themselves to prepare the civil servants who are going to retire in time - because we give them six months - so that there is automatic transfer of someone from the active payroll to the pensions’ payroll. Thank you and I submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, can you inform us whether the names of the errant officers are in the main report by any chance? They are there? Okay, honourable minister, apparently, the names are in the main report; this was just a summary.

6.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for presenting an excellent report. In the agriculture sector, the issue is about extension workers. I was a bit disappointed when hon. Gonahasa said extension services are dead. Extension services in the country have just started. We have just recruited and in the last one year, we have seen a lot of changes.

A lot of the seedlings that were given did not die. We had a lot of seedlings germinating. We had a good harvest of maize. We have good harvests in the fruits. We have a lot of good milk being produced because every sub-county now has a veterinary doctor. We are even managing the ticks with these doctors without any assistance from Government. Because the extension workers are working very hard with the farmers, the tick resistance and cattle deaths have really gone down.

It is good to condemn but it is also good to give chance to a system to start. We have just got money for extension workers and we give all the money we get in the agriculture ministry for extension workers to the districts. What the ministry does is to advertise and give them the qualifications required for the extension workers we need; the district just employs them. 

We do not only give money for salaries; we also give money to help in the movement of these extension workers. We have bought for them motorcycles, which have just arrived. We have bought pick-ups to help the district veterinary and agriculture officers. I beg that we do not say that it is dead because we are just starting. Out of the 5,000 extension workers, we have now employed 3,226. We are going to see changes with these extension workers, so let us not condemn the system. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. That is good information.

6.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jennifer Namuyangu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the entire committee for presenting a wonderful report. All these things are happening in the local governments; I can confirm that. However, we realise that only 12 per cent of the national budget is allocated to local governments. It is also true that out of this money, 65.9 per cent goes to wages, 25.6 per cent goes to non-wages and only 11 per cent goes to development.

Before we condemn local governments and call them corrupt, we must start from there. I would like to appreciate that the committee has been able –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not heckle. Please allow the minister to respond to the report and your debate.

MS NAMUYANGU: I am happy that one of the Members speaking, hon. Nambeshe, is a former LC IV chairperson. Maybe he is aware of what he was doing. (Laughter) I do not condone corruption. I condemn it. I know it is happening in some local governments but not all. 

Having said that, I would like to start from where one of our colleagues, the MP for Kajara County, ended. He said that the council sat and resolved that the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) steps down. I think colleagues should be able to guide the councils that this is illegal because the mandate to remove or interdict the CAO is now with the central government, not the district councils. Other than causing a local government financial loss, we should do things legally. However, I will take up the issue and see to it that it is addressed.

The second issue is where colleagues said that local governments have a dependency syndrome. It is not out of their own making. You are aware that local government graduated tax was removed plus even these other taxes like fees from landing sites, bus and taxi parks and markets. Like the committee has pointed out, it is true, we have had issues. Sometimes, it is not even the central Government but you find some political leaders say no more collection of taxes on this and that, and the people believe them. Therefore, we have to work together to mobilise the communities to pay taxes. It is not even my boss. I have even heard Members of Parliament tell a certain market in his district not to pay taxes and people do not pay. 

We need to take it as a collective effort to sensitise our people to pay taxes. As a ministry, we have come up with an innovation on what we call local economic development to encourage all the local governments to take up economic activities that will generate local revenue. As you are aware, even allowances for the councils to sit must come from this local revenue yet some of the districts cannot even raise it and so they end up not having council meetings. This is even limited to only 20 per cent. We have encouraged them - and a number of them have heeded to our advice of starting local economic activities.

On the issue of land titles, it is a big issue and we have ended up losing land in urban centres and for institutions. We have agreed, at Cabinet level, to find money specifically to help the local governments to start titling this land so that we overcome the problem.

On the Community Agriculture Infrastructure Improvement Programme (CAIIP) projects, I want to say that it was a good project. Incidentally, it has ended. When you go to all the local governments where it was, you see the roads, markets and value addition machines. I agree with the committee that the local governments are now grappling with the issue of money for maintaining these roads. It is an issue but I also want to add that the local governments should also be sincere. Previously, before they got the road equipment, they were hiring the machines. They were paying the contractors and they had little fuel. As we speak, they have the entire set of machines. We have increased their fuel and trained their staff. We are no longer using the contractors. So, why should a local government claim that the machines are idle? Actually, in the districts I have been, they told me the machines are not enough to work. Every sub-county has a road fund and they are now struggling to use it in a financial year.

The other challenge they have is about the bulldozers because they were given at a sub-regional level. I would like to encourage colleagues to take interest in this. Since we are part of the roads committees, let us take interest. If you do not supervise, people will take advantage. (Interjections) We shall share and you will give me the information, honourable colleague.

The other one was about absenteeism. It is true this is a big issue. However, working with the Prime Minister’s Office, we picked 20 worst performing districts. Our interest was in health and education and we understudied them. We also introduced a clocking-in system in these particular districts. All health workers and school staff must clock in. As a result, there has been a lot of improvement. 

Further, we have also introduced rewards and sanctions. For us, as a ministry, we meet with all the accounting officers on a quarterly basis. They must report on these particular issues. Absenteeism in schools, health facilities and local government at districts and sub-counties is reported on. I can assure you that there has been a lot of improvement. 

Initially, even the CAOs and the municipal clerks who are the supervisors of these civil servants were the ones absenting themselves. It was very difficult to supervise. Now, we have tasked them to supervise and give us reports about their subordinates. The 20 worst performing districts were picked from the east; they have been able to improve.

On Youth Livelihood Fund, in the districts where the political leadership has been very supportive, this programme has worked well. I was in Bukomansimbi; I saw a group which is doing welding. They have already paid back 80 per cent of the money within six months and they have even been able to open branches beyond their district. I was in Soroti in December. They have a group doing woodwork. They used to sell a door at Shs 150,000. Now, they are selling a door at Shs 500,000. They have already paid back the money. I was in Moroto and I was surprised by a group dealing in produce buying. They had already paid back their money in six months.

Therefore, where there has not been political interference, the groups have excelled. In Abim District, where there was a political interference and the leaders came out and told the people not to pay back the money because it was a gift from the President, are at 19 per cent recovery. So, we should not condemn the entire programme. It has been a good programme in certain areas though it failed in some areas due to political interference. 

It is true that, in some areas, the technical people were forming ghost groups. Others even made the young people sign for Shs 9 million but gave them Shs 4 million. All these things are there and we need to work again as a team to make sure we fight this fraud. 

Madam Speaker, I think I should end at that and I would like to thank the Members. I would like to tell you that, as a ministry, we have already started on the recommendations to sanction accounting officers who are not doing their work. You heard about interdictions. We are only stuck somewhere and we may need to change the law because when sometimes we interdict somebody, they take us to court. 

About accounting officers who are not doing well - actually, I have been debating with my senior colleague that we should create an office at the Ministry of Local Government so that we bring those underperforming accounting officers on katebe other than transferring them. So, you need to support us to change the law so that people can be thrown out and we replace them with people who can work. 

The last issue was about the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS). It is true some local governments have had issues. The most recent was Katakwi where they had an acting CAO who did not know what to do even when we had informed them. The ministries of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and that of local government have technical people who normally go to build capacity of these people. Our team had been to Katakwi more than four times but when I went there they had not got money from Government for the last two quarters.

Immediately I came back, I asked to permanent secretary to look for a CAO who is suitable to work in that place and we have already sent them a CAO.

So, we are moving. We are vigilant and are on the ground but we need your support to ensure that we all fight corruption and advocate for the local governments to be well funded. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Does the chairperson of the committee have any closing remarks?

6.53
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (LOCAL GOVERNMENTS) (Mr Okin Ojara): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving Members opportunity to look critically into this report. This is an Auditor-General’s report. Therefore, we just went to confirm what the Auditor-General had presented. It could not have attracted any debate but you allowed Members to debate it anyway. I would like to just make some clarifications. 

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi asked a question on whether there has not been a qualified report from the Auditor-General. I would like to state that I do not know what happened in the financial year 2016/2017 but somehow; there was no qualified report from the Auditor-General, which means probably the accountability at the districts may be improving. We did not see it but this is the report the Auditor-General presented. 

In the financial year 2014/2015, there was a qualified report about the local governments. In the financial year 2016/2017, we did not see any qualified reports; all the reports were actually unqualified. 

The other issue, which I would like to clarify on, is about the issue of the level of revenue collection. I think very many Members have alluded to this that there is a lot of influence from the centre in terms of how the local revenue is being generated and collected. Since the minister has also taken note of that, we hope she will be able to discuss this and see how they can rectify it because the local governments are suffering. They cannot generate any revenue to support their activities.

Standards set by the ministries are a big issue. We set standards that we cannot meet. By the way, the framework the Auditor-General uses to audit is the same framework we set. If we said health centre IIs and IIIs are supposed to have these doctors and they get on the ground without getting that that is the basis on which they audit their books. If we say in the schools we have to have 1:45 teacher-pupils ratio, that is the basis on which the Auditor-General actually audits. Therefore, as a Cabinet, you need to go and discuss this and review the standards that you normally set.

Madam Speaker, we also recovered some money. I requested our clerk to bring forth the amount of money that was recovered but the clerk did not have the opportunity to avail us. However, we have instructed, I would say, some accounting officers who have deliberately misappropriated money and the staff or technical team at the district level to refund it. It should be up to hundreds of millions Uganda shillings. I cannot get the figure very well but it should be in the general report, if one can read; probably they can be able to find that. 

Lastly, is the issue of the condition of our government-aided senior secondary schools as well as the primary schools - we have had a situation where Government gives money through the education ministry especially for infrastructural development in government-aided senior secondary schools and tertiary institutions like national teachers’ colleges. 

In Onyama, I remember they sent about Shs 6 billion for structural development but that has not been audited. In Gulu Senior Secondary School, they sent about Shs 2 billion but it was never audited. In Lira Technical School, they also could have sent about Shs 2 billion but not audited. Therefore, we need to encourage ourselves to engage with the Auditor-General to be looking to that.

Finally and finally, let us pay more attention on the operations of local governments because that is where service is delivered and that is also where we are going to end up as individuals. Thank you, very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairman. Honourable members, there is one area I wanted us to tie up. I would like to propose an amendment on the issue of the weighbridge; instead of the energy ministry to say, “The Government” should construct weighbridges because both energy and works ministries deny responsibility yet somebody has to do it.

I don’t know if you agree that we, instead of energy ministry, put “Government” and task the Prime Minister, who is here, to give us a solution because we cannot continue like this. Is that okay honourable members?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the question be put?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this report be adopted?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you so much. We thank the Prime Minister, members of the Cabinet, and Members from both sides of the House for the work done. House adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00.p.m.

(The House rose at 7.00p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 22 January 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 

