
Tuesday, 28 January 2020

Parliament met at 2.02 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. Since I have not had the opportunity, let me start by wishing you a very happy new year. May your prosperity this year shoot beyond what has ever happened before, now that I have prayed about it. (Laughter)

Honourable members, I will cause an alteration in the Order Paper to accommodate a motion by hon. Cecilia Ogwal. The motion is for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to Dr Amina Hersi Moghe upon being awarded the European CEO Award, Entrepreneur of the Year Africa 2019. I will cause this alteration so that this recognition can be made today.

We are in the budget process and as always and every year, we do this. As we are aware, our rules and the laws that govern these processes have very clear timelines on what we should do with the time we have. The National Budget Framework Paper was submitted – I hope on time – by 31 December last year and the discussions on it by the committees and also the Committee on Budget I am sure took place at the right time. 

I have been advised that some documents that accompanied the Budget Framework Paper had delayed but have since been laid and therefore, have been submitted to the Committee on Budget, which is good. However, we now know that the rules say by 1 February, the Committee on Budget should have reported to this House and this House should have approved.

As we all know, 1 February will be on a day that we will not be sitting and at the same time, we cannot extend the timeline beyond 1 February. Therefore, we have to bring it forward by the two days of the weekend and see if we can finish it this week. I have been also advised that the Committee on Budget is finalising and by tomorrow, we should be able to start these discussions on the Budget Framework Paper, if everything goes as they have planned.

Therefore, prepare, honourable members that on Friday morning this week, we might be required to come back here so that we finalise with this Budget Framework Paper debates, so that the submission from Parliament can go in time, to enable the other arms of Government do what they should do within the timelines given by the law.

In the entire budget process, there is only one institution that has done its best to stay within the timelines provided in the law and that institution is the Parliament of Uganda. (Applause) All the other institutions have done their best but they have fallen short. We keep encouraging them but we always have timelines that are not being adhered to, which is causing us some difficulties. 

However, we are now together in this and this is the first timeline from Parliament, 1 February. Let us discharge this burden within the time and pass the torch back to the Executive arm of Government so that they can do their bid and come back to Parliament, so that we are able to finish with this budget as anticipated in the law.

Thank you, honourable members. Let us proceed with business. I have received phone calls, particularly from the honourable Minister of Foreign Affairs. I think there is an item on the Order Paper. What item is it? It is Item 3 (c).

The honourable Minister of Foreign Affairs called me this morning. He is not around but also said that there are some meetings scheduled to deal with these specific issues. When they are done, he will have a better chance to brief this Parliament about what has happened for this relationship to be restored. There are meetings that have been scheduled and so, we will wait for the minister when they come and then deal with this. He is not around and so, we will not be having item 3 (c).

Can we now go to the Order Paper? (Mr Ssemujju rose_) Is it on my communication? I hope it is not on Foreign Affairs –(Laughter)– because I am not the minister.

2.08
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): It is on your communication, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much. The immediate information we wanted from Government was on Ugandans who are being killed in Rwanda. I was in Parliament and our request to Government was to advise Ugandans and give them travel advice. Do they continue travelling to Rwanda as we receive bodies and as they continue with meetings? 

The resolution of the problem in the meetings is a matter for which this Parliament may not have authority. However, our request was that Government must advise Ugandans because so far, four people have been killed. We said, “No, this cannot continue.” Rwanda has advised her citizens and Uganda ought to advise hers as well. Therefore, that advice is what we wanted urgently as these meetings go on.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, can you extract those concerns and we forward them to the Minister of Foreign Affairs, please?

2.10
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Mr Speaker, we thank you for wishing us a good year of 2020. Over the weekend, I was in my constituency and also on radio stations. People were calling and they were very worried about your situation. There was information circulating on social media that you were badly off and almost dead and that you were poisoned and suffering in Germany.

I thought it is important that as you wish us a good year, we also want to wish you good health since you are back on your feet. (Laughter) Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is the least of things I expected. I am well as you can see. I have not yet fallen sick. I will probably in future, like all of us do. However, I have not yet fallen sick as of now.

I was simply wondering who had the intuition to know when I was going to fall sick –(Laughter)– and therefore, alert everybody that this man knew he was going to fall sick about this time so he alerted everybody that he is sick now. I simply wonder how they got the intuition to know it. I have been well. I have not had any issue as yet. It will may be come in the future but for now, I am okay.

However, I remember European history. There is the illustrated history of Europe by Richardson – somebody wrote it. There was a particular discussion about a country in Europe that was really in trouble. I do not want to talk about that country. The illustration was that country in the caricature of what its name resembles was grabbed by some monster.

They refer to that person as “The sick man of Europe”. Do you remember the sick man of Europe? The person then asked, “Do you ask as a doctor or as a successor in title?” Do you understand? For those who are talking, are they talking as doctors or as successors in title in case anything happens?

That is beside the point. Honourable members, I am well as you can see and we should be able to proceed. 

MR TUMUHEIRWE: Mr Speaker, the procedural point I am rising on concerns the Dairy Cooperative Societies mainly in the districts of Western Uganda. On Thursday last week, a matter which was very urgent was brought to this House because the cooperatives are on the verge of losing their milk coolers, which were given to them precisely in the Obote 1’s Uganda People’s Congress Government in 1968. The cooperatives have cried to this House for their protection but the presiding Speaker that day directed the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to respond to the letter, which had been received from the Office of the President. 

Mr Speaker, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is represented in the House. I seek your guidance on how we should proceed on this matter as it was very urgent. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you aware of the matter of the milk coolers? 

2.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we are aware of this matter and we would like your permission to have a short statement on this issue tomorrow. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is okay. Thank you. 

2.14
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to put up an issue of national importance. This concerns an epidemic in China of Coronavirus, which has hit the people of China. The people of China are very many and they have got the capacity to help us. Most of our people are doing business in China and the Chinese are coming here as tourists and business people. They are landing in Uganda freely and yet, the people in Asia and the whole world have raised alert flags around their entry points. They are very keen because this virus is terrible. 

Once it is smuggled here, many of us will die within a very short time because one time, when there was an outbreak of the SARS virus I was there. We tried to hide in holes but it still reached the hideouts. 

If the Government of Uganda or the Ministry of Health does not take precautions and if this virus comes in with our business people or Chinese investors or tourists, the situation will be unmanageable. Last night, I heard that China has already lost $ 180 billion in a short space of time because the businesses have been interrupted.

I request Government to put more alert on our entry points to make sure nobody enters this country with that virus. For example, we get Yellow Fever certificates for going to other countries. Those people who are coming from China should also be given the same kind of certificates so that our people can stay safe. Thank you.
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is somebody going to deal with this matter? For sure, this is a serious matter and the minister responsible for the sector should have informed the country about the problem and how they are dealing with it so that we feel the protection of the State and remain comfortable. Is the Minister of Health here? 

2.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, the Minister of Health will brief us when she comes in. we can call her to come now but if you allow, she can also come tomorrow. We, however, know that we are taking precautionary measures and she will be able to brief the country latest tomorrow through the representative of the people here in the House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think on her own volition action, she needs to inform this Parliament and the whole country what the problem is. She does not need to be prompted on this. Let her come tomorrow, if she is ready, let her give this statement because it is a serious matter. 

MS RWAKOOJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I noticed an omission regarding Foot and Mouth Disease. I have constantly talked about the lack of vaccines and acaricides. Last week, we talked about it here and it was said that the minister will come and brief us on it. I do not see that matter on the Order Paper. I wonder why this matter is constantly left out. 

It is a source of not only irritation but frustration because we lack a source of fund. The milk has gone down in price and we cannot sell cows. What is the ordinary person supposed to do? I would like to demand that it is put on the Order Paper and the Clerk should not keep forgetting about it deliberately. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. You see, honourable members, we manage the Order Paper that way so that we do not come to items when there is no response. We manage it by confirming that there is a statement and then, we put the item on the Order Paper. If there is no statement we have received and we put it on the Order Paper, we will come to that item and as usual, we will say there is no response. 

Therefore, instead of doing that, we would like to be sure there is a statement and then, we put it on the Order Paper. If it is not appearing, it means the Clerk has not received the statement from the minister. That is how we are trying to make the Order Paper not look unreal. 

I have been advised that the matter was responded to in a statement last year. We will cross check to see how to handle it. 

MS RWAKOOJO: Mr Speaker, last year, if you remember, the matter ended – actually, now I am forgetting who was in the Chair. I think it was the Speaker. There was an argument between the Minister of Health and the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, hon. Kabatsi who claimed that the Ministry of Health buys drugs for the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

The Prime Minister was here and he was asked to tell the House the truth about this matter. He agreed with the Minister of Health and the Speaker said, “This is the right point to adjourn.” However, the matter was not yet resolved. It was an embarrassment if those who were here could remember. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we look at the records and see how to bring up this matter. The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is here though. 

2.2
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Mr Speaker, this morning, we have been discussing the issue of Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD). The entire ministry is concerned about having FMD in 46 districts. 

Putting that story aside, on importing drugs, Government has allowed the ministry to go back to the original way of doing things especially the importation of the sensitive drugs including the FMD vaccines. We have already ordered the vaccines. We are going to vaccinate in those areas, which are now suffering from the disease.

Mr Speaker, in two weeks, we are going to announce using the Media Council and all avenues of communication informing all the members of the public about the areas where we are going to vaccinate - to ring vaccinate. After that, we shall continue testing and inform the public on areas, which will then be free from FMD -(Interruption)

MS ADONG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Towards the end of last year, there were some sick cows that were dumped in Nwoya District. I understand they are still there up to now.

The district leadership did not have the authority to go there because they were blocked. I am wondering how people get animal movement permits to be able to move with cows. Is Nwoya District included among the districts you are going to vaccinate?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, certainly, there is a group, which took cows to Nwoya. My investigations revealed that they were being chased by police. They first landed somewhere in Nakasongola and when they were closed in, they moved to Nwoya.

However, we are going to vaccinate even in Nwoya so that we get rid of this disease. By the way, FMD is a virus like a cold. If, for example, a cow does not infect others, the virus will be dead just like a cold. 

However, if they come into contact with other cows, then the spread continues. That is why we vaccinate around affected areas, which is called ring-vaccinating, so that these cows do not infect the others. (Interruption)

MR AKOL: Mr Speaker, I would feel better if the minister came with a statement on the Floor of Parliament other than just using his mind and brain to explain issues.

Therefore, are we proceeding well? The minister should come with a statement? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, we are not proceeding properly. Honourable minister, you can now see the procedural questions being raised. There might be a point of order in the process, procedure and clarifications are being raised and yet, we do not have a substantive document to deal with.

This has been because at the right time, you did not come. We are now asking you when you can come with a statement on this issue and we deal with it and finish it.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, I would be ready to bring a comprehensive statement on this rather very difficult disease after 15 February 2020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Then, let us do it this way; you come with a preliminary statement on the urgent matters on Thursday. Then, the big statement explaining all the details, policy matters and all those things, you can do them after 15th February. Is that fair enough?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Okay, that is fair.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On Thursday, we expect a statement from the minister, which we will debate. Thank you very much.

MR SSEMPIJA: Much obliged.

2.27
MR PETER OCEN (Independent, Kole County South, Kole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. The road from Kamudini to Lira was constructed a long time ago. Currently, the road has been characterised by daily accidents and deaths.

On 20 January 2020, a one Joshua was knocked down by a speeding vehicle and burial is going on now. John Ogwang in Ayer sub-county, on the 21 January 2020 was also knocked down and he is struggling with a lot of pain in Lira Regional Referral Hospital unattended to. Even the vehicle that knocked him was not found.

To mention but a few, Mr Speaker, last week, we buried one Joyce Alyang who was knocked dead by a boda-boda cyclist. Two weeks ago, two children from the same family were going to Aberdyangoto Primary School, one of primary one and another of primary three going for prayers, and both of them were knocked dead by a speeding trailer from Kenya.

Currently, the middle of the road is impassable right from Kamudini up to Lira. Patching has been going on, but  -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, help the House, are they dying because vehicles are over speeding or they are dying because the surface of the road is bad?

MR OCHEN: Mr Speaker, the road is extremely bad. Even the middle of the road is impassable for the motorists. Instead, they use the pedestrian side, where they knock the people.

I would like to inform Government that this road is extremely bad and in a sorry state. Daily, we are getting these kinds of accidents. I would like to hear from the Government when we are going to be rescued from this kind of situation. That is my prayer.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, you are here. Congratulations. You were a very frequent attendant when you were minister of state and now that you are a full minister, I am sure the attendance will be even better. (Laughter) 

2.30
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are aware of the conditions of Lira Kamudini Road. This is a road, which is under the project of the Northern Corridor rehabilitation. A contractor was given that job. 

However, the contractor was terminated because of abuse of social safeguards and his contract was terminated. We have now contracted another contractor to do the maintenance and as we revisit the whole contract for repair of the whole Northern Corridor Road, all the way from Tororo up to Gulu.

Therefore, the project is on but there was abuse by the contractor and we could not let go. That is why the contractor was terminated. I feel for the families, which have lost their loved ones but we are doing everything possible to have another contractor on site to do the maintenance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the public gallery, this afternoon, we have a delegation of 52 students and 12 members of staff from Ibuje Child Development Centre Apac District. They are represented in this House by hon. Maxwell Akora and hon. Betty Engola. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome.  (Applause)

In the VIP gallery, this afternoon, we have Dr Moghe, the proprietor of Atiak Sugar Limited. One of the motions that we are going to deal with is in relation to giving thanks to her. You are welcome, madam. (Applause)

2.32
Ms lilly adong (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

During the short break we had, I interacted with a number of people including those who are HIV/AIDS positive. I also got concerns from many pastors and some health practitioners at lower levels. The concern they told me to raise here is that the type of Anti-Retroviral drugs (ARVs) that has been changed – they had the old one but it was changed.

The new drug has adverse effects. After taking it, they black out. There are some who came to me but I also visited a number of others. They suffer after taking these drugs. When they black out, it takes them almost two to three days.

Each time they go back to hospital, they are encouraged to continue taking the drug. They tell them that they will get used to it. As a result, most of them have stopped taking these new drugs. They prefer to take the old type and when these get finished, they die.

My request to the Ministry of Health is that they should try to study these drugs. If they have been changed, they should advise accordingly. If the new one is not working, what else can the country do? This could partly be responsible for all the deaths we are seeing in the community. Some people give up and wait for their time to die while others persist and continue going back to hospitals. 

Since even church leaders are raising this concern, can we receive an answer? We have many people who are desperate in this situation. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Minister of Health, congratulations. You have a response to make. 

2.34
The Minister of state for Health (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to request for time to go and consult. I will come back tomorrow to give a statement.

The Deputy Speaker: Did you say tomorrow?

Ms nabbanja: Yes.

The Deputy Speaker: Okay. Tomorrow afternoon, we will expect a response to that issue of ARVs that are beginning to adversely affect the people who use them. 

Mr sSenyonga: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising concerns fees structure for the renowned day Government secondary schools. I raised this same matter on the Floor of this House. The Minister of State for Higher Education promised that the Commission was handling the issue and that it would report soon.

At the moment, schools have only 14 days for senior ones to start. I have managed to go around several schools. You cannot even call them Government aided schools where the taxpayers’ money goes. Teachers are paid salary from the Central Government and all textbooks, computers and even buildings are supplied from the Government. 

However, they are charging exorbitant fees to the extent that a senior one day scholar pays fees of between Shs 580,000 and Shs 780,000. These are not boarding schools. We are talking of renowned day schools for the common person.

Are we proceeding rightly for the minister to keep promising that the Commission is handling something for the good of our people when there is nothing going on?

I can see the Minister of State for Primary Education but the answer came from the Minister of State for Higher Education. Can you order them to come and give us a statement that Ugandans are eagerly waiting to hear?  Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable minister, are you proceeding well? (Laughter)

2.37
The minister of state for education and sports (primary EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Mr Speaker, I appreciate the concern that has been raised by the Member, not only today but previously.
Mr Speaker, I beg that you allow us to come with a response in regard to this issue tomorrow.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable minister, the challenge is that this matter has been here since last year. You made undertakings that these things were going to be standardised, that there would be reviews and so on. Children have gone back to school but things have not yet changed.

I would have expected that since it is an old matter, you would have just answered it straight away. However, since you are not able to, did you say that you will come tomorrow?

Ms seninde: Mr Speaker, I am going to communicate so that we come with a response to this issue tomorrow.

The Deputy Speaker: Tomorrow will be tomorrow.

Ms seninde: Tomorrow will be tomorrow.

The Deputy Speaker: That is the day after today. (Laughter)

Ms seninde: Mr Speaker, tomorrow is Wednesday.

The Deputy Speaker: Sometimes, your tomorrows are so extended but we expect this tomorrow afternoon. We will receive the statement from the Minister of State for Education and Sports on this matter of school fees.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO DR AMINA HERSI MOGHE UPON BEING AWARDED THE EUROPEAN CEO AWARD, ENTREPRENEUR OF THE YEAR AFRICA, 2019

2.39
Ms Cecilia ogwal (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, the motion is for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to Dr Amina Hersi Moghe upon being awarded the European Ceo Award, Entrepreneur of the Year Africa, 2019.

This motion is moved under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS the European CEO Awards celebrates leading players across the financial and technical sectors and recognises CEOs whose innovations firmly position their companies;

AND WHEREAS Dr Amina Hersi Moghe is an entrepreneur who has launched several multi-million dollar projects in Uganda including Oasis Shopping Mall in Kampala's Central Business District, the Laburnam Courts Apartments, Rabo Enterprises Limited, Kingstone Enterprises Limited, and Kingstone Namanve LCD;

AWARE that Dr Amina, through Horyal Investment Holding Company Limited, established the first sugar factory in Northern Uganda known as Atiak Sugar Factory in Amuru District; the factory is expected to bring revenue and development for the region and is as well championed as the first large scale industrial project for Northern Uganda;

NOTING that in recognition of Dr Amina's outstanding achievements, Dr Amina Hersi Moghe was awarded the European CEO Awards 2019, Entrepreneur of the Year Africa;

COGNISANT that the above award is important to Uganda as a nation as it shows that Uganda has developed its business sector and continues to grow as illustrated by the businesses established by Dr Amina in Central and Northern Uganda and therefore, deserves the recognition of this Parliament;

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by this august House that:

Parliament collectively congratulates Dr Amina Hersi Moghe for having received the prestigious award of European CEO Award 2019, Entrepreneur of the Year, Africa.
 Parliament takes cognisance of the contribution and business strides made by Dr Amina Hersi in the development of Uganda. 
Uganda replicates Dr Amina Hersi Moghe’s investment model that involves the indigenous population in contributing to the development of their community.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) The motion is seconded by Members from Kilak, Nwoya District, Chua, Butaleja, Tororo, Budaka, Bugabula, Kalungu East and the Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Would you like to briefly speak to your motion, honourable member?

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the House for the overwhelming support for this motion. My attention was drawn to this prestigious award - the European CEO Award 2019 Entrepreneur of the Year, Africa - going to a Ugandan entrepreneur. This gave me an impression that Uganda, more or less, is a giant in the continent of Africa and cannot be ignored. 

Secondly, there are several African countries that have kept women investors away from the centre of driving industrial development. However, we, in Uganda, have consciously embraced the women in moving the affairs and taking leadership positions in the commercial sector or in the management sector. Dr Amina has been able to demonstrate that when you put a woman in the boardroom, you will never fail.

Dr Amina has registered a giant footmark in northern Uganda. You are aware that northern Uganda has suffered devastation in three phases: 

Post-Idi Amin rule, where very many people in that area were dislocated; 
Due to the Lord’s Resistance Army and; 
The devastation brought about by natural disasters. 

Therefore, northern Uganda has suffered and all of us have failed to see how we can come up with affirmative action to ensure that it catches up with the rest of the country. 

An industrial enterprise that comes to make a difference in the region cannot be ignored. That is why I would want this House to take serious note of that. 

Most of you know that I am very much anchored and my life is driven by what the Lord has dictated. In the Bible, they say the skeptics who did not believe in the power of God in Jesus Christ ridiculed him and said, “Can a prophet really come from Bethlehem?” I am sure there are skeptics in Uganda who can ask themselves, “Can a good investor really come from northern Uganda?” 

Today, I have come to prove that, yes, the best investor and entrepreneur in Africa has been spotted to come, not only from Uganda, but from the northern part of Uganda. 

Finally, the most exciting thing about Dr Amina is that the moment she entered into the sugarcane growing industry, she has been able to approach her production on two fronts: She has focused on raising the standard of women through cooperative societies. I was impressed that when the committee visited that industry, they found that the main drivers in the activities are women being mobilised as cooperative societies. 

To me, that is central. The people that really work on the land and are driving our peasantry sector are actually women. Hence, I believe Dr Amina needs to be appreciated. She has pressed the right nerve as far as peasantry agricultural development is concerned. 

I beg to request that my colleagues support this motion and encourage other investors, who may fear to come and develop the north, to come and develop it in the spirit of partnership. They should also involve the indigenous people in what they are doing.

We, in the north, are very sensitive because we know that the only valuable asset we have is land. When you want to come to help us develop, do not come with the intention of first grabbing the land and then, you develop it. No, come and develop the land with us in collaboration so that whatever you put in place belongs to all of us. I beg to move, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The motion has a seconder. Can I ask the seconder to speak?

2.49
MS PAMELA KAMUGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal for moving a motion to pay tribute to Dr Amina Hersi Moghe. 

I rise to support the motion. On behalf of the people of Budaka and Uganda Parliamentary Women’s Association (UWOPA), I would like to congratulate Dr Amina Moghe Hersi, who is a unique investor. Her aim is to empower women in the northern region to become the main suppliers of cane to the factory. 

This programme, which is being established in conjunction with the Government of Uganda, is meant to kick-start wealth creation with disposable income by having locals as the initial sole out-growers, while the investor does the milling.

Atiak Sugar Industry will be the first big industry to be built in northern Uganda, unlike other factories which are located in Kampala City. Dr Amina is, therefore, focussed on enhancing rural development in line with Government’s vision of developing commercial agriculture and industrialising the country. The women from Acholi and West Nile will join Farmer’s Cooperative Union, which will represent out-growers.

Mr Speaker, allow me to applaud a woman who has a vision of improving the livelihood of war returnees and vulnerable women. She has mobilised ex-convicts, households of persons living with Nodding Disease Syndrome and all the chiefdoms of Acholi. 

I support the motion moved by hon. Ogwal to pay tribute to Dr Amina Hersi Moghe in recognition of her award as one of the best leading female investors in East Africa who saw an opportunity to revive agriculture by establishing a sugar factory in Atiak sub-county, Amuru District in Northern Uganda. 

On behalf of the people of Budaka and UWOPA I congratulate you, Dr Amina.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. It is a unique motion, it has two seconders. Let us have the Member for Kilak, then I will propose a question and we have a short debate.

2.52
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Mr Speaker, I rise to support the motion. I met Dr Amina in a hostile environment. When I was elected, she was told, “you are gone. This man is very tough and he is not going to spare your investments.” At the same time, when I was elected, I was told, you have a very bad investor in your constituency. Therefore, I met her in a bad environment because we were afraid of each other. We met to understand each other. 

Dr Amina is a person from Somalia. I was in Somalia in 2013 and in the culture of Somalis, women are kept indoors and they are not allowed to study. I was wondering how a lady from Somalia could be an investor. I had to ask her many questions to understand her. I came to know that she was a resilient lady. 

I would like to thank Uganda Investment Authority. Much as we are talking about this award, there are many other awards that Dr Amina has won. 

In 2008, Uganda Investment Authority awarded Dr Amina with Woman Investor of the year. Then in January 2012, she was awarded Best Woman Entrepreneur by Uganda Woman Entrepreneurs Association Limited. Then in 2013, she was awarded the Moran of Order of the Burning Spear, the third class by His Excellency, Mwai Kibaki, President of the Republic of Kenya. 

In June 2014, she was awarded the New Economy African Business woman of the year for the stock exchange business that she was doing. In 2014, she was awarded an honorary Doctorate of Philosophy Degree by United Graduate College and Seminary International University of United States of America. 

In October 2015, she was awarded the CEO Africa Most Influential Woman Award, business and construction. This is a CEO Magazine award. 

Now, we are celebrating this one and talking about it. 

Dr Amina, as hon. Ogwal has said, is working with the farmers in my constituency. As I talk, the farmers who are employed in the farm are about 2000. 

She has other businesses in Uganda that employ about 600 Ugandans. Therefore, you wonder how a Somali would come to invest in Uganda and employ many Ugandans. 

I also took my time yesterday to look for other news about Dr Amina and I realised that she was also featured on BBC as one of the most entrepreneurial women in Uganda. This made me come here and support this motion. 

In Northern Uganda, people have been saying that we do not want investors but the problem that we have in Uganda is that investors would come through the Government and they would want Government to grab land from the people and give it to them. 

The approach taken by Dr Amina has been different. She has actually negotiated with the land owners and the land was given to her for the farms. Apart from that, the out-growers in my constituency are benefitting. This is through the coordination between the National Agriculture Advisory Service (NAADS) and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. They are doing good work for our people in Northern Uganda, especially those who were formally abducted. I am also one of them but I am not a woman; the women are the ones benefitting. 

I have a reason to appreciate what she has done in northern Uganda and in my constituency and Uganda as whole. 

When I was looking for information to second this motion, I realised that there are a lot of challenges that this lady has gone through. 

First of all, the social media information placed her to be somebody working for the big people in Government. Somebody even told me in one of the committee meetings, “you people are supporting the projects of President Museveni; this lady is very close to President Museveni.”  My point was, if my people are going to benefit from this project, I do not mind whether she is close to the President or not. 

By the way, for an investor to operate in a country, you have to be close to Government. Otherwise, your business would not survive. I said, I do not mind about it; I would go ahead to work and make sure that my people can benefit. 

I also realised a lot of business wars among the investors especially in sugar factories because I know that this factory we are talking about should have started operations in May 2019. But even the equipment and other things that were paid for were not supplied up to now, until she changed the people who were supplying the equipment and as we talk, we are about to celebrate the first crystal of sugar in northern Uganda and I think in May, we shall celebrate it. 

I do not support the NRM Government but when it comes to my people, then I support the projects. (Applause) I am seeing the happiness on the other side (Laughter) I made it very clear that when it comes to my people, I support but I have not said I am in NRM and I am sorry I am not going to join you. 

Mr Speaker, I second this motion and I implore my colleagues to stand by hon. Ogwal and her prayers. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion that I propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to Dr Moghe upon being awarded the European CEO Award for Entrepreneur of the Year Africa, 2019. That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now. We will limit the debate. We have two Bills to finish today. Let us keep our remarks brief, to the specific subject and no preambles. 

2.59
MS ROSETTE KAJUNGU (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank hon. Ogwal for bringing this motion to congratulate our fellow woman, Dr Amina for the wonderful work she has done and for bringing a smile to the people of Northern Uganda. 

I am happy because this is one of the few instances when we hear about something positive here in Parliament. Most of the time we are hearing about problems but Dr Amina, you have made us proud as women and as Ugandans. 

I would like to urge Government, much as this model has been implemented in northern Uganda, there is no part of rural Uganda that is developed. I would, therefore, like to urge Government to take time, especially Uganda Investment Authority and Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to look at the uniqueness of Dr Amina’s model so that other parts of Uganda can learn from her initiative and her entrepreneurship. Thank you very much and I support this motion. 

3.01
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion brought by hon. Ogwal. Dr Amina has achieved but not acquired this. She has demonstrated that she is determined, hardworking, patient and a pusher. If you go through how she started up in Kenya as a young woman and progressed well in Kenya and later, came to Uganda and did all this work, surely she is a tough woman.

I have worked with her for some time. I know who Dr Amina is. She has demonstrated that she is an East African. She is a Kenyan woman but working very steadily in Uganda. She is not bothered about borders. I thank Dr Amina and I like her determination. You remember that at one time, they even burnt this sugar project in the north but she stayed and the project is taking off and people are now praising it.

Therefore, I thank Dr Amina and I urge her to keep pushing for more projects for this country. Thank you.

3.03
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba County West, Gomba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion that has been raised by hon. Ogwal. It is very timely. Many times, we have achievers who we do not recognised and they sit there quietly. I would like to congratulate Amina. She is a personal friend and maybe that is why I am referring to her as Amina. I also know Muhammad Hassan and he is sitting up there. Hearty congratulations.

There was a time when she was almost killed around Spear Motors but somehow God saved her life. Someone tried to assassinate her. She is a very God-fearing person. I know that she has Laburnam Courts Apartments. She also has Oasis Mall. You have brought a smile on the faces of the people of northern Uganda, especially the women. We should not grieve when the women get benefit because it passes on to the rest of the family – the man and the children. 

Thank you for giving hope to the women and the people of northern Uganda as a whole. I support the motion. Thank you.

3.04
MR OKIN P.P. OJARA (Independent, Chua County West, Kitgum): Mr Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the mover of the motion, hon. Ogwal. The motion is very timely and most welcomed to this Parliament. 

As a Member of Parliament from northern Uganda and Acholi Parliamentary Group, I support the motion in the sense that the business model employed by Dr Amina in northern Uganda involves the local communities who are outgrowers and, therefore, there is a lot of backward and forward linkages in that industry. This is the model that we believe the Government of Uganda should adopt and I am glad the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is here. 

We have a number of issues concerning land, which have been surfacing in this country, especially in northern Uganda. However, we have also had a business model that will take care of the land conflict and that is none other than the sugar factory in Atiak. Therefore, I take this opportunity to thank her for employing a number of the Acholi and people of northern Uganda in that industry. 

I wish her well and I congratulate her. Thank you.

3.06
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in supporting the motion and also congratulating Dr Amina. This motion is not in vain, particularly when you look at the element of investment that in turn brings employment. 

When hon. Akol was submitting, he said around 2,000 are being employed. We cannot take this for granted. Many times, we complain about unemployment and we all know that Government positions where people can get employed are fixed and there is no way Government can employ more people. The solution lies in a vibrant private sector. When we have investors who come and reduce this unemployment pressure, we cannot take it for granted. 

Mr Speaker, when you look at investment that leads to employment, it in turn means that the poverty index can also be reduced. When more people are employed in an area, it reduces the poverty index in that area. 

I also congratulate her for leading the way to start investments in northern Uganda. When Government gives accounts of industries that have been established in Uganda, they are many but when you go to the spread of these industries in terms of regions, northern Uganda has the least number of industries. 

Therefore, when investors go and establish industries there, we do not take it for granted. I also take this occasion to ask Government to extend the national grid to all regions to attract investors. People cannot go to some of these areas because there is no power there. Therefore, I urge Government that when power is being connected, all the regions should be taken into consideration. Thank you.

3.09
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion. Last Saturday, I was the best man at a wedding in Wadilai. Wadilai is a sub-county across the Nile, bordering Amuru District. I interacted with a number of people whom I discovered are from my constituency but are working across in Amuru. Many of them are engaged in the activity of sugar growing, related to this factory. You could see how people were very happy. They are making money from the industry. I thought this was really good. 

In my sub-county, there is a whole parish that has been very good for sugarcane growing and people have been growing sugarcane but just selling ordinarily. I would imagine that with that connection to the factory, even the sugarcane grown within Wadilai will eventually get market in this sugar factory. 

For that, I would like to congratulate Dr Amina. You are not only supporting the people within Acholi sub-region but also coming across to West Nile. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.11
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. Dr Amina is known to me as a person who worked in Kampala City when I was the mayor of this city. She is the woman you can always refer to, she is very bold, courageous and does not fear to take risks. Therefore, I call upon all women to emulate Dr Amina; a strong business woman.

We support and encourage the successes that she has achieved. We are proud of her and we shall always give her as our reference. Thank you, so much.

3.12
MS IDAH NANTABA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join the rest of the colleagues to congratulate Dr Amina upon having achieved that big award. I am aware that in this country, we have very many investors who are engaging in sugarcane growing as an industry and processing.

To my surprise, Dr Amina is new in this field because in the past, we have heard of the Madhvanis. I do not think they have achieved the same award because we have not paid tribute to them.

In that line, I would like to bring it to the attention of the House that Kayunga and many other areas in Uganda are starting to see investors getting involved in growing of sugarcane.

However, we have recorded cases that are not human. Cases of rape of women because many of these casual labourers do not come with their women when they are moved from one area to another and in that case, we have recorded cases of defilement, rape and many other cases of sexual abuse. 

Mr Speaker, I pray and wish that Dr Amina champions the fight against such in areas where sugarcane growing is going on because we will not continue to record such cases and then, appreciate such investments in our areas. We can only do it if we see a reduction.

Kayunga has three forests and one of them has already disappeared due to sugarcane growing; investors are coming to Kayunga and are grabbing all the land that is available to growing sugarcane.

Wamale forest has disappeared and all you see is a sugarcane plantation. They were trying to grab the second one but I am standing my ground to make sure I protect the two that are left. I pray that Dr Amina also champions the fight against grabbing land that belongs to our forest reserves. 

The social corporate responsibility - I am told that in Northern Uganda, she is already achieving in that area. How I pray that she also engages other investors in the same area to give back to the communities that are hosting sugarcane plantations.
Look also at the issue of emoluments. The payments are not good for our casual labourers. In Kayunga, we have many of them reporting cases of under payment - Shs 3,500 is too little for our people to sustain their families.

That is what I wanted to bring to the attention of the House as I congratulate Dr Amina and ask her to champion cases of environmental degradation and rape defilement in those sugarcane plantations.

Our young people are not going to school, very young boys of eight, 10, 12 years are being employed in those sugarcane plantations and it deprives them of their right to education. I pray that she champions those causes for the betterment of our country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, very much. I will have the Deputy Premier speaking last but we should draw this to a close. I will have the following members speaking before I gauge.

We have two Bills on our Order Paper that we need to handle and please, be brief. I am going to allow the Member for Nwoya District, Kanungu District and Tororo County.

3.17
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join this House in thanking Dr Amina and hon. Ogwal for bringing this motion. I would like to appreciate the model that Dr Amina decided to use and for breaking the silence that Northern Uganda was  a no go zone.

She invested her money in northern Uganda where almost every investor feared. She is spearheading investment. The model of her investment is people-centred; she has only a few acres of land but has incorporated all the villagers around.

She has also made it possible for investors to learn from her that you do not have to grab land to invest money. She went there despite all the demonisation that people have towards people in Acholi-land. She has settled comfortably.

A few hiccups are there with a few members of the community but people are comfortably surrendering their land for sugarcane production and the same should be applied in Lakang.

We are saying that if Government had adopted the same procedure and an investor with a clean heart to invest in the community had come, we would not have people being chased from Lakang as it is being done. 

I thank her for putting women at the forefront. We have about two groups from Nwoya District. Women always go there and they are being trained in business and soon, they are going to open their own farms.

Dr Amina, may God bless you, may you continue bringing similar investors to come and put their money in Uganda and respect the indigenous people the way they are. Thank you.

3.19
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to congratulate Dr Amina upon achieving this award. I thank her for working hard, being a great example of an African woman that is looking forward to being a great economically liberated person. 

I would like to request Government to also help us because in our constituencies, sometimes you find that there are women who would like to do these things - even young boys and men but they do not have capacity. They reach somewhere and fail on the way.

On that note, the incentives given to foreign investors -  sometimes, we need to look at our own local investors and apply it to them. In many cases, we have seen foreign investors being given incentives. They are given free land in Namanve and other things.

However, when somebody from here wants to put up a factory, they may not look at you seriously. I would like to request Government to look into that area and encourage our people so that they are also economically empowered.

I am very happy that Dr Amina has done this in the north and I believe that the people of the northern who were worried - because I remember last time, some of them were very worried to the extent that they could not allow this. I hope they are now happy that there is something going on in the north.

I would like to thank Dr Amina very much and add that while you are in the North, think about other areas. God being your guide, there are also other areas where you can put other investments and developments. If you are able to, of course, I can mention Kanungu. This is so that others can also enjoy your hard work, your forecasting and readiness to bring good fruits on this earth. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.22
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to congratulate Dr Amina for becoming a brand name in northern Uganda. For us in Tororo, Dr Amina has been a brand name as well as to this country, in many aspects.

When Uganda was in need of many household items that we lacked many years ago, the Amina family set up a very strong business across the border in Malaba. All the requirements that this country lacked were supplied to Uganda through what some people would love to call smuggling. However, that was the entrepreneurship that that family started on that side.

It is no wonder that Dr Amina had to cross to Uganda to make sure that we benefit from her enterprising family in order to fulfil the needs of this country. Thank you very much, Dr Amina, for the opportunity you have given to the people of northern Uganda. 

I would like to ask you to use your good relationship to invite many others of your colleagues to northern Uganda so that we can have many factories set up in that place and the whole country grows together.

Congratulations, Dr Amina. We love you. Please, continue doing the same for the good of this country. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I see some of the children leaving. In the gallery this afternoon, we have children of Kamuda Child Development Centre in Soroti County, Soroti District. They are represented by hon. Kenneth Esiangu and hon. Angelline Osegge. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are welcome. 

Dr Amina, you are really favoured by this Parliament. I can see that I am having difficulty winding up this debate but I have to. (Laughter) I do not have a choice; I have to. I see all the ministers would like to speak. I see the ministers of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Leader of Government Business - They would all like to speak. I also see that the ministers of Health and of Local Government would like to speak. However, we have to draw this to a close, honourable members. I am going to do the difficult job of winding up this debate.

To wind up this debate, I will congratulate the Minister of Works and Transport for what he has been able to do to support Atiak Sugar Factory and especially to support the out-growers. (Applause) It is the Ministry of Works and Transport that did the bush clearing, with support from NAADs, which is under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. They coordinated this operation very well. 

This is not to say that this is the only reason that Dr Amina got the award. However, it must have contributed tremendously to the world recognising that a person who goes in the middle of nowhere and in the middle of a group of people who had lost all hope and generates hope from scratch and gives them the opportunity to earn their own living must have influenced the decision of the award committee that Atiak Sugar can stir in the consideration for this award.

Honourable members, we need to try and draw this to a close. I do not know whether I can now ask the Leader of Government Business to summarise for the ministers. I know the honourable member for Kasilo is very close to Atiak Sugar. (Laughter) It is a fact and I know it. Can I give him just one minute? One minute, please, hon. Okupa. I know your connection.

3.26
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I came to know Dr Amina when I was working with Uganda Revenue Authority. To me, it is a testimony that people can reform because we arrested her because she was trying to get goods across the border through smuggling, like what my honourable colleague was saying. However, from that time, we discussed and said, “no, people can reform.” We asked her to come to Uganda and she was able to. You can now see.

I also would like to make a correction. Dr Amina was not the owner of Nakumatt. Nakumatt was a tenant on her property and I felt I should correct that.

When we brought a loan here to support Atiak, there were a number of reservations. However, I would like to thank this Parliament for listening to the voices of the few people who supported it. Dr Amina has not disappointed like Kananathan did. That is why we need to congratulate her and continue supporting her for the betterment of this country.

Mr Speaker, we need to protect her investments. Twice, they have set fire to the sugarcane plantation. I think this is where Government should come in. Gen. Katumba and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Industry, together with defence, I think we need to help because it affects our economy, affects employment and demoralises the people who want to help us.

I had a lot to say but allow me – because of time – to stop here and say congratulations once again to Dr Amina. The other thing I needed to correct, as I conclude, is that most people think Dr Amina is a Kenyan. Her family came from Somaliland and settled in Bungoma. She is now in Uganda. She is a true East African. I thought I should also make that correction. Thank you, Mr Speaker and congratulations again.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We will allow a minister from the Government side. Which minister has to say something? Finance, do you have something to say or are you going to release all the money that we need to do the bridges? Please, Be brief.

3.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I also rise to congratulate Dr Amina, upon this important achievement. I would like to thank her for being a hardworking person and a persistent entrepreneur who has contributed greatly to this country.

I would also like to take this opportunity to say that when she got very many difficulties in this country, President Yoweri Museveni stood by her side. (Applause) We would like to thank the President for the guidance and for standing with investors.

I think this motion also answers a number of things in this House. When we were struggling to support her in different committees in this House, I prayed that one time, this House would realise that the decision we were taking to support her was right. To come here and congratulate Dr Amina, to me, is an answered prayer.

Our Gross Domestic Product now stands at Shs 128.5 trillion. Out of this, Government’s budget is only Shs 39 trillion, meaning that the Shs 80 trillion is in the hands of the private sector. This motion again reminds this House that we must support the private sector in the laws that we make, especially the speed of making decisions about investments in this country.

I congratulate you, Dr Amina. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I will come to the Prime Minister. We start with the Minister of Works of Transport.

3.30
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will also join those who have spoken before me to first of all congratulate Dr Amina for having been able to pull this off. Of course, it has not been easy but she has been a very resilient lady. I do not know how many times she has walked to our offices but she has never been discouraged. That is a good attribute to her.
In the same vein, I would like to thank her son, who has been the driver behind this project. He is a young man but when he makes a presentation, he leaves you agape of what he has been able to do. That is also good training by the mother who has really put him in the middle of the project.

As a ministry, we have been very supportive and we will continue to be supportive. We still have one challenge and that is to be able to connect the transplantation from both sides of River Aswa, because part of the plantation is on Palabek side and the other part is on Atiak side. 

We need to connect the plantation with the bridge and that bridge is about Shs 42 billion. Hopefully, one of these days when we come to make that presentation,  - Otherwise, it would be very difficult for her to move the canes in a distance of about 68 to 90 kilometres from Palabek to Atiak.

Therefore, we call for that support so that this factory can be able to live to its expectations. For those who have not been to Atiak, I request that you visit and see what it is. Those who were there have seen the transformation. Atiak was known for bad things but now, its name is about the sugar factory and the employment of the people. 

When you see the resilience and commitment of the people of Atiak in supporting this project, Government needs to give them more support and make this project a success. I would like to congratulate Dr Amina on her achievement and I know there is a lot more to come. Thank you for your great effort. 

3.33
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Mr Speaker, since the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business is going to say something, allow me to just use one minute to congratulate our mother, sister and friend, for being the best achiever and the entrepreneur of the year 2019. Most of all, she is a woman and a mother. This is very important to many Ugandan women because she has set herself as a role model in that matter. 

I would like to thank the leaders from the northern region who supported Dr Amina during that time. It was not easy because I was there all through and I have seen that the leadership in the northern region need to be commended because some people thought they would not support the development. I thank them very much and I thank hon. Ogwal for bringing this motion. 

The other thing is that there are others who have not been mentioned here. We sat in many meetings in the board room. There is somebody called Dr Amina. For me, I would say she is a real negotiator and a very intelligent lady. She could easily make herself understood and stand for her position. Dr Amina, I think those who awarded you knew all these qualities about you. I would like to thank you because I have seen it all.

This Parliament should come out and make people understand how to work with the private sector. We need to educate the masses, especially the technical teams in Government. People do not want to use the private sector. People still think that Government departments can implement things. Let us allow the private sector – for us we avail a conducive environment for the private sector to operate. 

Mr Speaker, Dr Amina was introduced to us by the President of the Republic of Uganda and he instructed us to make sure we supported her. In the first meeting when I saw her, we had the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We really would like to thank them for supporting Dr Amina.

The last thing that people should know - some people have mentioned it – but the out-growers system was a design from Dr Amina, although we supported it financially. It was her bright idea. We are now talking about thousands of people especially returnees and wives of ex-combatants who have been mobilised to join the out-growers system. 

I would like to thank Dr Amina for all this and I really congratulate her for this achievement. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I think a distinction has to be made because we do not want, as Parliament, to go with the impression that the Government’s support went to Dr Amina’s company. It did not go to her company. The support from the Government is to support out-growers who are citizens of this country. Dr Amina’s interest is a sustainable supply of canes to her factory. Therefore, the bridges and the opening of the land that was done by Government were done for the people of Uganda and not for her. 

Her company is fighting with debts with banks and other people and I am sure she is surviving that. Also, I would like to let you know that Government bought some interest in the company so that it partially owns it. Those clarifications have to be made because otherwise, we would go with the impression that Government is pouring money into a private company. That is not true. 

All the support that came from the Government through NAADS and executed by the Ministry of Works and Transport was to out-growers. For example, the clearing of land, putting bridges and trenches and a fire prevention system to enable the out-growers to begin benefitting from the supplies of Government.

3.38
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Speaker, I stand here to support the motion by hon. Ogwal but also to thank Dr Amina for the great investment that she has made in our economy. She is indeed a gem in our economy. She started with one woman and supported her until she formed a 3000-women cooperative in northern region, which I launched. We were part of the training and I went there physically. 

What I would like to bring out is that Government has 34 per cent shares in Dr Amina’s project. Definitely, this project is going to benefit the entire northern Uganda through infrastructural development, training, employment, markets and many other ways of socio-economic transformation. 

Therefore, I applaud Dr Amina because she is great. I also applaud the leaders from northern Uganda who supported the project. I thank you all for bringing about transformation in our economy. 

Thank you for this opportunity, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for this opportunity. I also would like to thank my elder sister, hon. Ogwal, for bringing this motion. 

Often time, we pay tributes to people when they are not with us physically. Therefore, I am quite grateful that Dr Amina is here to listen for herself when members of Parliament are paying tribute to her for her contributions towards the development of this country.

It was not an easy start and I always felt sorry for her but I am glad that at the end of that very difficult start, we are able to smile with her. Congratulations Dr Amina for this achievement.

However, I would like to state that this investment would not have been possible is it was not for that very conducive environment that the Government put in place. That has attracted not only Dr Amina but also other investors to the different parts of the country.

We are yet to also have other investors that should come in to invest in the Minerals sector because this is an area that is still not yet well tapped. Yet, it could bring in a lot of revenue for this country. Congratulations to Dr Amina and every Ugandan because this is an achievement for all us. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (NORTHERN UGANDA) (Ms Grace Kwiyuchwiny): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It would not have been nice if I did not say anything-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now it is going to be nice.

MS KWIYUCHWINY: Now it is nice, thank you very much. To congratulate Dr Amina for what she has done in northern Uganda. I want to agree with what my colleagues here have expressed appreciating her intervention in Northern Uganda.

I have not only seen Dr Amina on her farm, I have also seen Dr Amina in community functions like fundraising. That means she has really become part of northern Uganda. When you go to her, she will not hesitate but contribute for anything that is in northern Uganda.

However, I would also want to say that her intervention and the type of commercial agriculture she has engaged in have opened a new chapter in northern Uganda, which has been predominately subsistence.  And we all know now that we cannot get out of poverty with subsistence farming.

Over 80 per cent of people in northern Uganda still do subsistence farming and so, this is a new chapter, which we have to appreciate and embrace and all other interventions should become part of this nature. This is because districts like Nwoya and Amuru are following closely in having one of the highest per capita incomes in northern Uganda. This is because of commercial agriculture. I would like to thank her for this intervention.

However, I would also like to conclude by thanking the community members. You cannot come with such a large project and if the community does not support, you think you are going to succeed. I thank the people of northern Uganda for embracing this intervention and I would like to appeal to other areas of northern Uganda to also embrace this because we have very vast and fertile land. 

We only need to put it to good use and use the labour, which we already have. The local content that we already have that can help to transform northern Uganda to be a better place. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jenifer Namuyangu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank hon. Ogwal for the motion. I would like to congratulate our Dr Amina for the stamina and determination to support us and our people to get out of poverty.

Dr Amina is exemplary because many times, we have had investors who want to concentrate within Kampala and do not want to go upcountry. I would like Dr Amina as an example to invite the private sector, the investors to move out there to all the local Governments. As a ministry and Government, we have encouraged all local Governments to embrace local economic development to come up with land where we can put industrial parks, where we can have all kinds of investment done within these local Governments.

Mr Speaker, I thank you and I congratulate Dr Amina. (Applause) 

3.46
THE DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Ali Moses): Mr Speaker, I definitely have little to say because a lot has already been said. However, I am happy that what many people did not say – I do not know whether they remembered or not is to thank hon. Ogwal for not only bringing this motion but to be the first woman here to start a factory. 

Of course, not in northern Uganda but she opted to start here near in Ntinda. It was a very big maize mill. When we ask her to tell us what happened, that will be a different subject that we will have to come later. However, the truth is that she was the first here and I think we should congratulate her also that women can also put up factories.

I think that is where people did not remember. She did not talk about it herself.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Lira millers.

GEN. MOSES ALI: Lira millers. We can talk about that later -(Laughter)- but the fact is that she started it. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to support her motion and also thank Dr Amina for being unique. There is a lot of land elsewhere and the people of the north were used to fear because of insecurity. There had been 20 years of war in the north and so, it would become difficult.

If you talk of Atiak, it is remote and where she went and opted to put the factory is even further inside. Atiak used to be known during those bad days of 20 years of war in the north where 70 people were killed by one of the army commanders of LRA. These people were not only killed but burnt, which is not a good thing to remember. Those are the things that can scare investors but she determined and went there and we must thank her for that. 

The other thing that Dr Amina did to put that factory there is not only for sugar purposes but there are a lot of things that have happened. One is that since she put up that factory, she has brought together mostly women from all areas there.

We in Adjumani or Madi being a district, we have over 500 women out-growers together growing sugarcane in Atiak. When we men have failed to work together, at least our women have helped us and are going ahead and this is led by Dr Amina.

We as men should follow the example of Dr Amina. There are many other women coming up. There is another lady with 1000 acres of oranges in Nwoya and I invited her when I hosted the President in my farm on the 7 December 2019. I told the President that we should now rely on our women for peace. (Applause)  They are the only ones doing it and able to do it. We should support them.

For that reason, I would like to call upon our colleagues in the neighbouring districts that we should join our ladies to promote the peace they have started to bring.

Dr Amina has also shown that factories and whatever you want to do can be done in the place she has chosen. Government is to be thanked. If you do not want to do so, I am going to thank Government on your behalf. (Laughter) Without peace, nobody could have gone to Atiak. Not even Dr Amina. 

There had not been peace for 20 years in the North. Now, there is peace and Dr Amina has proved so. That is why she is able to go there. We should thank Government. Even if you do not want to thank her for other reasons, at least, for this one, you should.

With that peace, Dr Amina is showing that there must be peace dividends, which she has already put up. How many millions? It is a lot. Nobody should say that you cannot invest in the North. If she can do it, can’t you?

We thank hon. Ogwal - I wish she were a doctor – for bringing up this matter to recognise Dr Amina. People do not appreciate even if you do well. They look for faults here and there. At least, give credit where it is due. That is why I would like to thank you for recognising Dr Amina.

I thank the Speaker for clarifying that whatever you see Government doing, it is for the out-growers. I am very happy that out-growers are doing well in and around the factory. By the way, there is a big power station on Aswa River. It is by some investors from Italy and is next to the factory.

Atiak is along a river called Unyama. The factory is around here and the power station is on the other side. There are a lot of chances in the north.

With that, we need to support this motion. On behalf of Government, I would like thank Parliament for accepting and hon. Ogwal for bringing up this motion. I am going to invite all people with facilities to the north and take advantage of this peace so that we have a lot of investment.

Thank the Government to continue maintaining this peace, which is a prerequisite to any investments. I would like to thank the House and everybody for supporting this motion. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Thank you. Honourable members, we need to draw this to a close. It has been long and the reason I extended it was very deliberate. It is a discussion on the framework for investment that we need to start looking at as a country.

The nature of Government support, which if we have, where do we target it? In the case of Atiak Sugar Factory, you know that we have been helping the community to participate in the economy that is going to be created by that factory.

We all have stars in our palms. The way to stardom cannot be blocked by race, gender or social-economic background. Your road to stardom cannot be stopped. If Dr Amina told you her story of how she broke loose from all the circles that were holding her back and now, the world recognises her, her story should inspire us and our children and the country that nothing is impossible if you put your mind to it.

You have heard the story from hon. Okupa and the story of what she did to come out and be the star that she now is. 

Therefore, we do this to congratulate her. She has achieved quite major milestones that have been enumerated. The Atiak Sugar thing is just one of those things that she has been able to pioneer in and create change and provide hope to people who had none. That is why this motion has come to Parliament. 

At this time, I should put the question to the motion for the resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to Dr Amina Hersi Moghe upon being awarded the European CEO Award Entrepreneur of the Year Africa 2019.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

The Deputy Speaker:  Thank you for supporting this motion.

3.58
Ms Cecilia ogwal (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, it will be unfair for me to sit without showing the House what the prestigious Award looks like. (Applause)

The Deputy Speaker: I am now giving you the authority retrospectively.

Ms Ogwal: Mr Speaker, I know that there are some people who would have wanted me to make a mistake and leave it on Table - (Laughter) – but I am sure Dr Amina would be very happy to have this in her sitting room.

The Deputy Speaker: We have closed this.

Ms Cecilia ogwal:  Thank you House, for the total support.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON IMPLICATIONS OF THE KENYAN LAND AMENDMENT LAW OF 2016 ON UGANDA’S PROPERTIES IN KENYA

Mr okupa: Mr Speaker, when you opened, there was a serious matter that affects all of us. The Minister of Health is now in the House. You said that when she comes, she would be able to brief us on the issue of coronavirus and how prepared we are. 

The deputy speaker: We had agreed that the statement comes tomorrow to brief the whole country. We will stick to that for a statement of coronavirus in China.

4.01
The minister of state for finance, planning and economic development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, the House requested us to request the Attorney General of the Republic of Kenya to give us implications on the amendment they made to their law regarding our properties.

The Attorney-General of the Republic of Uganda has written to the Attorney-General of the Republic of Kenya, who has promised us, through our Ambassador that he will send us a response next week. Once it comes, we will be able to bring it to this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. It is deferred to next week.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE EXPORTATION OF FISH MAWS AND OTHER FISH PRODUCTS BY CHINESE AND INDIAN INVESTORS TO THE DETRIMENT OF LOCAL FISHING COMMUNITIES

4.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, last week, this matter came on the Order Paper and we requested the Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to make the statement. We have been working with him and he is now ready. He is supported by other relevant ministries, including the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives.

4.01
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a statement on the exportation of fish maws and other fish products by the Chinese and Indian investors to the detriment of local fishing communities. This was the question and I will be supported by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives when I conclude my presentation.

Uganda produces up to 447,000 metric tonnes of fish from captured fisheries and agriculture. Nile Perch contributes 86,463 metric tonnes of the total production. Tilapia contributes 49,768 metric tonnes and the small fish pelagic (Mukene, Muziri and Ragoogi) contribute 260,460 metric tonnes, while other species contribute 50,800 metric tonnes. 

Currently, the Nile Perch is the most valuable fisheries species in Uganda contributing to $ 153 million annually in the international fish exports, of which fish maw accounts for 531.6 metric tonnes valued at $ 52.9 million annually. 

Fish maw is a commercial term for swim bladders or large fish, such as Nile Perch and other fish with similar bladders, including catfish, the croaker and sturgeon. The swim bladders are a treasure and a delicacy in Asia, including China, and are ranked fourth among the sea treasures. 

In spite of the growing business for the fish maw, there has been limited information regarding its value chain, until 2019, when value chain studies were conducted for the Lake Victoria region. Therefore, the fish maw product is very important and is reported to have many uses ranging from health and medical purposes, including making surgical threads, anaesthetic drugs and other drugs used to increase libido in men. 

Fish maw soups are reported to be taken by surgically operated patients to quicken recovery and have high protein and other nutrients believed to help healing of lungs and kidneys. Therefore, the fish maw is also used in the manufacture of isinglass, a form of collagen used mainly in clarification and fining of some of the beers and wines.

Colleagues, fish maw product is also reportedly used in the manufacture of some air craft and the space shuttle body parts, car parts and melamine plates and cups. There are traditional beliefs attached to these fish maws, as a source of good luck and health in some parts of Asia, specifically China and as such, fish maw is kept in homes, mainly as decorative treasures.

The largest trading partners in fish maw are Hong Kong and Southern China where a kilogram of fish maw goes for between $ 450 and $ 1000, depending on the strength of the market and the product quality and the fish pieces from which it is extracted. The Uganda fish maw is ranked fourth. In Hong Kong, fish maw is usually sold on black market characterised by high protection. 

In Uganda, a fish maw from 70 kilograms of Nile Perch can fetch about Shs 1.5 million, which is far more costly compared to the fish itself, which goes for about Shs 0.7 million. As a result, fishermen continue to cheat the rich boat owners by cutting or plucking out the fish maw and throwing the fish carcass back into the lakes during the fishing. 

The lucrative nature of these fish maws from sea fish, which is called a sea treasure in the world market, has led to the collapse of the sea fish pieces, to the extent that the fish maw trade is sometimes referred to as aquatic cocaine or cocaine of the sea or buoyant trade. This lucrative trade has a lot of economic value but it can be short lived, if no proper regulation is in place to sustain the fishery. 

The Problem Statement

The unsustainable supply of fish maw in the world market is driving demand for the Nile Perch maw so high leading to unsustainable fishing and handling practices, including over-fishing and the capture of immature fish that may ultimately result into a decline of the nile perch in our waters. 

Therefore, the fish maw industry has led to rampant gutting; that is the cutting of fish to remove the fish maw on the water during fishing inside the lake and leaving the carcass on the waters or removing the fish maw tactfully through the gill area, leaving the fish looking intact. However, this poses quality issues.   

At the peak of the Nile Perch capture fisheries, Uganda had 21 fish processing and exporting establishments that directly employed over 3,000 people. Starting 2006, Nile Perch Fishery came under excessive fishing pressure due to the increase in value of Nile perch meat and the by-products, especially the swim bladder, all popularly here known as Ennuni, which now we call the fish maw. This led to the reduction of stock and the fish processing establishments from 21 to six functional factories with very low capacity. 

Why we should guard our Nile Perch

Mr Speaker, the Nile Perch fish maw greatly contributes to export earnings of Uganda and employs many people along the fish value chain. The fish maw trade and processing businesses offers opportunities, especially for women employment and since the women are considered to be trustworthy in handling the highly valued product. 

The growth of the Nile Perch Fish Maw businesses has also increased the profits of fish processing companies who, in addition to selling fish and fishery products, gain from increased prices of the maw. 

The fish maw industry has also benefitted a few trusted maw factory agents and their middlemen who, in the process of searching for the maw to supply to Chinese companies, have created a lucrative artisanal maw trade sector. Therefore, the growth of the maw trade has also benefited local maw collectors and extractors.

Mr Speaker, fish maws, once regarded as waste, are increasingly becoming a delicacy in Hong Kong and Southern China. Because of the growing demand of maws in Asia, prices have gone up, something which is destined to boost the country’s fish export earnings as an industry in general.

The 2018 records from my ministry indicate that the country exported more than 531.6 metric tons of fish maw and this earned the country – though not through the straight channels –US$ 52.9 million and this converted to Shs 197.5 billion. 

With the recent Government intervention of deployment of a Fisheries Protection Force, the Nile Perch stocks in Lake Victoria are recovering, the number of functional factories has risen to 12 and exports increased to 20,364.12 metric tons valued now at US$ 153.4 million, and that is by the end of 2018. 

The fish maw accounts for 531.6 metric tons and I have also mentioned the money, which is US$ 52 million.

Challenges affecting fish maw trade

Mr Speaker, fish maw trade has the potential to boost incomes, especially for vulnerable groups like women and the youth. While both men and women can undertake all forms of maw businesses, women are favoured as employees in the maw companies and are considered trustworthy and more reliable with less temptation to steal the maw although the problem there is that women have difficulties in working for longer hours.

Most of the financing of the fish maw operators is by interest free friendly Chinese cash advances from fish harvesting and the maw extraction. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, how long do you still have to go? This is the challenge I keep airing. This matter came as a matter of urgent public importance. How can a matter of urgent public importance be responded to that way?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, you gave us 30 minutes and we thought – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, rules are rules. They are made before the game, not during and not after. Our role is to play by the rules. 

We know what the rules say. If a member raises a matter of urgent public importance, that matter must be urgent and must be responded to immediately. This is a full ministerial statement that attracts a debate but under the rules you are proceeding on, we will not debate it. (Interjection) That is the problem. We cannot debate it because they brought it under urgent matters and I am a strict rule applier.  

Therefore, you are going to summarise your response and if you feel that this is a big statement that we must deal with in a comprehensive way, then you seek time to present a ministerial statement that will attract a debate. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Much obliged, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You must be obliged -(Laughter)– because now we are going on and on with a statement that will not be debated. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, when I saw that you were generous and gave me 30 minutes, I thought I would bring the whole issue but I can summarise it, Sir.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I have actually seen the statement, which the minister is reading. I am standing on a procedural matter. The content of the document is very important, particularly when it comes to export by foreign investors to the detriment of the local fishing community. That subject alone presses the central nerves of all of us here. 

I would therefore procedurally like to see the minister seek a better avenue of having this information shared with us so that we can tell you how detrimental this export trade is to our people. 

Mr Speaker, I am seeking guidance on whether we should just abandon this matter or he should come back through another route and we give our input.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when you invoke a certain rule, that rule applies. When you invoke another rule, that other rule will apply. The rule that has been invoked in this particular case is rule 42 of our Rules of Procedure, “Urgent Matters” and the minister has gone on for an hour responding to an urgent matter. How could that be?

Honourable members, this abuse is by us. We say the exceptions provided in the rules are for very urgent matters like collapsed bridges, disease outbreak, famine, natural disasters. That is what this rule was curved out to deal with; where you proceed without notice.

Now, clearly what the minister is responding to is a substantial issue that should have either come in a question for oral answer or a clear ministerial statement that attracts a debate of one hour. 

Under urgent matters, there is no debate. We are sneaking in very important items under rules that do not apply and we are happy to do it and then we go on and on.

I am very strict on these matters. You were asked an urgent question and your response must deal with the urgent aspect of it. You cannot begin outlining full policy issues. We will not allow that. 

If that is the way you are proceeding, honourable minister, I will ask you to seek leave of the House to present a full ministerial statement on this matter so that we debate it. (Applause)

If you desire that this statement be debated, please seek leave of the House to present a formal statement on another day, probably tomorrow. We will capture whatever you have read so far and you will continue from there tomorrow under a different rule and we debate it. (Applause)

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, I beg to seek leave of this House to allow me to present this formally because of its importance and the people that are involved in this business and to allow the members to contribute towards this presentation. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a request has been made by the minister. There was supposed to be an additional statement from the Ministry of Trade under urgent matters. That cannot be accommodated so I will do this. (Interjection) We shall deal with them because they have to be debated. What I am directing is that the minister should come tomorrow with a full statement, uploaded on the iPads of members, so that they can look through it and be able to engage in a proper debate. That way, we will be able to handle the issue of the fish and the exportations in a more comprehensive way. 

I urge you, honourable members, that when a matter is this involving, you cannot bring it under this rule because you would be cheating the House. This matter is very important. I do not know which member raised it. If you had come with it to me, I would have stopped you from doing it. I would have told you to either ask an oral question or we would have to find a way of making the minister make a full statement so that it is debated. 

Therefore, next time, please, do not hide under rules that do not apply to seek an opportunity to speak on matters that are more involved than the way you are trying to present them. You cheat the House and that is not proper. We will deal with this matter tomorrow.

Honourable members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from the United Kingdom – and I think there are other members accompanying them. They are attached to M/S TransAid (UK). They include:

Mr Peter Tibigambwa – CEO Safeway Rightway, TransAid (UK) 
Ms Joan Aitken – a trustee for TransAid (UK)
Mr Neil Rittie – Road Safety Project Manager, TransAid (UK).

They have come here to observe the proceedings of Parliament. Please, join me in welcoming them. I think they have come in relations to the Road Traffic and Safety Bill that we should have been handling now. (Applause)

In the VIP Gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of Members of Parliament on the Committee of Human Rights of the Parliamentarians from the Inter-Parliamentary Union. They include – the names are a bit of a challenge but let me try, of course with your prayers:

Hon. Jerkov Aleksandra – Serbia
Hon. Ali Abdulla Ali Husain Alaradi – Bahrain
Hon. Rodriquez Valencia Roberto Osvaldo – Cuba.

Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)  I have acquitted myself of all those difficulties. (Laughter)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PARLIAMENTARY RESOLUTION TO SUSPEND ALL OPERATIONS OF THE UGANDA PEOPLES’ DEFENCE FORCES (UPDF) FISHERIES PROTECTION UNIT ON MAJOR WATER BODIES IN UGANDA

4.23
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I crave your indulgence that for now I make a preliminary statement on Item 3(D, E & F) because all of them affect the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs. The other two statements are to do with the Fisheries Protection Force on the lakes.

Mr Speaker, as you know, my ministry is scheduled to give three statements on today's Order Paper, namely: Item 3 (D, E & F) with regard to the status of implementation of the parliamentary resolution to suspend all operations of the UPDF Fisheries Protection Unit on major water bodies in Uganda.

On this subject, Mr Speaker, I wish to state that Cabinet considered this resolution yesterday and has set up a committee to be chaired by hon. Dr Bright Rwamirama to study the resolution but also with instructions to investigate all the complaints raised against UPDF Fisheries Protection Unit since its inception in February 2017 to date. The same Cabinet committee is expected to report back to Cabinet first and Cabinet will, through the Office of the Leader of Government Business, report back to the House on the status of implementation of the resolution. 

The same committee referred to above, has also been tasked by Cabinet to investigate and inquire into the matter of the 16-year-old girl, Naume Ekit, who is alleged to have been raped by a UPDF soldier in Amolatar District because this matter is also related to the behaviour of the UPDF Fisheries Protection Force.  

Mr Speaker, therefore Item 3 (D & F) are being handled by the appointed committee of Cabinet.

With regard to Item No. 3 (F) on the spike of cattle raids in Karamoja and the demise of the LC III chairperson of Rupa Sub-county, the UPDF has, through the office of the Commander of Defence Forces, set up a board of inquiry to investigate the circumstance that led to the death of the chairperson and the board of inquiry is yet to submit its report to my office, which is expected in a period of two weeks. And I undertake that as soon I receive it in two weeks, I will report to this House the circumstances which led the death of the chairperson and the action Government has taken.

Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this presents us with a fairly difficult situation because these statements were expected and we are now being informed that Cabinet has looked at the resolution and has appointed its own sub-committee to do further investigations and report to Cabinet and eventually to the House. What that means is that as of now, without that investigation, there is no statement. It can only come after the investigations and that is what the minister has stated. The only glitch here, honourable minister, is that you did not give us a timeline with which we can work.

Honourable members, you also remember we adopted a procedure which we launched two or three years ago, called “evidence-based decision making”. We do not want to move away too much from that and run into speculations for decision making. We need to have our decisions which are evidence-based. Do you have any timeline honourable, minister?

MR MWESIGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am guided by the Leader of Government Business that this report should be ready in three weeks.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Those are 21 days. Let us wait to get proper information and we deal with it.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week, the members of Parliament from Karamoja sub-region drafted a motion – I was supposed to be one of those seconding that motion – relating to the insecurity situation in Karamoja as of now, where people are rearming and Karamoja has become very insecure for people to move. Alongside that, there was also the issue of the very untimely killing of the LC III chairperson of Rupa Sub-county –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I deal with that, honourable member? That motion is coming tomorrow. That motion is from hon. Samson Lokeris. We had discussions with the minister of Defence and the minister in-charge of Karamoja Affairs. There is an agreement that a full debate should be on that motion and that will happen tomorrow so nothing will be lost on this particular motion. Would you like to confirm this honourable?

MR SAMSON LOKERIS: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since you have approved that the motion will be moved tomorrow because the situation on the ground is quit unpalatable and like you said I would like to inform the House that people are now re-arming in Karamoja. Movement is no longer like those days so I conform that-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are we agreeing that we debate this motion tomorrow?

MR SAMSON LOKERIS: Yes, we are ready.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, because we do not want you to start now. The honourable Member from Dodoth East now wanted to start debate straight away. Let us have this motion on the other aspect; the motion should be circulated. I have ordered it to be put on the Order Paper tomorrow.

The prayers that are in the motion we can then a prove them and probably it will help Government to extend and widen it, and also take some immediate remedial measures to deal with the other urgent aspect of it and then we see how to move on.

MS AYAKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My procedural matter is on the issue of the UPDF operations on the water bodies. We are well aware and thankful to the Cabinet for having come up with a committee to handle the matter but right now there are issues, which are happening in the communities.

Yesterday, 60 traders from my district went to do business in Panyimur Landing Site and they collected tradable items among which were Irish potatoes, onions and fish. As they were moving at around 6.00p.m. they were intercepted by the UPDF and ordered to reverse going towards Pakwach.

They went through Lira and now the vehicle has been impounded in a landing site in Apac District. According to the information we got the UPDF had harassed people. They beat them up, confiscated their goods, they are not expected to say anything concerning that. Now the women are suffering, they picked loans from moneylending companies and right now their goods have been taken away.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The procedure?

MS AYAKA: We urgently require that as we wait for the committee to handle those urgent matters, the vehicle and goods of the traders that have been impounded should be released immediately.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. The challenge we have is with the law. The law says that if they find you with any prohibited articles, in which case it would be fish, they will not only deal with that but also they will deal with the truck and whatever is in it; they will take it away but there are other procedures that should follow thereafter.

The issue as raised is that you have this subcommittee of Cabinet going to do investigations and come back to report to Cabinet but in the meantime, as the Ministry of Defence in charge of the operations of this unit is there something you can do to deal with the specific issues that are there because it looks like it is an on-going thing?

The investigation might be this side when things are happening the other side. Is there a way that you can try to balance to see that people are helped while the investigation goes on?

MS EGUNYU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have heard about the 21 days that Cabinet gave the committee to do the investigation on the UPDF soldiers on the lake. May I know whether from Cabinet you instructed the soldiers to become rougher within these 21 days? The soldiers are becoming too rough than before, have you given them such instructions in these days that you are doing your investigations?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought it was a procedural matter directed to me. That was not procedural for my action but the minister has heard about what is going on.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the minister of defence comes to respond I appeal to hon. Adolf and Government; immediately after Christmas the UPDF team FPU (Fisheries Protection Unit) came to Kasilo. I would like to give this experience such that where they have not gone maybe it can help.

How did I handle it when I was told; I got in touch with the one heading the team Lt Col Niwagaba. I said, “You are coming to Kasilo Serere can we have a meeting before and he came home.”

The day when they were going to start the operation I moved with them to Bugondo, Kagwara, Garama, Aswi landing sites sensitising people and I appealed to them to give them one week to hand over the illegal gear.

That is why you have not heard a complaint from Kasilo; can your soldiers adopt that approach. Let us have a human face to this operation. I have done it and I know it can work such that we sensitise the people, engage the stakeholders, they listen and give them amnesty to handover. Then they can use force, on those who will refuse to handover. I thought that it would be useful for me to give this information such that we do not have our people suffer and they have kept in touch, briefing and updating me.

Even today Lt Ankunda spoke to me when they had an issue at one of the landing sites where some people who had hidden their illegal gear and small boat sneaked into the water. 

Unfortunately because of the rains they capsized and drowned. People feared to go and look for the bodies; I asked them to use the boats fit to allow the people to look for the bodies and they have been able to recover the bodies of those who drowned. So, can we have that human face as we try to help the people? That was the information I wanted to give.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know why you stood up.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.  We are faced with one fact. In the process of saving the lives of the young fish the army is killing the lives of human beings. We need to aggregate what we need first and most. Do we need the lives of the young fish more than the lives of human beings or the opposite?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, when you rise on a procedural matter you abuse the authority of the Speaker granting you that right. You strictly rose on a procedural matter now you are talking about killing fish, killing human beings; it is not part of my procedure. Please respect the Chair.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you for the guidance, Mr Speaker. When Parliament took the decision to suspend, suspension is not ultimate stoppage. It can be in the short term, meaning that it can be effected as other processes are taking place.

The minister has informed this Parliament that Cabinet is taking steps. To me, that will not stop the decision to suspend because it has actually acknowledged that there is something wrong. As that is being considered, this can still stand. Let us suspend until we actually ascertain all the facts around this.

Mr Speaker, are we proceeding well when the minister has acknowledged there is a problem but has not told this House whether the suspension itself has been effected? It does not affect the investigations of Cabinet. Let us suspend as we wait for the decision of Cabinet to be brought to this Parliament and we consider whether to ultimately stop this or maintain the status quo? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. It was a resolution that was given to the Executive to implement. In the process of doing the implementation, they first do the analysis of our resolution and then adopt the mechanism for implementation. Ordinarily, they report to us, as at our Rule 217 on action taken on our resolution.

The minister has said yesterday, they set up a Cabinet sub-committee to handle this matter. The decision of Parliament to suspend was already taken; we do not have to take it again. It is up to the Executive to implement it. They are using their mechanism to study and implement the resolution of Parliament as passed.

You have already passed the resolution to suspend. We do not have to pass it again. It has already been passed. 

MR SSEMUJJU: I think the trouble with this particular decision of Parliament is that immediately the House made this resolution, there are senior UPDF officers who are part of this unit who were in the media saying, “These politicians cannot chase us from the lake. Are they the ones that brought us here?” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are we now going back into the other profession?

MR SSEMUJJU: No, no; we are not going there. As the minister gives his interim statements, I think he needs to explain whether measures have been taken against the particular officers who are treating Parliament with contempt. If you are investigating and they shut their mouths, maybe Parliament will be patient.

However, they are swearing in the media, “How can these politicians? We are not going to leave” and one colleague has said that actually, they have become rough. 

Mr Speaker, as you had guided, the minister can help us understand - in the interim measures - whether he has also spoken to the UPDF officers. If you are going to respond to Parliament the way they did, I imagine what will happen to an ordinary fisherman they are meeting from Buvuma.

In the interim statements that you are giving, you need to deal with that also as an interim matter. Immediately a resolution is passed, you have UPDF treating Parliament with contempt.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think, honourable members, what has happened is we have received some information from what the minister has said. For example, the perspective on the new approach that has been introduced by the Member for Kasilo County on how he has been able to handle it could help the operations if that is what was adopted. 

Involve the representatives of the people in terms of sensitisation, so that you do not simply come here. You are the Government; you cannot be brutal against your own people. What you do is talk to them, like what the President said about some people who had occupied a place where they were going to put a landing port for ships in Bukasa. He said he went there himself and talked to them. He gave them a period within which they should organise themselves and leave, so that they can put that. 

Would that be a proper procedure to follow, based on what the Member for Kasilo has said? That is for your internal operations to see whether this could help in the interim period, so that you put a human face to this operation. It is beneficial but if you are doing good things badly, they become bad. That is what I will say.

Honourable minister, please wind this up.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What the honourable member for Kasilo has said is the right thing to do. I think he provides an example of good leadership in terms of harmonising the enforcement force of Government but also protecting the people from the excesses of some undisciplined soldiers.

Therefore, I applaud that intervention which the honourable member for Kasilo did and I would encourage other colleagues to do the same. Where, perhaps, in some cases it cannot work, we are also available as the leadership of the ministry to support you in your quest to make sure that this exercise is done and done properly.

What this committee is going to do is exactly what members have stated. Contempt of Parliament certainly is not acceptable and this is part of the terms of reference of the officers who talk are not above the law and certainly are not above the institution of Parliament. That is one of the issues that the committee will take interest in but even before the committee completes –(Interjection)– Can I finish my point? 

Even before the committee completes its work, we shall, as a ministry, call these officers to order so that they use the language that is appropriate. Therefore, as I said, let us give the committee time to do this work, investigate all these complaints and once the investigations are complete, Government will come back to this House and report appropriately.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When Parliament debated, there were a number of issues that came up and I wanted to point out one particular incident concerning the girl-child in Amolatar.

It was reported and acknowledged by the minister here that when the UPDF officer was apprehended and detained at the police station in Amolatar, a number of soldiers invaded the police station and forcefully removed the suspect. They even carried all the files, including the medical report that the doctor had issued. 

The procedural matter I am raising regarding this is when he mentioned that he was providing an interim statement. I thought it is proper that apart from the withdrawal of the UPDF, there were certain issues, especially a victim of sexual violence and the evidence therein that was assembled cannot be allowed to wander because after 21 days, it will be a difficult matter for courts of law to deal with. 

I thought the minister should have reported on those particular aspects, whether the UPDF soldier was handed back to police and what happened to the file, as the other broader investigation goes on.

There are also a number of other officers who were mentioned like Lt Kikanabo. There is evidence that was laid here to which the state minister admitted. What has happened to those particular officers in the interim to ensure that they do not go back to the lakes? That is the point I wanted the minister to deal with. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not really a procedural matter.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, I cannot pronounce myself now on what will happen to the officers who were involved in the exchange with the police because that is part of the work that Cabinet has assigned to the committee. My hands are tied. I cannot do the work of the committee now and here.

However, among the issues they are going to investigate is the incident of the rape of the girl in Amolatar.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the issue of the rape, if it was reported to police, would now not be entirely the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs’ issue. It would now shift to Ministry of Internal Affairs. Hon. Obiga, do you have any information about this person who was in police custody? 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Mr Speaker, that is one of the matters for investigation by the Board of Inquiry, as my colleague, the Minister of State for Defence and Veteran (Veteran Affairs), said last week. As my senior colleague has already said, it is part of the broad package, which the committee of Parliament is handling. Therefore, I do not have any further information. Thank you. 

MR GODFREY ONZIMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. The procedural matter I am raising is on two issues. The first one is the issue of harassing people on the lakes for catching small fish. The second issue is arresting people moving with fish in Lorries whether it is mature or not. These are two separate issues. 

The procedural matter I would like to raise to the minister is –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You cannot raise a procedure to the minister. 

MR ONZIMA: The procedural issue I would like to raise is, if the minister is waiting for a report from that committee on the issues of harassing people on the lakes, there are other issues, however, that were raised particularly from West Nile where fishmongers are being arrested. Once you are got with fish, you are arrested. A number of Lorries are being impounded. The soldiers do not ask whether these are immature fish or not.   

Wouldn’t it, therefore, be procedurally right for him to bring this other report before the one on harassing people on the lake because the latter report requires investigation? However, the report I am asking for was a spot-on issue where 16 Lorries carrying fish were impounded. These are businessmen and businesswomen who want their items. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not a procedure that I can rule on. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for you to go and deal with the issues of the impounded trucks and so on and so forth?

MR MWESIGE: Well, there is the Fishery Act and it has provisions, which are very clear. If somebody is caught with illegal fishing gear or immature fish, it does not matter whether it is smoked or not; as long as it is immature, that is an illegality. Those, however, are details we cannot cover now. 

I have said that serious complaints were raised on the conduct of the fish protection units and Government has documented all of them. When the committee starts working, I am sure more complaints will come to the committee including the ones in West Nile. They are not barred from coming to the committee. 

The complaints will be investigated and the report will be made. 

MR GAFABUSA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of the girl who was raped by a UPDF soldier has nothing to do with the issue of the fish protection on the lake because this girl was not raped in the lake while doing illegal fishing. It is an exclusive criminal matter and the suspect was arrested and I think the police was still doing their investigations. They had opened a file and the UPDF soldiers came and raided the police post and took away the suspect.

Is it procedurally proper, Mr Speaker, that we lump the issue of the raped girl together with the issue of mistreatment of people on the lakes when this specific issue is exclusively a criminal matter? The Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and Ministry of Internal Affairs should have handled this matter separately from the issue of mistreatment of people on the lakes. Are we proceeding right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you repeated what I had stated. I said the issue of that raped girl and the issue of the police investigation are separate from the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and I asked the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and give us a brief but he has no information. He has just stated it here. 

Where are we going to extract information from if these people do not have it? I asked that same question. I said the issue of the raped girl and the evidence and the detention of the suspect is now a matter of internal affairs. I asked the Minister of Internal Affairs, if he has any information, to give it to us and he came and made a statement when you were here. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: This is a House with records. That day when we debated this matter, the Minister of Internal Affairs was here. He came and confirmed that on the Hansard that the UPDF soldiers went and overran the station in Amolatar Central Police Station. In fact, that day, the Speaker directed him to make phone call inquiries. He came back and confirmed that the UPDF soldiers overran the station and took both the suspect and the file. 

The Minister of State for Defence and Veteran Affairs who was here also confirmed the same on this Floor and made a commitment that as UPDF, they were going to work out a mechanism of sending back the suspected UPDF soldier to the police so that the investigation can continue. Therefore, I find it weird for the minister to come and say something else.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, my question was very clear. The matter of the raped girl, the evidence relating to the crime, the detention of the suspect and whatever happened to him is a matter for the Ministry of Internal Affairs. I asked the Minister of Internal Affairs to give us information relating to the rape case. 

The minister came and stated on the record – he did not say it never happened. He said whether the police station was attacked by the UPDF or not it is now with the Cabinet Sub-committee. That is what he stated here. I asked that same question because I did not want to lump up the issues. Honourable minister, please.

MR OBIGA KANIA: Mr Speaker, what you have said is correct and what my colleague has said is what I said here in the other debate. In the last debate here, when you, as a Parliament, decided to send my colleague to the Committee on Discipline, Rules and Privileges, you said that he gave information – (Interjection) - let us listen. We, let me use the word “we” - Most obliged. Thank you very much.

We decided, on the basis of the information that my colleague gave stating that there was a board of inquiry over the issue of the persons who were involved in the rape case in Amolatar, that he was waiting for the report of the inquiry. We decided that he should go the Committee on Discipline, Rules and Privileges. That means he is on trial. 

As far as I am concerned, from that other debate, we clearly said that he was in the hands of the protection unit. That is why I am saying that from the protection unit, he is with the board of inquiry and I have no further information. That is all I am saying and this is part of what was discussed and reported here by my senior colleague. Therefore, what other information can I have? Thank you.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, I realise that we have a lacuna in our rules and I think that is why Government is taking this House for granted. When you read Rule 217 on action taken on reports and resolutions of Parliament, there is no timeframe given.

May I request you, Mr Speaker, under Rule 8(2), to use your powers and give a timeframe to be incorporated under Rule 217 so that we start invoking it to get serious responses from Government? Since in our Rules of Procedure, we provide for 45 days for committees to report, may I suggest that you give Government 20 days to report in response to resolutions and recommendations by Parliament so that we do not get into this kind of fracas again? That is my procedural point, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the drafters of the rules were guided by the variety of issues that can fall under that. You cannot give one timeline for everything. Therefore, it might be on a case by case basis because the facts might be completely different; there might be cases where you do not require three days but the next day. You cannot say you want them to come in 35 or 20 days. I think that was what instructed the drafters of the rules to make it like that so that each case comes stating its urgency and the rules would be applied according to the nature of the urgency of the situation.

Our resolutions are very clear. Depending on a particular case, the resolution will say, “…and the minister will report back to Parliament in five days” and yet the rules are general. However, a particular resolution will state a timeframe. 

I do not know whether this particular resolution stated a timeframe because I have not seen it. I think that is it; on a case-by-case basis, fact based decision - In this particular one, the resolution states, we would want you to report back to Parliament in 10 days. The resolution would be specific about the timeline, which is required for the implementation of that particular resolution.

Therefore, we cannot deal with that in rule 217. It has to be dealt with in the specific resolution because that is where we take the actual decision and provide timelines. [A Member rose] Honourable, when you stand and do this, what am I supposed to do? On what matter do you rise, honourable? There is nobody holding the Floor. You seek clarification from a Member holding the Floor and there is no Member holding the Floor and I cannot hold the Floor.

MS ALUM: Mr Speaker, I thank you for the guidance that you have given this Parliament. I was in the House on 19 December 2019 when this issue was raised about the raped girl. I remember the Ministers of Defence and Internal Affairs were given time because they first contradicted themselves. The Minister of Internal Affairs had to move out and make phone calls.

Parliament, in its wisdom, decided that in the next sitting, which is supposed to be this month, they were supposed to come back and brief Parliament on the exact actions that the two ministries would do.

I am surprised that the Minister of Internal Affairs now stands there and says that he has no information completely and that everything is with the board, and yet it was very clear that he has a part he is supposed to play as Internal Affairs and even defence.

Therefore, the procedural issue I am raising is, now that we do not have a timeframe and yet Parliament instructed them to report back in January, how are we going to proceed with this issue of criminality without a timeframe?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are now bringing me into a debate that I should not be involved in. First of all, let me start this way. There is no statutory limitation on criminal matters. The fact that it may not have been handled yesterday or last week or a month ago does not make the case expire. Maybe the evidence will be messed up with but this case could even come 20 years later, unless the suspect is dead.

Therefore, there is no statutory limitation on criminal matters and there is therefore no urgency in the handling of criminal matters. You cannot say, it has to be done today because it involves many processes of getting there.

We operate under the presumption of innocence. A person is presumed innocent until the contrary is proven. Therefore, if we now say that he should be shot or something, we would not have followed the due process.

Therefore, all we are saying is, what they have done, from the minister’s statement, is that in respect of this girl, the facts have been established that yes, a suspect was arrested, yes there was stampede by the military on the police station where the suspect was detained and yes, he was extracted from there and the statement that is now being made is that the suspect is in the custody of this unit.

Those are the facts we have been able to listen to so far. However, the question is, the next thing that has happened is that now there has been a board of inquiry set up by the Ministry of Defence or UPDF to investigate this specific matter of the girl who was raped and report back.

Therefore, there are two lines of inquiries here; one is the Cabinet committee, which is dealing with the other issue of the fish and the way people are being treated and now the board of inquiry from the military side that is dealing with the case of the girl who was raped.

Therefore, the procedure you are asking me is, now that there is no timeline, if you go to police and report a case, you are not going to give the police a timeline when they must finish the investigation, when the court must finish its hearings and when the accused should either be acquitted or convicted. You cannot do that because there are processes and many people involved like lawyers and so many other people. There will be adjournments and witnesses that fail to appear and so you cannot give it a timeline, for example, that “For this one, we want it done within one month.” You cannot do that with the investigations and trials.

Therefore, even if you put it in the resolution of Parliament that “We would like this particular matter handled in five days,” it will not happen. The best you can do is to say, “The minister should report on steps taken in five days.” 

The minister has stated that they do not have any further information from what they have heard before because the inquiry has not yet come out with anything. The sub-committee of Cabinet was just set up yesterday. They have not commenced work.

Therefore, they do not have any further thing to report. How do you give timelines on that situation? The situation is that the Minister of Defence has said, “In three weeks, there should be some report.” He will come back to the House and give us the information that he has, on both aspects; the sub-committee of Cabinet and the girl who was raped.

Is this something we can leave so that we give them time to do their work and come back here? Of course, if there is information to the contrary in the middle of this, we can come back and reopen the discussion. We can pause it here.

PRESENTATION OF THE PETITION BY PERSONS AFFECTED BY THE CONSTRUCTION OF KARUMA-LIRA 132KV AND THE TORORO-OPUYO-LIRA 132KV POWER PROJECTS

The deputy Speaker: Was there another procedural matter? 

Mr komakech: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter related to a motion that was brought to this House, seeking leave of absence on the National Legal Aid Bill –

The Deputy Speaker: Leave of absence?

Mr komakech: Let me repeat: In October 2018, we presented a motion on the National Legal Aid Bill. It received immediate objection based on financial implications. We were requested to work together with the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and see how we would harmonise our position and come back with a ready-made proposal to this House.

So far, we have taken a very long time. Nonetheless, we have been working together. However, when we check on the Order Paper under “Business to follow”, we have completely been removed. I am asking about how we can get back to these processes when we are ready to move. 

It is also important to note that we have gone ahead as well to discuss with development partners on support for this National Legal Aid Bill to the extent that the development partners are ready to contribute to this process to a tune of Shs 60 billion to ensure that the National Legal Aid Bill becomes a law.

Is it procedurally right to remove this without consulting us? We are in a dilemma. 

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable member, you entrusted us with the authority to remove anything. We have the discretion to remove anything from the Order Paper. But that is beside the point.

Honourable members would recall that indeed a motion was brought to this House and it received overwhelming support to allow the honourable member to bring a Private Member’s Bill – although he says it was leave of absence. It was seeking leave of the House to present a Private Member’s Bill. 

The debate was very supportive of that. The only hitch that came up was that the Bill by its nature would have financial implications. The private member could not move it.

Therefore, instead of saying that we do away with the motion by removing it, we said, “We do not take a decision on the motion but let the mover sit with the Attorney-General and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and find a way forward on how this Bill can be introduced”.

The initial objection from the estimate from the Government was that it required Shs 17 billion per annum to implement it if it was passed. That money was not available.

Now that the member is saying the development partners have agreed to provide Shs 60 billion, it would cover about three years of this. That means that we now have funding for the Bill for at least three years to start then we see how Government can take it up. That is the status quo.

The honourable member has found a backway procedure to reintroduce this matter but be that as it may, it has already come. Therefore, we need to find a way of resolving this matter. Establish the status whether they have consulted with the Attorney-General. 

Maybe, we give the member a day when he can come and give a report on what has happened since we asked him to first consult. We will give him time in the future to prepare a brief so that we see where we are. 

If there is confirmation from the Government side, Attorney-General or the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, then we see how to process this. Would that be a way to handle this? That is my guidance on this matter. 

About the petition, where is the honourable member for Lira District? She has a petition to present but I do not see her here. Did she delegate anybody else to present it? No. We can deal with the next item then.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE TRAFFIC AND ROAD SAFETY ACT 1998 (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

Clause 1

The deputy chairperson: Clause 1. I think this could have been an error by making a clause to be the title of the Bill. The short title should not have been a clause. That could have been a misprint or an error because that is always an opening clause. 

The Act may be cited as the short title so it cannot be a clause. Therefore, we will not vote on that but we will follow the clause as it is in the Bill.

Clause 2

The deputy chairperson: Honourable members, usually, we defer Clause 2 because there might be other definitions that might arise in the course of the discussions. When we come back to Clause 2, we will deal with the definitions and complete it. We stand over Clause 2 for those purposes.

Clause 3

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Robert Kafeero): Mr Chairman, before we go to Clause 3, I beg to move that we insert a new clause immediately after Clause 2 as follows: “Substitution of section 3 of Principal Act 

The principal Act is amended by substituting for section 3, the following:

Chief licensing officer of motor vehicles. The head of the department of transport regulation and safety is designated as the chief licensing officer.” 

Justification 

For specificity by ensuring that the department designated as competent authority, under clause 29, administers all the provisions of the Act for ease of the implementation and coordination.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, honourable members? The amendment is proposed and the justification is given for a new clause to be inserted in the specified area. I put the question to that proposal. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to. 

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR KAFEERO: Clause 7; Amendment of section 11 of the principal Act.

Clause 7 is amended in- 
By substituting for paragraph (a) the following: 
“
By repealing Paragraph (l); and”
Paragraph (b) in the proposed paragraph (o) by inserting immediately after the word “quadricycles” the words “except those used by persons with disability.”

Justification

The proposal to repeal paragraph (f) and (h) was made in error. The two paragraphs are relevant and should be reinstated 
To exempt quadricycles used by persons with disability from the application of Section 11. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal in (a) should be clear so that our drafting people can pick it well. 

The proposal in 7(a) is to delete paragraph (f), (h) and the word, “and.” That should be the proposal. They are maintaining paragraph (l) because that is what you are repealing, honourable minister. Therefore, you leave it there because that is what you are repealing. 

What you are removing from the Bill is paragraph (f) and (h) and the word “and” immediately after the word “(h)” so that the drafting people can pick it clearly and the other proposal are clear. 
Can I put the question to that amendment as proposed by the chairperson of the committee? 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I was of the view that the chairperson of the committee, for purposes of clarity, would restate them so that the House can know what he is talking about. Some members may wish to hear from you about those particular areas. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, I think it is now clear. For purposes of drafting, they say in (a), what will remain is by repealing paragraph (l) and then you go like that. 

Therefore, what we are deleting from clause 7 (a) is the appearance of paragraph (f), (h) and the word “and.” That is what we are taking out so that it is only paragraph (l) that remains. Is that clear now? 

Honourable members, I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR KAFEERO: Amendment of Section 18 of the Principal Act. Clause 14 is amended in paragraph (c) in the proposed subsection (4) by substituting for the words “forty eight hours” the words “one hundred twenty hours.” 

Justification 

To allow reasonable time within which to produce an original vehicle registration book when required, especially owing to the fact that motor vehicle registration books are sensitive. There are also situations where a driver is not the owner of the vehicle and would therefore require adequate time to obtain an original registration book. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that the only proposal? Honourable members, is that clear? I think that is clear enough. Can I put the question to that amendment? I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17 

MR KAFEERO: Clause 17, amendment of Section 29 of the Principal Act:

Clause 17 is amended by inserting four new paragraphs immediately after paragraph (a) as follows: - 
“b) In subsection (3), by repealing the words, ‘and details of spare parts manufactured, bought or sold in the prescribed form.’” 
“c) In subsection (4), by repealing the words ‘or manufacturing or dealing in new, second hand or reconditioned spare parts for motor vehicles, trailers or engineering plants.’” 
“d) In subsection (5), by repealing the words ‘or new or second hand or reconditioned spare parts for motor vehicles, trailers or engineering plants.’” 
e) By repealing subsection (7).

Justification 

They are consequential amendments arising from the repeal of regulation of trade of spare parts for motor vehicles under this law and left to be regulated under trade. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, honourable members? Honourable ministers, do you concur with these proposed amendments from the committee? Can you be on record on this, if you agree to these amendments? 

THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Mr Chairman, I concur with them. 

MR SSEMUJJU: I am just seeking a clarification and I need to understand the proposed amendments. “Notwithstanding any other written law a person shall not repair motor vehicles…”. 

Is it your proposal that someone cannot be a mechanic to repair a car unless he has a place and licence? My fear is that you are going to drive many people out of this business. That they must have a physical place where they are doing this – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I repair my own car? Will I be arrested for that?

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Mr Chairman, you can repair your own car but you cannot – what this law intends to sort is these mushrooming garages everywhere for commercial purposes. That you can just start operating under a mango tree and you have a garage and you are commercially repairing vehicles. That is what we are trying to control so that there is sanity in the industry. Otherwise, now it is free for all. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think for the aspect of the licence that is fair because if someone is to repair my car, I must be sure that that person indeed is designated to do that particular work seeing as there are many quacks that are coming up and they are masquerading as mechanics. 

But for the place, I think we must delete that because someone can have the skill and can repair from any place for as long as that person is qualified. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think the issue is that a person must have a  place where he does it but that person can be called to go and repair a vehicle in West Budama South in case there is an issue but he should be from an address. That is what the law is saying. You can repair from anywhere else provided you can confirm that you operate from the house of hon. Nzoghu, for example. 

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, look at this scenario. For example, I went to school, qualified as a mechanic but I do not have the capacity to operate a garage but I have the skill. Do you stop me from repairing a vehicle because I do not have a place?

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Chair, now that I have the clarification, my proposal would be to reject this proposal. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Did you submit your amendment early? 

MR SSEMUJJU: No, I did not. I thought at this stage you can reject a clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But what are the implications of rejecting that one? Have we interrogated it? That is an amendment that you are bringing to the Floor. Have we investigated it and found what its implication would be on the Bill? 

That is why we say if you have an amendment even for purposes of deletion of clauses, submit it in advance, justify it so that we see. If now you just want to do it like that, I will not accept it.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Chairman, I agree, I am just inviting the House to reject this – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I am the one to put that question; I will not put it. (Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU:  The trouble with this particular proposal is that first of all, you are dealing with what for many years has been part of our informal sector. I would like to ask the minister to be very cautious when you are regulating the informal sector. You need to be gradual. 

The moment you have a law stopping all these boys in Kampala and Wakiso from repairing vehicles which is their main source of income, you are sending hundreds onto the streets. 

Secondly, my own understanding of this proposal is that you are stopping even me from doing any repairs on my vehicle. Even your explanation has not taken away my doubt. I am uncomfortable with this proposal because it is going to – 

In a country where you even have Government schools under a mango tree, how do you now tell people not to operate garages from under mango trees? That the mechanics must be the ones to have physical address? 

The licence is okay but to say that they must have a place and you want to eliminate – yes I will take the information. 

MS MUTONYI: Thank you colleague for giving way. Mr Chairman, the sub clause is not saying “shall not repair a vehicle … shall not repair a trailer” meaning if it is a vehicle, it might be mine but if they are saying, “…not repair motor vehicles”. That means you are repairing today, tomorrow and so on but you do not have a specific place where you are stationed and even your workers are not coming from anywhere. That is what this law is after. I do not know whether I am clear -(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Mr Chair, I know there could be a mischief that the law is trying to cure. I feel so inclined to support hon. Ssemujju. Unfortunately, he did not do homework. 

Did Government really think through the impact of this law in the Jua kali small scale industries – we are now turning to skilling and retooling Ugandans. 

From Primary Seven, one can get attached to a garage and learn the skills and as long as one can get somewhere – there are freelance mechanics. You know them. You call them and they repair from your home or on the way. 

Honestly, why do we want to close out these young people who are struggling? Wouldn’t we think about a better way – of course operating under somebody’s licence, operating under somebody who has a permanent place of abode to avoid stealing – wouldn’t we do it much better? 

I know that what we are saying is of no consequence given the ruling of the presiding officer but I wanted to add my voice to his. Let the records indicate that I am not supporting the law entirely as it is. I would have supported the position as proposed by hon. Ssemujju Nganda. The issue of licensing is already a regulatory process.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Technically speaking, hon. Ssemujju has not made any proposal. 

MR OBOTH: I am now modifying his proposal. (Laughter) When you are going to give somebody a licence, there could be one person. The chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure is a mechanical engineer and he has an address. It is not possible for somebody starting out from my village to have an address. This is the point I am making. Who is the law for? Somebody like Speaker Motors has an address. 

Mr Chairman, if it is the issue of an address – like he is introducing this as professional bodies, governing or licensing or regulating – we would look at one person. The Minister of Works and Transport, who should be consuming this, is actually in an inter-ministerial meeting now. 

The main thing is that we are opening the net very wide that it will disable these other upcoming mechanics. Not everyone comes out of law school and has a law firm but they can practice under a licensed law firm – having a trading licence. That is hon. Ssemujju’s proposal. That could have been taken care of through licensing and regulation in the regulations made under this law.

MR WALUSWAKA: Mr Chairman, I would like to clear the worry of my senior colleague. Hon. Oboth, do not think that the registration will be like the one at law council, where you go. Whether the mechanics have gone to school or not – there are people who learn on the job. The address we want is simple. For example, if you come to me, I come from Omuhuyu Village and that is an address.

Mr Chairman, some people lose cars – you do not know who is repairing your car. They car is put somewhere and immediately the owner of the plot comes and takes the car and the car is burnt. When we talk of the address, we do not mean a plot in Kampala. It can be in West Budama. 

For the qualifications – even if you have gone to school or not, there are even good mechanics who have never gone to school. With this presidential advice of emyooga, even mechanics are coming into associations. People can come together. Therefore, it is not the legal way of writing to the Solicitor-General and whatever.

MS KYAMBADDE: Mr Chairman, we have to shift away from the informal sector and the time is now and we should do it with our regulations. Most of you have been conned by mechanics because they have no addresses. Therefore, it is important to formalise our businesses so that our economy can grow. I support this. We need to formalise the sector. They need to have an address and they need to have licences. Every licence has got a cluster of which class to support. Let us move on from the informal sector today and we should be responsible for that. Thank you.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Chairman, the minister misunderstood me. She is making a couple of proposals. The one proposal that takes people away from the informal sector is the licence. These days people have moved away from physical places. If you go to Europe, people are working from home and some through their phones. You are now saying that for you to be a mechanic, you need to have a place of business. My phone is my registration.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think let us think through this properly. I am beginning to see a tendency that might make us miss the point. “…as an approved place of business” – that is what the proposal is saying. Hon. Ssemujju says “my work tool is my phone” – wherever I am, that is the operating thing. However, what the proposal is saying is that even when you are doing that, they should be able to find you in your address wherever you are. Here, they are being specific. They are not talking about a P.O Box address, but a location address. If the purpose is for finding you, can that be an approved place of business?

Members, this thing may have multiple purposes. It may be for consumer protection or to protect those who draw from the services. It might be a process, like the minister has stated, to try and reduce the informal sector. It might also be an issue of revenue collection so that anybody who takes benefit from the infrastructure that has been established should pay something to Government in terms of taxation.

Can somebody think – for example, if instead of this, somebody says “somebody who is going to engage in business should have a tax identification number” would it solve that problem instead of having an approved place of business? If you apply for a tax identification number, you have to put an address there. Wouldn’t that solve the problem?

Really, let us agree on this. Our informal sector is way too big and there should be systematic processes of trying to reduce on the informal sector. We must have people participating in the economy formally. That is what the drive should be. If you still want to protect people to stay in the informal sector - 

This is a business that is already known. You are not talking about agriculture. You are talking about a service provider who has skills and who must pay some revenue to the Government for doing that. Is that too much to ask, instead of saying you should have an address approved? An address approved might mean they should come and inspect your garage. If the purpose is to protect people who are going to deal with this, would the tax identification number be able to trace this person?

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Chairman, the trouble I have is that we are not being gradual. The mechanics in their hundreds – and many of you who have vehicles know that today – are not licensed. You are making a proposal to licence them. On top of that, you are also making a proposal that they should have physical places that are approved. Think about the hundreds who are going to be affected by this law when it is passed. You are going to look like agents of the Wavamunnos at the expense of the ordinary people who are doing mechanics in their hundreds. 

Therefore, there is a fear that vehicles are going to be stolen. In this century, do you just give your vehicle to someone you do not know? We even have national IDs but you do not ask a person to identify themselves; you just park and they begin repairing.

Let us think about the hundreds that you are going to drive out of business immediately by this law. If that is your wish, it is okay.

MS ANITE: Mr Chairman, let me just give my mind into this issue. Hon. Ssemujju was talking about the hundreds who are in the vehicle and motorcycle repairing business. All those hundreds of people engaged in that business have a physical address so the point that he is raising does not arise. They have the physical addresses although not approved so approving is better. If those physical addresses are not approved, you will drive your car there and the minute you leave your car, you will not find the person there.

Away from that, now that I am on the Floor, I support this licencing but my only problem is, at what cost? It should not be preventive. If the cost is preventive then the hundreds who are struggling to make money will not be able to do the licencing and get to do the business.

I would like to get clarification from the chairperson; at what cost will the license be and where will it be issued from so that it is not preventive? I am not saying that we should put it in the law but it shows that it is not preventive for the many Ugandans who are in that business.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is hardly a debate stage; this is Committee Stage. That is why it is very important that the discussions about specific amendments are threshed out and agreed upon prior. When you come like hon. Ssemujju has done - You just show up and say, I want to amend. Nobody has interrogated the impact of that amendment and thought it through. It is like an ambush; rules of ambushes and discharge of them are very difficult. We now have to first anchor it on the Bill and say, what will be the implications and we have not interrogated it.

We might end up removing something that should have been there or end up leaving something that should not have been there but because we are not properly informed, and we would like to take a decision and we are taking arguments on face value, we are bound to make mistakes. Let us stand over clause 17.

The purpose of standing it over is to allow further thinking through this proposal that has come and then when we come back, we will be able to deal with it. Clause 17 stood over.

Clause 18

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Mr Chairman, amendment of the principal Act. Clause 18 is amended by deleting the proposed sub-section (6). 

The justification is, the provision does not place any obligation on a buyer and therefore it would be very unreasonable to penalise him or her.

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Mr Chairman, I would not take the proposal because our provision, which we had included was, “For avoidance of doubt both the owner and the buyer of a motor vehicle, trailer or engineering plant shall be liable under sub-section (5).”

These days when a vehicle is sold, somebody does not take the trouble to transfer it so you find a vehicle moving through two to three hands before it is officially transferred.

In case that vehicle commits a crime or is involved in criminal actions, you cannot know the current owner. We are saying that as soon as a vehicle is sold, both of you the seller and the buyer, must ensure that you transfer that vehicle for purposes of ownership.

We are moving towards installing a tracking system and so we would want that once a vehicle is transferred to me, it should be tracked to me and not to the person who sold it.

MR SILWANY: Mr Chairman, I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister. Most of our people purchase these vehicles in instalments. Somebody has paid half and then gets a quarter, a tenth, slowly by slowly. During the payment period, where are we going to transfer the car because transfers come in at the end after everything has been settled? I would like you to make that clear, honourable minister.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: When is the vehicle deemed sold?

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: At completion of payment, you have sold the vehicle.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Chairman, I have sold a vehicle, signed transfer forms for someone to go and put the vehicle in his name and handed over the details. Why should you criminalise me for not chasing him up to the licencing officer to effect the transfer?

As things are now, you sign and hand over and then the person who has bought will be the one to go through these processes so why do you criminalise me for not looking for a policeman to take this guy to the licensing officer to do his process?

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Mr Chairman, it is in your best interest that when you have sold this vehicle and you have been paid what is due to you, this vehicle gets out of your hand and therefore, it is no longer your responsibility.

As I said, if you have sold the vehicle and you do not mind whether he has effected the transfer into his names or not, if this vehicle ends up in a scene of crime and it is still in your names, it will be traced to you and not to the person you sold the vehicle to.

Therefore, it is in your best interests to ensure that the transfer is properly effected. The chairperson answered very well; the vehicle is considered sold after final payment.

When you are paying in instalments, the vehicle still belongs to the person selling. After completion of the payment, the vehicle becomes yours. Therefore, you must ensure that, that vehicle is transferred into your names and it should be in the best interests of the person who sold you the vehicle to ensure that you are now the owner of that vehicle so whatever happens with that vehicle is your responsibility and no longer his.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Mr Chairman, I would like us to be practical. In the URA system, for you to initiate a transaction, somebody has the responsibility. In the current licencing regime, somebody has to login and then initiate. If you are going to blame both the buyer and the seller and yet it is the seller supposed to initiate the transfer - Once you have bought, there is nothing you can do unless the person who has sold logs into the system and initiates the transfer. Therefore, why would you punish somebody who does not have the system to login? That is the clarification I would like.

MR OBOTH: On this one, being a Ugandan and knowing how the system works, people buy old cars. We have here dealers in old cars like hon. Silwany; I can put him on record. (Laughter) This law is not favouring them in such a way.

However, the law as it is – as proposed by the minister – is in a better form to create obligation on both sides; you, who are buying and you, who are selling. Most people pay the balance in small bits. Even hon. Waluswaka bought from hon. Silwany. (Interjection) I know; I have evidence –(Laughter)– and they have not transferred.

I think I would go and support the Government, knowing that if you do not create liability and obligation on two sides, you would have failed the law itself. If you say one side, then it will assume that whether this person has paid in full – if you said the buyer or the seller should transfer, then you are saying that the moment I pay you any deposit, you should –(Interjection)– I supported you on the other one; support me on this one. (Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU: I have sold the vehicle. If there is an authority where I should report, that matter should be simple for me to do because I only sign on the forms to transfer into someone else’s name. He has refused to transfer. He has given me my money. Why don’t you simply tell me where to report that “I have sold this vehicle”, instead of telling me that I should hunt him down to go and effect the transfer?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we have some order, Members?

MR OBOTH: Most days, you generate the transfer online. As long as you have the Tax Identification Number (TIN) and initiate the transfer, that is reflected. Even if you go to URA, this is a very practical experience I have. 

Now, if the seller has already effected transfer, there is some small money you are supposed to go and pay and that is all. I believe that it would be good to create it so that the two parties work together. If you create for one person –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can somebody describe for us how a transfer is effected? Someone clarify on how a transfer is effected from start to end, please. How does it happen, because it might guide us on what obligations to follow?

MR SILWANY: Before I say that, the important clarification I would like to bring, Mr Chairman, is the information. If you are selling vehicles and you sell to about 10 or 15 buyers and then they tell you that it is your obligation to chase each of them to ensure that they have transferred the vehicles into their names, I think that burden becomes very big on the person who is selling the vehicle.

How will you chase this one and that one to ensure that they put the vehicle in their names at the same time? They effect a transfer when the buyer goes and initiates with proof that there has been a sale, which is a sale agreement. He proves to Uganda Revenue Authority that there is a sale agreement, “This vehicle has been sold, I bought it and the agreement is here.” The process is then done like that and the vehicle is transferred into the buyer’s name.

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: To effect the transfer, the seller logs into the system and initiates the transfer. Now, the buyer should also take the initiative to accept that the transfer has been effected. When you say because you are selling many vehicles, then –(Laughter) We are saying it should be an obligation on both sides. 

If you have already sold the vehicle and have initiated the transfer but the buyer is not responding, it is your right. You can go to the licensing officer and prove that you have already sold the vehicle and this man must come and acknowledge that he is now the owner of the vehicle. You have protected yourself. If it is not the licensing officer, you can even go to the police and say, “I have completed my part of the bargain.” What is left is for the buyer to accept that the vehicle is now in his hands. If anything happens, you have a record that you did your due diligence. You transferred the vehicle and reported what you did. The matter is now with the other person. However, if you leave it just like that and say since you have sold and he does not transfer, “it is his business”. If something happens, we are going to track that vehicle back to you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we will stand over clause 18. It is now after six o’clock. We should resume.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.05
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: For what purpose? (Laughter)

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. I put a question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, report from the Committee of the whole House. Which clauses did we pass and which ones did we stand over?

6.06
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Katumba Wamala): I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House considered the Bill and clauses 2, 17 and 18 were stood over –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Committee of the whole House considered the Bill entitled, “The Traffic and Road Safety Act…”.

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: The Traffic and Road Safety Act (Amendment) Bill, 2019 and clauses 2, 17 and 18 were stood over.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which ones were passed?

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Clauses 1, 3, 4, 5 up to clause 16 were passed. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, for purposes of our record, there is no clause 1 because clause 1 is the short title; it cannot be a clause. We said it should simply be ignored. It remains that short title without any number; so we cannot say we have passed clause 1. We will come to title later. 

We stood over clause 2, passed clauses 3, 4, 5, 6 and we passed Clause 7 with amendments. We also passed clauses 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and we passed clause 14 with amendments. We then passed clauses 15, 16 and stood over clauses 17 and 18. That is the report. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTIPON OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.09
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. We will resume tomorrow. We had started very well with a good pace but the challenge that we have are these amendments, which never came early. We cannot anticipate them. When they come, they generate fresh debates that we should try to avoid. It makes the processing of Bills very complicated. Sometimes we make mistakes along the way. 

Therefore, honourable members, it would be better if you use the time now to look at whatever amendments you intend to propose and circulate them by early morning so that by the time we come to the House, you have shared what you would like to propose with their justifications. If by tomorrow you still show up and try to make an amendment on the Floor, the amnesty period is over. (Laughter) We will not entertain such amendments because that amnesty is not extendable.

Honourable members, let us do this to help us pass quality outputs that we are confident they are properly interrogated and the provisions are good laws fit for their purpose. We do not want to make any mistake. 

Is there a member of the Committee on Budget here? Can somebody help us with what has transpired in the committee? Is the committee done with the work?

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, I am an ex-officio member on the Committee on Budget and I am actually from their meeting. They are still working although they are about to conclude. I left the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development still before them. That is how far I can state for the record.

They worked through lunchtime without any break. I think they are trying their best. Most of the documentations and other things could have come to them late. 

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a member of the Committee on Budget. I left my colleagues in the meeting to come and say what I was told to say. 

Mr Speaker, we have been working from yesterday and we have handled most of the committees. We are remaining with three committees. So, by 10 o’clock tomorrow, we shall be done and ready to go. That is what the chairperson of the committee asked me to tell the House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does that mean you will have the report ready by 10 o’clock tomorrow or the report will be by afternoon?

MR SILWANY: The report will be ready by afternoon.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will you be ready to report? 

MR SILWANY: I think it will be ready by close of business because when we finish at 10 o’clock, we shall start on finalising the report immediately. To be lenient to us, I think you will have to give us up to Thursday morning to present the report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the challenge, which I stated earlier is that we have a timeline of 01 February to deal with that report the Committee on Budget is working on. They are doing a good job under difficult circumstances because some documents may have not come in time. 

I had already stated that there could be a possibility of sitting on Friday for about two hours to try to finish this within the timeline. We do not want to extend this period because it will jeopardise everything else. 

I would propose tomorrow that if it were possible, we have a full day of sitting on Thursday. We start in the morning at 10 a.m., break off and then resume in the afternoon and see how far we can go. If it remains, then, we can come on Friday morning to finish it. If we finish it on Thursday, we will not come on Friday. Therefore, we will deal with the Bill starting tomorrow and other matters that will likely come up. 

Honourable members, House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 6.14 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 29 January 2020 at 2.00 p.m.) 
  



