

Tuesday, 30 January 2018

Parliament met at 2.24 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:

    1. Mr Moses Kahima.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kahima, congratulations on your election. I welcome you to the Tenth Parliament and I wish you well. On my left are Members of the Opposition. On the far-left there, are the Independents. On this side are the Members of the NRM, where I believe you are going to sit. (Applause)

The ministers sit on that front row and the other Members of Parliament sit here. All are friends and I know that with time they are going to welcome you and work with you. 

I would like to give you the instruments of office: The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. You should read them carefully to guide you in your committee work, in the plenary and petitions – all the work of your constituents will be guided by the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. Again, welcome. (Applause)

I hope that the Clerk will in future guide the public gallery on how to conduct themselves during the swearing-in.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you back from the committee work; I know that you have been busy with the budget framework paper. Thank you very much for the work you have been doing. I would like to thank all the chairpersons and members and pray that we use the next one or two days to complete the budget cycle and comply with the Public Finance Management Act. 

Honourable members, I have also learnt that our colleague, hon. Latigo, the Member for Agago and former Leader of the Opposition, was involved in an accident on Wednesday along Kampala-Gulu Road and sustained injuries. He is now at Nakasero Hospital under the care of doctors. Let us pray for him. In case the doctors allow, you can go and check on him and give him encouragement. 

I am also happy to report that our colleague, hon. Dr Moriku the Minister of State for Health (Primary Healthcare), has been discharged from the hospital. (Applause) She is undergoing review as an outpatient. It has been a long period for her. Thank you for your prayers and support. We commit her to the Almighty God for complete recovery.

I also report that hon. Deogratius Kiyingi of Bukomansimbi is still indisposed. I wish him a speedy recovery. Keep him in your prayers. 

Honourable members, last week we successfully organised the “Parliamentary Week” during which the general public was invited to visit Parliament with a view of learning how it operates and to interact with the honourable members.

I want to thank those members who participated in the various activities during the week, but to say that it was a bit disappointing that in some of the activities, there were less than 50 members of this House. So, I do hope that in future, you will participate in these activities because they are for the institution.

I want to thank the President of the Republic of Uganda, the Vice-President, the Prime Minister, the Speaker and members of the East African Legislative Assembly for visiting the exhibition and understanding how we work.

I also want to thank the members of the public for coming. They were here in big numbers. We look forward to continued, good partnership. Let me thank the Clerk and her team for the work done during that week. It was quite heavy, but I think it is good for relating to the population.

Now, honourable members, there were some changes to the standing and sessional committees. However, I want to remind the Government Chief Whip, the Chief Opposition Whip and the coordinator of the Independents to, again, review the constitution of these committees. Some are oversubscribed while others are undersubscribed.

So, my attention has been drawn to the following committees - the following are oversubscribed:

    1. Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises - one person extra;
    2. Committee on Human Rights - one person extra;
    3. Committee on Health - one person extra;
    4. Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development - one person extra;
    5. Committee on Natural Resources - four people extra;
    6. Committee on Physical Infrastructure - five members extra;
    7. Local Government Accounts Committee - two members extra;
    8. Public Accounts Committee - two members extra.

Undersubscribed is the Committee on Information and Communication Technology. They are short by three members. 

I want to ask the whips to address that issue so that we can have a more fair distribution of the members.

Honourable members, I received a letter from hon. Esther Mbayo, the Minister for the Presidency, formally appreciating the work of Parliament in the campaign and management of the National HIV response. She is commending us for the enactment of the necessary laws in the management and prevention of HIV/AIDS in Uganda. 

She thanked us for the oversight visits conducted by Parliament, which have increased advocacy and the right to protection of the rights of the people living with HIV, and continuous participation in national and sub-national events in the promotion of awareness and leadership.

So, we want to acknowledge hon. Mbayo’s support and recognition of the work of Parliament. I also welcome you back from Kole where our committee gave support to the leadership in the region in that campaign to fast-track the initiative. 

I congratulate all the committees and chairpersons who have made it possible for all the work of Parliament to be recognised. This is very good, and I thank you very much. Keep it up. It is good for this House.

Honourable members, on 28 November 2017, hon. Waira Majegere, MP Bunya East, moved a motion for a resolution of Parliament to constitute a select committee to investigate the lawlessness of Boda boda 2010 and other boda boda associations in Kampala.

The motion was debated and the House resolved to constitute a select committee. However, honourable members, in the interim, there is a criminal trial going on. There is an investigation around the same area. I would like to propose that we hold on a bit because it would be difficult for us to hold the hearing and the same people are called to the court.

So, I want to appeal that we hold on a bit to see how the court process moves before the House comes in to investigate. Certainly, we take note of the seriousness of the situation, but let us wait for the other organ which is already undertaking the investigations and the trial to handle that issue.

Now, honourable members, in the first week of this month, I attended the 24th conference of Speakers and Presiding Officers of the Commonwealth in Seychelles and I bring greetings to all of you. We discussed many issues, but the crucial one was the need for Commonwealth Parliaments to embrace electronic governance.

Some of the countries in the Commonwealth like India are quite ahead of us on the use of ICT in Parliament. In that regard, honourable members, I know that we have made headway by giving you the iPads. However, the Parliamentary Commission would like to see a paperless Parliament by the end of the Second Session in May 2018.

So, progressively, we shall expect you to use only your iPad in this Chamber. We will be able to facilitate the public to contribute to our Bills and policies online. We shall also request the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to adjust our rules to enable electronic tabling of documents. 

Through this system, we shall be able to track Bills, the annual reports and other matters brought to Parliament. An application has been designed by the ICT department to enable the presiding officer to monitor progress from each committee 24/7. I am therefore giving notice that the ICT department has been instructed to design a more focused training on electronic governance for all the Members.

Honourable members, I received complaints from the ICT department that in the past, when training is organised, very few members go. Now, we are going to change the strategy. We shall do it committee by committee. So the ICT department is going to issue a programme for all of you, so that we know who has attended and who has not attended. 

But in any event, we will expect you to be knowledgeable by April and just use the iPads. So, I am giving you notice that you will be called upon to go for that training. Let us do it because it is important for our work and for our efficiency. Thank you very much.

There were a few issues of national importance. Hon. Anyakun, please use only two minutes.

2.40
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. It is on the issue of sachet waragi.

Madam Speaker, I remember in 2016, around April or May, the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives informed this august House how the manufacturing of these sachet waragi was going to stop by 1 September 2017.

As we speak now, Madam Speaker, the commodity is at large in very huge quantities. The trucks are in every market place, especially in my district. They target the beneficiaries whenever they go to the market to sell the few commodities like the cows and goats. Immediately, they buy sachet waragi.

The District Police Commander (DPC) of my district called me and told me there are so many deaths which are being reported. People are just dying along the road because of this sachet waragi. Having it at the back of our mind that we have issues of food security in Karamoja, this sachet waragi is causing issues of abortion to women who are pregnant. Women are being raped. There is also unwanted pregnancy.

The problem we have is that we always wait for post-mortem. When this happens, we discuss it after something has happened. I kindly request that if the Minister of Trade can come back and let us know, did this manufacturing of sachet waragi stop or did it continue?

We are losing very many people because of this kind of waragi. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that matter has come up a number of times and I think we need to take firm decisions.

We shall request the Minister of Trade to come back and address us on the issue of those sachets. They are so portable and so convenient that even school children are using them. I think we need to address this.

So, the minister should come and advise us on what to do on the sachets.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Only the other day, I was reading in the press that at a famous school, Sir Samuel Baker Secondary School, the teachers were brewing and selling waragi in the staff quarters.

Whereas the minister may come up to tell us what has so far transpired with the motion to ban sachet waragi, I think there is much more that is needed. 

Indeed, reading through, you could see that teachers, as a way of augmenting their meagre salaries, had resorted to brewing and selling waragi. I think there is lack of government supervision –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give the House is that there are categories of alcohol which are being sold in this country. The sachet waragi which is distilled is the one which has been banned. The one which hon. Ssekikubo is referring to is the mild sort of locally brewed alcohol in the villages. In my district, we had also banned the sachets but what was deemed allowed was the locally brewed one which does not have a high percentage of alcohol. What he referred to from that school is one of those which were not banned in our areas. I would like to submit. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think waragi is waragi. (Laughter) We still maintain that the minister comes and we discuss those two types of waragi and agree as a country on what to do.

2.45
MR HERBERT KINOBERE (Independent, Kibuku County, Kibuku): Madam Speaker, I stand to raise a matter of national importance. As most of us must have seen in the recent New Vision headline, it was stated that the Ministry of Education and Sports is moving to close over 1,300 schools. In the previous weeks, Kampala City Council Authority has been moving around closing unlicensed schools. So far, 48 schools have been closed here in Kampala.

Madam Speaker, when you analyse the performance in exams of 2017, you would see that private schools have performed better than the public ones. Most of the private schools have submitted their documents for licensing to the Ministry of Education and Sports since 2014 – according to my research – but no licence has been availed to them.

According to sections 31, 32 and 34 of the Education Act I have here, to set up a private school, you must have the minimum requirements which they have even processed. The majority of the schools have been able to acquire recommendations from the districts, their middle supervising authority. They have also been able to access NEMA certificates. I have those documents here and I request that I lay them on the Table. I have been able to gather all the information.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you have data on 1,300 schools?

MR KINOBERE: No, I have sampled about 30 schools since they released that information. It is because I wanted to give information which I have an idea on. I have some files here. 

Madam Speaker, this issue has caused a lot of inconveniences to the parents. I read today’s Daily Monitor and on the second page, the headline reads: “Parents Storm Minister’s Home over School Closure”. I may not be able to read it. However, it is unfair if we wake up one day and say 1,300 schools are being closed.

THE SPEAKER: Hon Kinobere, now you are engaged in a debate. We should ask the government to explain whether it is true they are closing 1,300 schools. When they come, you can present the evidence showing that those schools were wrongfully closed.

MR KINOBERE: I had my prayers, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, present your prayers.

MR KINOBERE: Madam Speaker, my first prayer is that the Ministry of Education and Sports should put the closure of those schools on halt since our children are going back to school next week. The ministry should present a clear statement to this august House as the children continue with their studies.

Secondly, I also request the Ministry of Education and Sports to speed up the licensing process so that these schools are given licences to be able to operate. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that issue is extremely urgent because schools start next week. The people of Uganda should know where they are going to send their children or if they have to move them, then they should move them. Therefore, we would like the minister to come here on Thursday and make a statement on that issue. 

Honourable members, in the public gallery, we have a delegation from Ruhaama in Ntungamo District. They are here to witness the oath-taking by their honourable member. Those are the voters of hon. Rwakimari and hon. Mugabe. You are welcome. (Applause)

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION (NO.2) BILL, 2017

2.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Supplementary Appropriation (No.2) Bill, 2017 for first reading. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the committee for perusal and to report back.

MR KABERUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development stood here and convinced Parliament on the money that was meant to finance 100 schools in sub-counties that do not have secondary schools. However, that money was taken to Kabale University but he said it would be refunded this financial year to be used by those 100 schools.

Indeed, Madam Speaker, the Education Service Commission went and interviewed the teachers in those 100 schools. Next week, the schools are opening but they have issued a statement to the Ministry of Education and Sports that they do not have money to pay the 3,700 teachers.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we address that issue during the Budget Framework Paper. When the report comes, you will raise that issue. The report is coming. 

MR KABERUKA: The report is on what?

THE SPEAKER: The report is on the budget. All those provisions; the schools, roads – 

MR KABERUKA: It is for the current year, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: We are going to discuss the report on the Budget Framework Paper. The chairperson of the Budget Committee is coming to report and then you can raise that issue. 

Now, honourable members, there is something I have remembered that concerns the Minister of Works. Today, I was reading the New Vision about the ferries. The story was about the Kigulu ferry but they were talking about Kaberamaido instead. Kigulu is in Lake Victoria and Kaberamaido is in Lake Kyoga. Therefore, let me speak on behalf of those people. I would like to know where the Kigulu and BKK ferries are because the people need them. (Applause) All those ferries were there. We would like to get an answer.

2.54
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) has just laid before this Parliament the Supplementary Appropriation (No.2) Bill, 2017. Here with me, I have a letter written by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Matia Kasaija to our donors with whom we had signed a memorandum of understanding about the money for expansion of social protection programme. 

In this letter, the minister committed that Government will find additional Shs 17.5 billion which will be appropriated by this Parliament for the Financial Year 2017/2018.

The Government committed to providing the shortfall under supplementary budget during the course of this financial year.

My issue is now that the minister has laid before this Parliament the supplementary appropriation Bill, I would like to know whether this money for expansion of social protection programme is included at these initial stages. The information that we have is, this money is not catered for yet the elder persons have gone without payment for the last six months. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I also suggest that we address it during the report from the budget chairman. We have noted it is very important so we shall be on the lookout for it.

Honourable members, there were one other matter of Kampala City Traders Association (KACITA). It has been waging a war on the issue of the relationship between the landlords and tenants in Kampala. They brought the petition here and we have discussed it. 

The minister of lands undertook to bring the Bill, she has not. In the meantime the KACITA are threatening to come and demonstrate here on the 24 February 2018. Therefore, I have written directing them to the office of the Prime Minister to demonstrate there and one group should go to the lands ministry because that is where the problem is.

We have addressed this matter on the Floor many times. I have directed them to go to the right places and not to come to Parliament. I don’t know what the lands minister has to say on this issue.

2.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true that you have written instructions to the Minister of Lands Housing and Urban Development to come today 30 January 2018 before you and this House to explain a number of matters including the Landlord Tenant Bill; where it is and show cause why it should not be finalised.

The Landlord Tenant Bill is in the final stages of being brought here. We have exhausted the process with the Cabinet. On two occasions, we have finished the principles; we are now at the stage where the First Parliamentary Counsel is going to give us the final draft copy of the Bill and we expect to lay it before this House by mid February -(Interruption)-

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have heard the minister mention the parliamentary counsel for which I needed his clarification in the context of the Bill, and the final stage in that respect. I am not getting him properly.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members that is a legal draftsman in the justice ministry whose work is referred to as the First Parliamentary Counsel. It is not at Parliament but at the ministry of justice.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. That is clarification on the Landlord Tenant Bill. We are aware of the situation you have been put in by the KACITA people and we are doing everything possible to beat the deadline by the middle of February. That is in two weeks’ time to be able to lay the law before this House.

The other issues that you have raised in your instructions; we undertake to bring a comprehensive statement next week or as and when it pleases you.

THE SPEAKER: When hon. Lugoloobi reports, you will seek about that issue. We have taken note of it and we are waiting for his report.


MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE UNDERTAKING TO ENSURE THAT ELECTRICITY TARIFFS ARE NOT INCREASED

3.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we would like to seek for more time because when we were here, we undertook that when we get the income tax exemption for Bujagali, the power tariff will stay at a certain level.

Now working with the energy ministry, we need to come here and make a comprehensive statement. We owe an explanation to the House and we are not ready today; we are asking for more time so that we come on Thursday or Tuesday and give a comprehensive statement.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you know you got that exemption on the basis that you were going to expand power coverage to the entire country. That is what convinced us to give you. These members were reluctant remember; until you said this will help us to spread power to the country.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, sometimes when Parliament makes recommendations to the Executive, they do not take it as serious. You remember the law they brought and they had convinced us to commit this Parliament up to 2030 and we objected by instead giving them five years. That was last year. 

Beyond reasonable doubt, this Parliament objected and said five years are enough for you even to monitor these guys to know whether there are indicators that the tariffs rate comes down.

The finance ministry has presented a paper. I belong to a finance committee; the tariff rates are shooting high. We told them that the problem with these guys is not exempting them corporation tax, it is the internal rate which they had committed for four years. We do not expect much from that.

I think they should go back and revisit the agreement they made with this company. There is nothing much we are expecting. The tariff rates they have told us about in the committee are high.

As we present the report you will see it here and it is high time now the energy ministry went back and reviewed those agreements with them. This is the information I wanted to provide to the House.

3.03
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality Soroti): Madam Speaker, I am glad this matter has come up even before we had presented it officially before the House. Over the last two years at committee level we have been having a debate over power tariffs.

The issue where we gave an exemption according to Electricity Regulatory Authority (ERA) is not meant to have the tariffs affect the local person but mostly the manufacturers and industrialists. I would have wished that as a member of the Committee on Natural Resources that we are going to come to the House seeking for leave to have a comprehensive investigation on the issue of power tariffs.

What is presented in the House is not exactly what pertains outside there. Nonetheless we give the minister benefit of doubt to come and present and some of us will not go into detail about the information we have regarding the matter of power tariffs. 

Madam Speaker, as the minister reports on power tariffs, a related matter regarding verification of the metres of electricity needs to be mentioned in that report.

Madam Speaker, the public is awash with information that there has been a standoff between Uganda National Bureau of Standards, Electricity Regulatory Authority and the ministry over verification of metres. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I would like to appeal to you to take the interest of the people of Uganda seriously. That was a very hard decision if you remember. Give us an answer on Thursday.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE HARD TO REACH FRAMEWORK IN THE UGANDA PUBLIC SERVICE

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Madam Speaker, you will recall that in our meeting of 14 December 2017, I was required to present a statement on the hard to reach framework on the Floor of Parliament on Thursday 21 December 2017.

In this brief report a selection criteria for the hard to reach areas is provided hence clarifying why some areas are currently excluded.

Background

The Government of Uganda has since the early 1990s been implementing public service reform programmes, which are aimed at improving efficiency, effectiveness and accountability in public service delivery.

One of the strategic objectives of the reform programmes was to attract and retain adequate numbers of skilled and capable personnel in public service organisations, in order to ensure equitable delivery of public services across the country. 

It was however noted that some specific areas of the country consistently failed to attract and retain competent and contented staff, hence denying some sections of Ugandans services they ought to receive such as education and healthcare. Such areas were codenamed “hard to reach/ stay”.

Government therefore undertook to pay public officers working in the designated hard to reach/stay areas an allowance in order to attract, and retain competent personnel in those areas.

Madam Speaker, by definition the hard to reach or stay is a remote or insecure area that is unable to attract and retain sufficient numbers of motivated staff because of difficult living conditions. The hard to reach/ stay areas are called hard to work in areas.

Such areas have the following characteristics:

    a) Remoteness; this may be caused by natural disasters such as a rough terrain, mountains, water bodies or by less developed infrastructure such as poor road network or lack of affordable transport.

    b) Inadequate supplies, poor access to electricity, communication and housing, long distance to work stations and lack of social amenities such as water supplies, schools and health facilities.

    c) Another characteristic is insecurity which may be caused by insurgency or war and limits mobility of people, goods and services. Insecure areas are characterised by higher prices and dilapidated infrastructure among others. 

The implementation of the hard to reach/ stay framework

In 2001, Government introduced a hard to reach allowance for primary teachers in seven districts namely: Nakapiripirit, Moroto, Kotido, Kaabong, Abim, Mukono that is Buvuma and Koome Islands and Kalangala.
An average total number of 1,405 teachers benefitted from the hard to reach allowance from 2001 to 2009.

In the health sector, payment of the hard to reach allowance was a one off payment for health works in all health units in two phases. One was in the financial year 2006/2007 and the other in the financial year 2007/2008. That was funded by DFID through UNICEF.

In 2006, Cabinet approved a hard to reach allowance of 30 per cent of basic salary to all public officers working in designated hard to reach/stay areas. This was part of the policy for public service organisations 2006.

Cabinet also directed the Ministry of Public Service to define and designate hard to reach/stay areas and the ministry complied. 

Accordingly, the Ministry of Public Service in consultation with the Ministry of Local Government designated the following 18 districts as hard to reach or stay areas based on the criteria highlighted above. They were: Adjumani District Local Government, Bugiri District, Sigulu Island, Amuru District Local Government, Bundibugyo District Local Government, Kaabong District Local Government, Gulu District Local Government, Kalangala District Local Government, Kanungu District Local Government, Kisoro District Local Government, Kitgum District Local Government, Bukwo District Local Government, Mayuge District Local Government, Mukono District Local Government that is the Buvuma and Koome Islands, Abim District Local Government, Nakapiripirit District Local Government, Nwoya, Pader and Kotido District Local Governments.

It should be noted that a framework as approved by Cabinet excluded district headquarters and urban local governments as hard to reach or stay areas even if they existed within the hard to reach or stay district. 

It should also be noted that Buvuma Island is one of the designated hard to reach/stay areas contrary to what hon. Robert Ndugwa reported on the 14 December, 2017.

During the implementation, the Ministry of Public Service continued to receive requests for gazetting other areas as hard to reach/stay; and this necessitated undertaking a study to review the payment of hard to reach allowance. 

The study was accordingly undertaken with the purpose of establishing the effect of payment of the hardship allowance on addressing staff attraction, retention, absenteeism and motivation as well as establishing whether or not the districts requesting to be considered satisfy the hard to reach criteria.

Assessment of the districts that had applied to be included in the hard to reach framework. In that assessment, 34 districts that requested to be considered for payment of hard to reach allowance were visited. 

An analysis was undertaken for each of the 34 districts with reasons for failure to attract and retain staff. This is one of the reasons for failure to attract and retain staff.

This forms the basis for establishing those that had adequate justification to be considered for payment of hard to reach allowance. The reasons for failure to attract and retain staff were weighed with a scale between 1 and 5. Marks were given with a total weight of 10. 

Weighting of reasons for failure to attract and retain staff 

Weight		Reason
Lack of transport facilities (incl. poor road network)	5
Lack of accommodation		4
Lack of social amenities		3
Insecurity and hostility of locals	2
Others: (Poor climate, poor terrain, national parks and water bodies)	1

Twenty one (21) districts were found to be eligible for payment of the allowance and 88 sub-counties were identified as qualifying hard to reach/stay spots within these districts.

It should be noted, however, that the sub-counties in Buhweju District have not yet been verified. The districts and sub-counties which were found to be eligible are:

Kween District
Benet 	
Kaproron 	
Mayok 	
Binyinyi 	
Kitawoi 	
Kwosir 	
Kwanyiy 	
Ngenge 	
Kiriki 

Bulambuli District	
Sisiyi 	
Bunambutye	
Bumasobo	
Bulago	
Bumugiboole	
Masira	
Buginyanya	
Lusha,	
Bulunganya	
Bwikhonge	
Namusi

Buvuma District
Buvuma TC

Sembabule District	
Lugusulu 	
Lwemiyaga	
Ntuusi	
Mateete	
Lwebitakuli 

Mitooma District	
Kiyanga 

Bukedea District	
Malera
Buyende	
Nkondo		
Kagulu 

Bududa District	
Bukibokolo	
Bumasyeti	
Bushiyi	
Bumayoka	
Bukalasi	
Bulucheke	
Bubiita	
Buwali 
Nalwanza	
Bukigai
Nabweya
Bududa
Busikha
Nakatsi
Bushiribo
Bududa T/c

Moyo District
Metu 

Rakai District
Kyebe 

Rukungiri District	
Bwambara	
Bugangari	
Nyakishenyi	
Ruhinda	
Nyarushanje

Kyakwanzi District
Gayaza
Alebtong	
Abia 
Akura
Abako 
Alebtong TC	
Aloi

Mubende District
Buto 

THE SPEAKER:  Now, honourable minister, I think our concern was as to why some areas were excluded; may be if we could focus on those, which were excluded and why.

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Speaker, the reason for excluding some is that the hard to reach framework does not consider the district because of the criteria I have given. It considers spots and these are sub-counties. So when we made an analysis of the 34 –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Hon Ndugwa.

MR MIGADDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I raised this issue because I wanted an answer not only to benefit Buvuma, but also other hard to reach areas.

You have posed the same question that, why were certain areas excluded from the hard-to-reach areas? In fact, I have seen the minister’s submission. He totally learnt nothing from my submission here. What he is talking about was not my issue.

My issue is; you have hard to reach areas, which, for example, is Buvuma District. You term the district as hard to reach. All the areas in that district should be hard-to–reach. All of them might be hard to reach because they are within. 

In simple mathematics, the town council in Buvuma is a sub-set of Buvuma District, for the information of the minister. Therefore, by explaining that the circular had not indicated these areas, he is not answering the question. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, are we proceeding rightly by the minister failing to answer the question and continuing to talk about what he talked about? Are we proceeding well? What we need is, “Why?” Then we look for a remedy.

THE SPEAKER: Hon Minister, the Buvuma Island is not a main land. Therefore, all the islands in Buvuma are hard to reach. So the question is, why isn’t a town council in those hard to reach areas be classified as hard to reach? That is what the Member wanted to know.

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Speaker, Buvuma town council is one of those –(Interruption)

MR MUYANJA SSENYONGA: Madam Speaker, can I give the honourable minister information? The challenge I have seen is that many of our ministers and permanent secretaries have never even tried to go there. 

If you go to Koome, Madam Speaker, you will find that in the period of 32 years, they have only received two ministers who recently visited me - in 32 years! When you are crossing, you are using these local boats. 

There are no health facilities and the transport system is terrible. Even when me as a Member of Parliament if I want to cross the island, I have to budget for not less than ten million - just to cross. This is so because you need seven domolas, as they call them, (fuel jerry cans) for the boat engine. 

Madam Speaker, when you look at the performance of Koome in the recent Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE), I am even happy that I had some second grades. None of your sons or daughters can go and stay there unless there is an extra pay. That is what we are insisting on, honourable minister. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, honourable minister.

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Speaker, as I have said, Buvuma Trading Centre is one of the 21 out of the 34, which are benefitting. I gave a criterion, the reason and the weights. 

Lack of transport is one of them. Of course, Buvuma is a hard to reach area. However, for some other districts, the district would be hard to reach whereas you have transport facilities, accommodation within the town or a town council –(Interruption)

MR MIGADDE: Madam Speaker, we are dealing with a very simple issue that is defining “hard to reach”. The minister in his own submission here indicates areas which are eligible and among which, is Buvuma Town Council. Yet he has just said that Buvuma Town Council is among the areas to benefit. My simple understanding is that “eligible’ means “Buvuma Town Council is not benefiting”. 

Therefore, is the minister in order –(Interjection)- yes, but it doesn’t benefit. Therefore you cannot say that it qualifies. My issue is; why isn’t it getting? So are you saying it is among the areas getting? It is not benefiting! That is my issue.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you saying that Buvuma Town Council qualifies to be a hard to reach area?  And if it does, when will it get the money? Is it during this budget? 

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Speaker, as colleagues have the paper on their iPads, it involves financial implications and this implication excludes Buhweju where a study has not been undertaken. The financial implications stand to a tune of Shs 21,397,910,964 - it is an issue to do with finances.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of finance, you know we undertook to implement the SDGs - these people in the islands are Ugandans; they need education, roads and health. Why don’t you fund them? They are part of this country. Part of your constituency is an island, isn’t it? Therefore, you know the life of islanders. In Kanungu, there are no ambulances and children capsize in the lake, because there is no ferry. What are you saying about this?

3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we are just going to be debating the Budget Framework Paper in a few minutes from now. I think before we submit the final budget in April, we will be able to look at the issues of hard-to-reach areas and then report to the House.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, those are now three issues to be looked out for when the chairperson reports later today therefore, keep note of them.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF SAND MINING IN LWERA WETLAND

3.27
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Irene Muloni): Madam Speaker, on 16 November the Committee of Natural Resources came up with a report detailing the status of sand mining in Lwera and came up with resolutions for different government ministries and agencies to implement.

My ministry was tasked to take action on five resolutions and I wish to update the House as follows:

The first resolution was that my ministry should issue regulations for the exploitation of sand as an industrial mineral in Uganda within three months.

Madam Speaker, we all appreciate the lacuna in the laws starting with the Constitution, which exclude the definition of mineral substance such as clay, murram, sand or any stone commonly used for building or similar purposes.

However, the Constitution empowers Parliament to regulate the commercial exploitation of any substance excluded from the definition of "mineral" under Article 244 (5). The current Mining Act, 2003 does not adequately address issues of commercial exploitation of some mineral commodities such as sand, murram, clay, gravel and materials for public works such as road construction. 

Madam Speaker, the current sand activities are, therefore, not regulated under the Mining Act, 2003 and have not been licensed by my ministry. We note that generally, such activities as sand mining are regulated under the primary environmental laws. However, the mining laws are currently being reviewed to address the lacunas in the regulatory regime for sand mining.

Through the resolutions of the report of the Committee on Natural Resources on sand mining in Uganda of 16 November 2016, Parliament effectively implemented Article 244(6) of the Constitution and as directed; my ministry has constituted an inter-ministerial committee to formulate the draft sand mining regulations. The draft will be finalised by March 2018.

Meanwhile, my ministry has been exploring the potential of glass sand in the country including Lwera in Kalungu District; Diimu and Bukakata in Masaka District; Nalumuli Bay, Nyimu Bay and Koome lsland in Mukono District. The sand potential in Lwera is currently unknown. 

However, my ministry has made a proposal to explore the potential of the glass sand deposit in Lwera and other areas to establish their viability for investment. My ministry plans to evaluate the glass sand deposits in Lwera in 4th quarter of the Financial Year 2017/2018.

My ministry is currently reviewing  the mineral policy, the mining law and regulations to introduce a new type of licensing (or mineral right) and mode of application appropriate for clay, sand, murram or any stone commonly used for building or similar purposes. 

Under the new policy and legal environment - once approved by Parliament, we shall receive applications for mining rights over all sand deposits when used for commercial purposes and shall require all interested parties to abide by the revised Mining Act and Mining Regulations.

The second resolution was tasking my ministry to develop and publish an atlas for minerals including sand in Uganda. Madam Speaker, my ministry has already developed an industrial mineral map, which also include sand. This map has been included in this statement for viewing but if it is too small, we have large hard copies for you to see.

The third resolution was that NEMA in consultation with my ministry should develop national sand mining guidelines by April 2017, and that the guidelines be disseminated to licensed sand miners in the country.

I wish to report that my ministry in consultation with NEMA has developed the draft sand mining guidelines, stakeholder consultations are ongoing, and the draft is expected to be finalised by June this year.

The fourth resolution was tasking my ministry to undertake a comprehensive study to establish the regeneration rate of sand in Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, sand is formed from the weathering of silica-rich rocks such as sandstone, granite, quartzite and gneisses among others, transportation and deposition over a long period. The transported material is deposited either in marine or continental environments, where through gravity, the materials are sorted and the heavier ones go to the bottom and the lighter ones to the top. This kind of sorting occurs where there is rain, wind, natural gradients, etc.

In December last year, my ministry conducted a literature review study and established that for a centimetre of sand to form, it takes nearly 1,000 years. This can be correlated with studies of sediments in the Albertine Graben, where a thickness of about one kilometre was deposited over a period of about 30 million years.

Madam Speaker, the final resolution was that the lead agencies should coordinate their licensing processes to enhance synergies required for regulation of sand mining and other investors within the country.

My ministry, upon approval of the proposed amendment of the Mining Act by Parliament, shall take up the lead role in licensing all sand mining operations across the country.  

However, all licensed sand miners shall be required to be in possession of an approved certificate of environmental and social impact assessment based on a comprehensive report of their anticipated impacts to the environment and proposed remediation measures. 

There is also a proposal to have District Local Governments play a role in regulation of sand, clay and stone for construction purposes since these operations are numerous across the country and are generally localised. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to clarify and update you on the progress.

THE SPEAKER: Can I first hear from the chair or vice chair of the committee; does she have any comments on the minister’s report before I go to one or two of the Members? Any comments?

3.34
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the effort being made. However, Madam Speaker, the major problem in Lwera is sand mining; the recommendation was to stay the activities. However, what they are doing right now, the technical aspects are being carried on. 

As we speak right now, it is worse than it has ever been. The level of degradation of Lwera due to sand mining has gone too far.

The local governments as they were directed cannot do anything because they are threatened by top army officers. Both the illegal companies and army officers are involved. It has reached an extent that the sophisticated machines that were put in Lwera and Lake Victoria, have dug up pits which are not covered and vegetation has grown on top of the water; this is dangerous.

Madam Speaker, may I call upon the Committee on Natural Resources to go back to Lwera and the surrounding areas and report back to the House within two weeks on what is happening. However, the activities must be stayed so that no company degrades the wetland as efforts are being made to put up the guidelines. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know, this is work in progress and I do not know how much we can do.

3.36
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report in the interim. Like my colleague has observed, Lwera ceased to work during day, the bulk of activities are nocturnal. Those who drive through Lwera see beehives of activities in the night and there is light all over. If you drive through Lwera, the road is sinking, yet it is a new road. The degradation levels have got out of hand. 

To my recollection, the directive by Parliament that prompted the action of the minister was to put up a moratorium on the sand mining in Lwera. That moratorium was never implemented and this is why the minister is reporting in the present future tense and in third person. 

Therefore, we are not able to know whether there is action going on or she is desirous of taking action because the degradation is instant and ongoing. If you would like to see it for yourself madam minister, drive through Lwera in the night, it is a city and mining is going on and sand is collected up-stream in the night and carried across during day. 

Madam Speaker, we need firm commitment on the moratorium.

3.38
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for her statement. I know that hon. Irene Muloni was focusing on the policy framework on how to regulate sand mining. 

However, Madam Speaker, the matter as of now, is the extent to which the motion of Parliament is being implemented. When the Ministry of Water and Environment with its lead agency NEMA are culpable in not executing the resolution of this House - the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development is coming up with a policy regarding the regulation of sand mining, there are persons that are responsible for ensuring that resolutions of this House are implemented.

Madam Speaker, the issues of sand mining is even getting a little more complex because the middle of Lake Victoria is also becoming a sand mining avenue. If you have been following the press, Madam Speaker, a honourable minister who seats in this House was presiding over a very colourful ceremony few days ago in which Mango Tree was officially getting unilateral powers to do sand mining in the middle of the lake in the names of clearing way for navigation.

Madam Speaker, we need to come up with very stringent regulations from this House so that ministries that do not want to execute resolutions of Parliament are held accountable in this House. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.40
RT. COL. FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to appreciate the minister, but I am disappointed because the report is very clear; as a minister, you should have come out to say that since the guidelines and roles are not yet out “I will not accept any activity in Lwera” and we would know that the minister has spoken. (Applause)

However, you have even confused us the more. We want a clear directive from you as a minister of this Government stating that since guidelines are not there, we stop the activities until all the necessary guidelines have been put in place.

Madam Speaker, we should care about the future generation. The livelihood of Africa depends on Lake Victoria. If we now destroy Lake Victoria, are we thinking about the future generation? What is currently going on at the conference in OAU, they are talking about the same problem; as if we are not minding about what is happening in the world, about Lake Victoria and River Nile; we are busy giving licenses to deplete our source of livelihood; we are not serious. 

Therefore, I call upon the honourable minister and Government to be serious and protect Lake Victoria and stop sand mining in Lwera. Thank you, Madam Speaker.                                                

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before I get to honourable Mbabaali, I would like to remind the Government that Article 244 state: “Subject to Article 26 of this Constitution, the entire property in, and the control of, all minerals and petroleum in, on or under, any land or waters in Uganda are vested in the Government on behalf of the Republic of Uganda”. 

Is there a will to protect this resource for the people of Uganda? We talked about this one year ago in this House, but it seems no one is interested and life just continues and we spectate as we drive through Lwera.

3.42
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her report. I agree with my colleagues that sand mining should be regulated. I come from the same area and I would like to note that since 1969, I have been passing through Lwera up to date. Lwera was never a wetland; it has only turned into a wetland after the heavy sand mining. However, whoever is talking on the Floor of Parliament - this land has got people who own it because it was not a wetland. 

Therefore, when we talk about stopping, cancelling title deeds; there is ownership behind this land. As for me I suggest, regulate this time, but they must be compensated for their land. I rest my case.

THE SPEAKER: Is it okay to – anyway, honourable Minister of Finance, how much money does the Government of Uganda receive from sand mining? What is the benefit to the people of Uganda from sand mining?

3.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I am not in position to say how much we receive from sand mining, but I think this is an issue that has been on table for so long. If you can allow us, we could go back and have an end to this issue, because it has been going on and on. We would appreciate if you could give us some two days so that we have a concrete position on this issue –(Interruption)

DR KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, when we visited Lwera, at least in the area of Lwera that we are talking about, the district had received Shs 600,000 from that land. Then in Mpigi -

THE SPEAKER: Six hundred thousand Uganda shillings?

DR KIWANUKA: Yes, Uganda shillings. And then in Mpigi, they had received Shs 3,000,000.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I really do not know; can you come back on Thursday with a clear position? We resolved last year that this should stop until you issue regulations. This has not been done and the practice is continuing. Come back on Thursday.

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you so much for the guidance you have given to the Minister. 

Madam Speaker, as they bring the report on that, these offices in the ministries are still giving out licenses to people and the natural resources of this country are being depleted. Is their report going to take care of Ngetta for which they issued a license to an individual who is destroying that hill that had been gazetted by the ministry of Tourism? An individual in the names of Sarjapha is depleting that hill drastically and I feel if they are coming to the floor of Parliament, they should give us information as to why they gave that hill to an individual. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, which minister should address this; energy or environment? Who is going to bring that statement?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, tomorrow, we will discuss it in Cabinet and then we will decide which Minister to come. The Minister of Environment is appropriate.

THE SPEAKER: It should be comprehensive and should include the components of the other ministries and the agencies.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Item no.7? Item no.6 will come together with the relevant area. Can Commissioner Bahati assist the Parliamentary Commission to lay that Treasury Memorandum? 

LAYING OF PAPERS

TREASURY MEMORANDUM ON DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND MUNICIPAL COUNCILS FOR FY 2014/15

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Treasury Memorandum on the report of the Committee on Local Government Accounts on the Auditor General’s report for the financial year 2014/2015 on the District Local Governments and Municipal Councils.


THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the relevant committee for scrutiny and report back. Honourable members, we would like to move to Item no.9, so we shall be pushing Item no.8 a little bit further because under rule 144, we should have completed the Budget Framework Paper by 1st February, which is a few days away. I understand the chair is ready to present the report. Therefore, if you do not mind, let us handle that item and also take into account the three areas that were identified earlier, which are guiding the report of the chair. Item no.8 is deferred. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FY 2018/19 – 2022/23

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Budget Committee on the National Budget Framework Paper for the financial year 2018/2019 – 2022/2023. This report has been uploaded on to the iPads, along with the Budget Framework Paper itself –(Interruption) 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am raising a procedural point under Rule 201 and Rule 144 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

I sit on the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Parliament was adjourned to allow committees to receive responses and make presentations to the Committee on Budget. 

Since we are using a WhatsApp message group, I asked the Clerk to the Committee, after some Government Agencies had appeared before the Committee - he told me and other members, that “we are now drafting the report”. 

Madam speaker, there has not been a meeting of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to deal with the draft report that the Clerk said he was drafting. What eventually has happened from what I gather, is that the chairperson, and may be some other chairpersons of committees signed reports on behalf of committees and then went to the Committee on Budget.

The procedural issue I am raising under rules 201 and 144, is that we are required, not only to sign, but to initial on each page of the report by at least one third, for it to be a report of the committee. 

I have asked my other colleagues with whom we sit on the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs; we have not been called to consider a draft and neither have we been called to sign a final report that was presented. I have been told many other committees have done the same thing.  

The procedural issue I am raising is whether this report by the Budget Committee is a genuine report, not a forgery because the moment you do not have reports of committees - and committees were asked to go and consider the Budget Frame Work Paper and then report to the o Budget Committee. So what did you consider, Mr Chairman that you are now bringing to Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not sit on your committee. Maybe the chairperson can tell us; is your report conclusive?

Mr LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, the report of the Committee on Budget has been duly signed – (Interjections) - it is the report that we are required to lay on this Table. This rule 201 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, which you have cited talks about laying on the Table and “Laying on the Table” means this Table not the table in the Committee on Budget. (Laughter) 

We received the reports from the committees – (Interjections) - from the sessional committees and there is no requirement in the Rules of Procedure of Parliament that the reports submitted to the Committee on Budget have to be signed by all the Members; the reports were submitted to the Budget Committee – (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Point of order, Madam Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the chairperson of the committee is right. The report that comes here is the Report of the Committee on Budget, not of the sectoral committees; that is what is brought here. 

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We need to get this clearly - the Budget Framework Paper is laid before this House and is referred to the Committee on Budget. What this means is that it is the Committee on Budget that has the mandate to deal with the Budget Framework Paper and report back to the House – (Interjections) – yes. Madam Speaker - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, are you members of the Committee on Budget? Let us hear from the committee first.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In our work method, the Budget Framework Paper being comprehensive, Parliament – with your guidance and guided by the rules – provides that sectoral committees look at the various sectors that belong to them. 

However, in doing this, committees are supposed to facilitate the process of the Committee on Budget in coming up with the report. What happens is that we scrutinise the sectors and the votes, which we oversee and report back to the Committee on Budget. 

Ideally, if time would allow, there would be no harm in committees, after interfacing with stakeholders, coming back and discussing the draft before it is reported to the Committee on Budget. 

However, we must appreciate that we have statutory timelines. In this case, by the 1st day of February, there is a requirement by law that this Budget Framework Paper must have been laid before this House. What happens in this case is that after the draft reports were prepared by the committee, the chairpersons of committees, in their wisdom and in the wisdom of the chairperson of the Committee on Budget, found it necessary to present the reports to the Committee on Budget, which subsequently scrutinised it before having it duly signed by the members of the Committee on Budget.

Madam Speaker, the report being presented here I believe is the report we have processed and it is duly signed by the members of the Committee on Budget. Therefore, it qualifies to be presented before the House. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should not lift the veil because we will not accept here the reports from legal, tourism - the responsibility is given to the Committee on Budget. Those are the official people to report here on that issue.

MR MUSASIZI: Further information –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we cannot deal with the issues of your committees here. The delegated committee of this House to deal with those matters is the Committee on Budget and they are the ones to report here.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, let me begin with the introduction –(Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: What you are talking about are the raw materials. The raw materials are presented to the committee; they are not presented to us here.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I actually have the raw materials here. In accordance with the provisions of Articles 90 and 155(4) of the Constitution, Sections 9(1) to 9(8) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and Rules 143 and 144 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, committees are mandated to among other things, consider this – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will have the opportunity to speak to that report. Please, wait. Chairperson of the Committee on Budget, please present your report.

MR LUGOLOOBI: To review the Budget Framework Paper, the Committee on Budget presents a report to the House to be approved by the 1st Day of February of each year.

In compliance with the above provisions, I beg to present a report of the Committee on Budget on the National Budget Framework Paper for the fiscal years 2018/2019 - 2022/2013 for consideration and approval by this August House as required by sections 9(8) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and Rule 144(3) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Also, in accordance with Section 6(e)(2) and (4) of the Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 2006 as well as Rule 62 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament presented a response to the Committee on Budget on the National Budget Framework Paper for the financial years 2017/2018-2021/2022 –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The budget is one of the most important items handled by this Parliament. It is the one that determines how the money is appropriated for purposes of delivering services to the people of Uganda. 

Parliament has put up committees and the main function of the sessional committees is to deal with each sector of the budget. This is because the Committee on Budget alone cannot be intelligent enough to do everything. Hon. Lugoloobi cannot tell us that he knows each sector – the health, roads and all the other sectors. He could be knowing planning but not necessarily understanding the entire budget. That is the reason, Madam Speaker, why we set up sessional committees. 

If there is a mistake, would it not be procedurally right that the sessional committees, which were put in place to first report on the budget – to report on what they considered and recommended. The Committee on Budget would then get all these views, go and merge them but after Members of Parliament have debated them.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right to allow sessional committees first to report to the House and after that then the Committee on Budget could report?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, do not introduce new rules, which do not exists. The sectoral committees cannot come and report here because our rules say that the official person to report is the Committee on Budget. So, listen to the report. If there are issues you do not agree with, you can speak against them. 

Otherwise, we are not going to invite 32 committees to come here and first report to the plenary, and then the Budget committee reports; no way! Listen and if there are areas of disagreement – and I do not know whether they are actually bound to take all your views. Let us hear them and then speak against what they have said, where necessary.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Procedural point again, Madam Speaker. I beg you to guide me very well to understand – (Interruption)

MR ABIRIGA: Guide who now?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Well, at least let them guide me. You might be very intelligent. I am not intelligent. You might think you are intelligent, but from the way I see, you do not - (Laughter)

Anyway, Madam Speaker, is it going to be that when the Committee on Budget reports, issues from each sectoral committee will be commented on separately? That is important because we need to first lay the ground clear, that after presenting on issues from for example, the finance ministry, then we can say there is an issue in that ministry and the same can apply to Ministry of Health - or is it going to just be that because they have said they want to appropriate Shs 30 trillion, we just pass it? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, do not insult this House. When that report is presented, we debate it and you know that. Please, you go back to the highlands. Chairman, continue with the report. Go back to - 

MR NANDALA MAFABI: I am not insulting the House, Madam Speaker. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. On the scope of the –(Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson of the committee, proceed - no! 

MR LUGOLOOBI: The committee, Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: What is it about?

MR MPUUGA: Thank you for your indulgence, Madam Speaker. I am not trying to rescind your guidance or decision, I am only inviting Parliament to address itself to rule 144 (2), which is to the effect that each sectoral committee shall consider, discuss and review the Budget Framework Paper committed to it under sub-rule (1) and submit its report to the Committee on Budget; it is about its report. The argument we have here is that the committees did not submit their reports, implying that -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mpuuga, those reports were received by the Committee on Budget. If they had not reported, we would say, they did not report. Chairperson of the committee, please continue with the presentation of the report – the sectors are not supposed to come here. 

MR MPUUGA: We are dealing with forged –

THE SPEAKER: No, please.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, maybe for the information of the honourable member, we interacted with the chairpersons of all the committees and the reports are all here with me – (Interjections) – just hold on.

Rule 144 (2) states that each sectoral committee shall consider, discuss and review the Budget Framework Paper committed to it under sub rule (1) and submit its report to the Committee on Budget not later than the 20th day of January. These reports were submitted to us. The rule does not talk about laying –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, why are you anticipating? Let the chairman report then you can say, what he said is not applicable. Please, you are not the chair of the budget committee. Do not take over his work. You sit and listen. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The committee scrutinised the National Budget Framework Paper and the reports on the sectoral committees and has prepared a report, structured in two parts.

Part one is on the Government Medium Term Macro-economic Outlook, Medium Term Fiscal Framework, Policy Measures and Indicative Revenue Framework.

Part two is on the sectoral committee’s observations and recommendations made thereon.

Methodology

Members of the committee:

    1. Analysed the National Budget Framework Paper;
    2. Held meetings with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and all the chairpersons of sectoral committees of Parliament and discussed their observations and recommendations on the components of the National Budget Framework Paper under its jurisdictions;
    3. The committee received and held a lengthy discussion on the presentation by the Leader of Opposition;
    4. The committee also held meetings with the National Planning Authority, UNRA and the Ministry of Works and Transport; and
    5. Section 9 (4) and Schedule 3 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, prescribes the format of the National Budget Framework Paper. The committee analysed the compliance of the National Budget Framework Paper to the provisions of the law.

Compliance of the Budget Framework Paper to the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility

The Budget Framework Paper for the financial year 2018/2019 to 2022/2023, to a large extent, conforms to the requirements of Schedule 3 under the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 as summarised in Table 1 below. 

This is the third Budget Framework Paper since the Public Finance Management Act was enacted and the Executive has made good progress towards compliance to the requirements of this law and to improve on the contents of the Budget Framework Paper.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I sit on the Committee on Education and Sports. We are still meeting with entities tomorrow and on Thursday to process the National Budget Framework Paper such that we can eventually report to the committee in charge of the budget.

Madam Speaker, hon. Amos Lugoloobi is here saying that he has got reports from all the sectoral committees of Parliament but ours is still processing. We have not signed any report to that effect.
Is he in order, Madam Speaker, to mislead us, including you? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know what he is going to say. Let him tell us and then if he says something, which is not there, we will say it is not there. Let him proceed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But let him lay the papers.

THE SPEAKER: Allow him. That is what he is doing.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, we received both the hard and soft copy of the report from the Chairperson of the Committee on Education and Sports; the report is here.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Where are the signatures?

MR LUGOLOOBI: The signature issue is sorted already.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, please take your seat.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, there are no signatures. There are no signatures there.

THE SPEAKER: Take your seat.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, looking at Table 1 on the compliance of the Budget Framework Paper to the Public Finance Management Act - we have noted that against all requirements, the finance ministry passed the test, except on the Medium-Term Macro Economic forecast, where the law requires indicators on the average year-end Gross Domestic Product, the rate of inflation (average and year-end), the rate of employment and unemployment, the average year-end exchange rate, the interest rate and money supply.

So the committee was concerned that the finance ministry had consistently failed to provide data on the actual estimates and projections covering the previous two financial years, current financial year and next five financial years on the indicators I have just mentioned.

This matter was put before the minister and he explained that the GDP growth rate and inflation rate were provided. He said that the rate of employment and unemployment are not collected on a regular basis and are therefore, not available. He further said that the average and annual exchange rate are not provided to avoid speculation on foreign exchange movement and that the interest rate and money supply will be provided by Bank of Uganda in due course.

The committee observed that the indicators the minister failed to provide are central in monitoring the performance of the interventions in the budget. The absence of these indicators rendered the analysis of the performance and forecast of the budget practically difficult.

The committee recommends that in the next financial year, the ministry should have no more excuse for non-compliance for the law has been in place long enough to have put in place systems to comply with all the legal requirements. 

Regarding the concerns the committee raised on the link between input, output and outcomes under the programme, the new Programme Based Budgeting Structure, which has been used to present this year’s Budget Framework Paper, the minister responded that the Programme-Based Budgeting, commonly called the PBB is using the existing infrastructure under output oriented budgeting by providing a link between input, output and the results intermediate outcomes. 

PBB requires MDAs to define what they intend to achieve with the allocated resources, in terms of strategic objectives, policy priorities and results. This would help to better align resources to priorities and service delivery results, which in the long run, will help to ascertain attainment of long-term outcomes and the desired impact.

Madam Speaker, the Budget Framework Paper, as I mentioned, follows a new arrangement; the PBB system. In that process, we lost the output indicators in the documents that were laid on the Table yet the ministry had to report on the annual budget performance, in terms of output, which output relates to the input, in terms of resources. 

Therefore, this is a problem that we raised to the minister. In that process, the committee was informed by the minister that the description of activities and corresponding output indicators, which do not appear in the National Budget Framework Papers, can be traced from the sector budget framework papers. Therefore, we have 17 sectors and each sector has a Budget Framework Paper and so when the national Budget Framework Paper was laid here –(Interruption)

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I believe I rightly heard the chairman, in his last remarks, refer to the sectoral committees as having reported. 

Madam Speaker, there are instances when we would like to, for purposes of achieving certain timely frameworks in the law, move as stipulated. However, we also do not want to give ourselves or any other person room to successfully challenge what you may be doing. 

When I read specifically rule 144 (1), it says thus: “The Speaker shall commit the Budget Framework Paper to the Committee on Budget for consideration and to each sectoral committee, the part of the Budget Framework Paper that falls within the jurisdiction of the respective sectoral committee.”

Madam Speaker, Rule 201, particularly, (1)(b) provides thus: “In case of a complaint as to the authenticity of the report, the Speaker shall halt the debate on the report and refer the matter to the Clerk for investigation who shall report back to the Speaker before the next Sitting of the House.”

Now, Madam Speaker, when we have these rules – and unless these rules are suspended – but we choose to proceed the way we are doing with members questioning the authenticity of the report, for example, the one the chairman is presenting, I would like to implore you that we deal with the members’ questions so that later nobody says that we sat here to just waste taxpayers’ time. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is not authentic about that report? 

MR KARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, the Chairman of the Budget Committee presented a report from the Education Committee, which was not signed by the members. 

THE SPEAKER: He has not presented - he is reading the report of the Budget Committee.

MR KARUHANGA: Madam Speaker - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Karuhanga, the report of the Education Committee cannot come here. That committee reports through the Budget Committee. Listen to that report and then we shall debate it. Take your seat, hon. Karuhanga. This is a report of the Budget Committee, not your sector reports. 

MR AYOO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you look at rule 144, part of which has been read by hon. Karuhanga - I would like us to read all of it especially part 2, which states thus: “Each sectoral committee shall consider, discuss and review the Budget Framework Paper committed to it under sub-rule (1) and submit its report to the Budget Committee not later than the 20th day of January.”

Therefore, Madam Speaker, the Budget Committee received the reports from the sectoral committees up to yesterday, 29th of January yet they were supposed to submit them by 20th of January. When you look at sub-rule (2), it says we need to pass the Budget Framework Paper by 1st of February each year.

Therefore, when you have a delay as a committee and you do not consider your report, you do not meet all your entities and submit the report within time, why would you want to drag the whole Parliament back because of issues in your committee? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the reports of the sectoral committee did not come to this plenary. You report through the chairperson of the Budget Committee. Let him report.

MR LUGOLOOBI: In paragraph 16, the committee recommends that to maintain the linkage between the activities, inputs, outputs and outcomes, the minister shall, in future, be required to lay on the Table, all 17 sector Budget Framework Papers alongside the national Budget Framework Paper to ensure that Parliament has a full record of all these commitments. 

The Budget Framework Paper of 2018/2019 and 2020 to 2023 is consistent with the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. In paragraph 18 onwards, we talk about the misalignment with the National Development Plan II. 

In line with sections 9(1) and (2) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, Accounting Officers prepared and submitted their respective Budget Framework Papers to the minister to generate the National Budget Framework Paper. The minister is expected to ensure that the National Budget Framework Paper is consistent with the NDP as provided for in Section 93 of the Public Finance Management Act.

To the contrary, it has been noted that although alignment at sectoral level is 81 per cent, the alignment at service delivery centres; that is local governments, ministries, departments and agencies, is below 25 per cent as indicated in table 2 below. 
There is a big mismatch in the alignment of strategic plans of sectors, ministries, departments and agencies and local governments to the National Development Plans hence the weak foundation of the National Budget Framework Paper i.e. local governments, ministries, departments and agencies, are inconsistent with the National Development Plans. This contravenes Section 93 of the Public Finance Management Act. The schedule is there in table 2, page 6. You can clearly see that we have 16 sectors and out of those, 13 were fully aligned with the strategic plans to the NDP. 

When you look at the 127 Ministries, Departments and Agencies, only 31 were fully aligned to the strategic plans and NPD II. In case of local governments, out of the 157, only 33 were compliant.

The committee recommends that in line with section 9 (viii) and 78 (i) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 the following should be undertaken:

    a) Approve the Budget Framework Paper (BFP) with conditions that ministerial policy statements for local governments, Ministries, Departments and Agencies without aligned strategic plans should not be submitted to Parliament.

    b) Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development makes a report to Parliament why the National BFP was prepared based on submissions of votes that lack strategic plans aligned to the National Development Plan.

As resolved by Parliament on 31 May 2017, through the adoption of the report of the Budget Committee on the annual budget estimates for financial year 2017/2018, all sectors, Ministries, Departments and Agencies as well as local governments, which have failed to produce strategic plans should be sanctioned through non-approval of their annual budget.

Accounting officers who have failed to produce strategic plans for their Ministries, Departments and Agencies as well as local governments should not be approved to manage public funds.

Inconsistent outcome indicators

Uganda has developed a national standard indicator framework to track progress towards attainment of middle income status by 2020. An effective programme based budgeting arranges the budget around a set of programme objectives that are clear and specific.

The indicators and targets must also be concrete, realistic and have credible baselines and timelines. However, critical analysis of the outcome indicators contained in the BFP across all sectors indicates a pronounced mismatch with the national standard indicator framework.

It is extremely difficult to link the National BFP of financial year 2017/2018 and that proposed for 2018/2019. The programme indicators are completely different hence making it almost impossible to track progress and quality of targets.

Further, the committee noted a total misalignment between the BFP sector outcomes and the various sector development plans. The following examples may illustrate the misalignment;

In Agriculture, a11 the sector BFP outcome indicators do not match the outcome indicators in the Agricultural Sector Strategic Plan.  

In Education, the sector outcome areas as extracted from the NBFP 2Ol8/2019 do not resonate with the sector outcomes set out in the Education and Sports Sector Strategic Plan.  

In Health, the Health Sector Development Plan highlights 11 result areas and 41 indicators. However, the NBFP only points out four result areas, which are not synchronised with the Health Sector Development Plan outcomes. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should urgently review and update the National Standard Indicator Framework, 2O16 so as to articulate clear, measurable, agreeable and concise indicators, key outputs and targets across sectors. This will facilitate adequate scrutiny, appropriate allocation of resources and ease Government performance management.

MEDIUM TERM MACROECONOMIC POLICY GOAL

Madam Speaker, the overall medium term macro-economic policy goal is to accelerate and sustain all-inclusive economic growth while maintaining macro-economic stability and debt sustainability. 

However, in paragraph 27, in the previous financial years, the pace of GDP growth rate, domestic revenue mobilisation and budget execution especially the development component mode of budget financing, access to private sector credit and the instability in the banking sector have to some extent, deviated from their anticipated levels.

Although these factors have not compromised macro-economic stability and debt sustainability, they could have contributed to income inequality and the increasing poverty. According to the BFP, the findings of the Uganda National Household Survey Report of 2016/2017 indicate, among others, that: 

    1. Poverty headcount has increased from 19.7 per cent in 2O12/2013 to 2l per cent in 2016/2017.
    2. Poverty depth increased from 5.2 per cent to 6.8 per cent. 
    3. Poverty severity increased from 2 per cent to 2.5 per cent in the same period. 
    4. The rural areas with about 76 per cent of the population contribute 86 per cent of national poverty. On the other hand, the urban areas represent 24 per cent of the population and contribute 14 per cent of national poverty. 
    5. The number of poor people increased from 6.6 million in 2OI2/2013 to 10 mi11ion in 2016/2017. The findings point to a serious reversal in poverty indicators. It appears that the economic growth registered in the previous 10 years has not generated the momentum needed to transform Uganda's economy at the pace anticipated in the Uganda Vision 2040.

The committee recommends that Government should re-examine its macro-economic policy framework for the IMF projections indicate that Government's commitment to achieve a middle-income status by 2020 may not be realised. Government should institute mechanisms to frequently monitor the changes in employment and the welfare of the population in the medium term.

Members may have a look at figure 1, which is quite clear. This figure presents the GDP per capita in USA dollars. The curve on top is the NDP curve on projections for GDP per capita. The curves below are the IMF projections on GDP per capita. And you can clearly see a huge variance suggesting that it may not be possible to meet our targets for 2020.

The second recommendation is that we reverse the worsening poverty indicators. There is need to balance social and infrastructural spending so as to ensure that economic growth does not leave any behind. Towards this end, the planning and budgeting frameworks need to learn from what has gone wrong and where redirection is required. 

In this regard;
    1. The BFP should provide for medium term review of the NDP for us to learn from what we are not doing well and reprioritise accordingly. This ought to be provided for in the budget.
    2. The BFP should adequately provide for other planning processes. The evaluation of NDP II, preparation of NDP III and the 10 year perspective plan.
    3. Relaxing the inflation targets to match the targets in NDP II. Here, we are calling for some form of inflationary spending to give the economy some flexibility especially in terms of aggregate demand.

National Development Strategy Implementation and Medium Term Macroeconomic Forecast
The financial year 2018/2019 marks the fourth year of the implementation of the NDP II. Table 3 indicates the BFP macroeconomic forecast as compared to the IMF and NDP forecast.

The medium term forecast in BFP is consistent with the IMF projections under the eighth review of the country’s policy instrument July 2017. In table 3, you can see the forecast for real GDP growth as proposed by the BFP, IMF and NDP II.

When you look at the annual headline inflation, there is a fairly significant variance between the NDP II forecast and the BFP forecast. When you go to broad money, it is the same story. However, there is a convergence on M3 broad money. 

The BFP focus for real GDP growth at 5.5 per cent in financial year 2018/2019 is revised downwards compared to the NDP forecast and the revision has been persistent each year, indicating that the medium term projection of 6.6 per cent under the NDP II may not be realised. I invite you to look at figure 1 on GDP growth rate.

The ones on top are the NDP projections and the ones below are the growth rates that seem to be emerging by the BFP and IMF. Therefore, there is lack of convergence between the plan and the projections in the budget. 

The slow growth is attributed to climate change, which causes prolonged droughts and intermittent rainfall patterns are slower than expected recovery in the provision of credit for private sector by the banking system, slower than anticipated investment and developments in the production sectors of the economy, slower than anticipated pace in the execution of public infrastructure investment projects and disruptions to trade due to regional instability like in Southern Sudan and Congo and slower global economic growth in the previous two financial years.

The committee further observed that in addition to the above factors, the slowdown in economic growth below the NDP proposed levels is attributed to inappropriate strategy or prioritisation of infrastructure development, which is a support sector without corresponding investment in the productive sectors they are intended to support.

For instance, whereas the proposed sector allocation to Tourism, Trade and Industry sub sector is Shs 119 billion, a corresponding investment in Works and Transport is 4,707 billion in financial year 2018/2019 and the situation has been persistently the same over the past two decades. The same applies to Agriculture, Minerals and ICT.

The mismatch of prioritisation constrains Uganda’s potential for import substitution and export development. This subsequently affects production, productivity and gainful employment hence the failure to attain middle income status. 

As a consequence, the nation cannot harness self-growth to sufficiently support its own infrastructural development and social services rather largely depending on borrowing.

For instance, in the financial year 2018/2019, it is projected that Shs 2.1 trillion out of 4.7 trillion, which translates to 45 per cent of the budget of Works and Transport sector would be funded by external sources.

While the implementation of the NDP II core projects is indicated to be on course, the projects continue to face implementation and supervision challenges arising from insufficient technical and implementation capacity. 

Inability to enforce contracts, lower provision of counterpart funds in the budget, lengthy procurement processes, delayed acquisition of right of way, unsatisfactory quality of works, poor project preparedness and lack of inter-agency collaboration and synergy.

Achieving the Desirable Macro-Economic Outcomes

It is prudent to note that the envisaged NDP II macroeconomic outcomes, that is sustained growth, keeping inflation below 5 per cent and attaining middle income status can only be achievable when emphasis is balanced between enabling, complementary and primary growth sectors. 

Resource allocation based on this categorisation is illustrated by table 5 below. The first category are the social sectors and the percentages in terms of resources allocated. We have the primary growth sectors that include Minerals, Agriculture, Water and Environment, Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Tourism, Trade and Industry, ICT and national guidance.

When you look at the graph that follows figure 3, we present the sectoral allocations for the past five years and you could clearly see that Works and Transport for the last five years has taken a lion’s share.

The allocation to sectors like Tourism, Trade and Industry are falling at rock bottom. That is what the graph depicts. How do you expect these roads that we are constructing very expensively with borrowed funds to give you a return on your investments without investing in the productive sectors?

The poor budget prioritisation is attributed to the fact that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not given adequate room to the medium term plan and the NDP to influence resource allocation.
The committee recommends that the National Planning Authority should be allowed to play a major role in guiding resource allocations, while the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development’s emphasis should be focused on resource mobilisation and accountability.

The Disconnect Between Macro-Economic Objectives and Sectoral Interventions/ Targets

The committee noted that public investment is still lower than was planned in NDP II, which has translated into a less expansionary fiscal policy than was expected to boost the economy in NDP II. 

Further, the sectoral focus in the BFP may not achieve the macro-economic objectives as several expected investments that should support the macroeconomic objectives are missing. For instance, it is hard to see how the theme of “Industrialisation for job creation” will be achieved, since the interventions proposed seem unlikely to drive the theme. There is no emphasis on industrialisation in this document.

Recent Developments and the Impact on the Medium-Term Macro-Economic Framework

Despite the lower than projected economic growth in financial year 2016/2017, the outlook for financial year 20l7/2018 and the medium term points towards recovery and positive growth prospects. 

The inflationary pressures have receded due to improved food supplies and the annual core inflation is projected to remain at 5 per cent. 

Although the financial sector is shallow in Uganda, the monetary policy stance has been supportive in ensuring recovery of the private sector activities, including the lowering of interest rates. Government has been slow at recapitalising the Uganda Development Bank (UDB), which has in turn constrained access to affordable long-term capital to the private sector.

In financial year 20l7/2018, the external sector is expected to improve with the narrowing of the current account deficit due to increased exports and remittances. However, the projected rise in infrastructure related imports might affect the current account projections. 

Given the global uncertainty and shocks led by USA foreign policy changes, Brexit and EU issues, if the anticipated remittances and FBI do not materialise, then the country's external position will negatively be affected.

The inflation targeting framework that was introduced in 2011 has served well for Uganda. It is hoped that with a favourable inflation outlook, the Central Bank will continue with its monetary easing programme, as demonstrated in the reduction of the CBR from 15 per cent in July 2016 to 9.5 per cent in October 2017. 

However, while treasury bill rates have continued to decline across all tenures in Financial Year 2Ol7/20l8 (Table 6), the reduction in the CBR has been slow to transmit to lending rates, reflecting tightening of lending standards and the asymmetry in the transmission of monetary policy. 

Commercial banks have attributed high interest rates to high risks associated with lending due to lack of credible collateral on the part of borrowers as well as overhead costs in form of utility costs among others. 

The scope for further easing of monetary policy will depend on the exceptional coordination with the fiscal policy and success of its implementation. The fiscal policy is largely about revenue and expenditure. Table 6, which is on page 17 shows the movements in the treasury bill rates by tenure. The first tenure is the 91 day tenure. You could clearly see that the interest rates as of December 2017 had reduced from 10.7 percent to 8.4 per cent. The same applies to the 182 day and 364 day tenure. Therefore, there is a declining trend in these rates. 

Paragraph 47, accumulation of domestic arrears especially from delayed clearance to the private sector that supplies goods and services to the Government has constrained private sector. Whereas domestic arrears stood at above 3.2 percent of GDP by end of June 2016, Government made a provision of just about 0.32 per cent of GDP in the budget for the financial year 2017/2018.

It is not clear whether the provision of Shs 300.9 billion equivalent to 0.29 per cent of GDP in financial year 2018/2019 is adequate to clear all the domestic arrears.

In addition, Government should remain committed to prioritising verification and clearance of domestic arrears in the financial year 2018/2019. 

Key Macro-Economic Assumptions

The inflation targets in the medium term are premised on favourable food prices as well as good weather conditions, stability of exchange rates and international commodity prices. The monetary authorities need to closely monitor these indicators, particularly the Bank of Uganda.

In paragraph 49, given the inflation effects of the frequent droughts in the country, because each time there is poor performance of the economy in Government, the explanation we always get is that we had drought. Therefore, in 49, we are saying that given the inflation effects of the frequent droughts in the country, Government should consider developing the irrigation infrastructure as a national priority. A well-established irrigation infrastructure in the entire country will ensure increased food production and productivity hence stable food prices.

Irrigation infrastructure will enhance GDP growth, create and stabilise jobs, ensure food security and increase domestic earnings and savings. Government should also restore and conserve all water resources. 

In addition, Government should institute measures that will address the continued encroachment, deforestation and degradation of forest cover countrywide. The fast declining forest cover in the country contributes to climate change.

In paragraph 52, in the absence of long term capital for private sector investments, economic growth performance over the medium term will continue to be below potential levels. Government should, therefore, consider expediting pension reforms and adequate recapitalisation of Uganda Development Bank, which in turn should introduce financial products of supporting investors in Agriculture, Mining, Industry, Tourism and ICT in order to boost the country’s economic growth. Strategies in the BFP aimed at reducing the cost of credit by continuing to invest in UDB and Micro-Finance Support Centre alone are weak and are unlikely to achieve the required impact.

Largely missing is reforming of the pension sector. In addition to reviewing restrictions on the NSSF Act, the BFP should provide Pension sector wide reforms that are key to the development of the capital markets and boosting national savings to provide finance for long term investments.

In paragraph 55, the agricultural sector still employs the highest labour force in the country and the structure of the economy has remained agricultural based. The structural transformation stagnation towards manufacturing results from limited skills in the labour market, high costs of production leading to the slow growth of factories.

While the Youth Livelihood Programme has benefited over 80,000 youths, they are still in the agriculture and trade sectors that require less skilled labour force, which is unable to trigger social economic transformation.
The committee recommends that:

    i)   The Government urgently considers measures for restoring skill-based training institutions that deliver technicians and other factory workers in a bid to attract new manufacturing industries in Uganda.
    ii) Government should hasten measures to establish, equip and manage technical and vocational institutes in each constituency as a measure to contribute to the transformation of the informal sector into a highly productive formal sector. Relevant resource allocation be made over the medium term.
    iii) Government establishes a national skills inventory that should be complimented by comprehensive curriculum reform to address skills mismatch.

Medium Term Fiscal Focus

This is presented in three categories in the revenue outlook, the expenditure outlook and the budget deficit. I request that during your spare time, you could go through this. I will take you straight to the budget deficit, in paragraph 64.

After looking at all the revenue and expenditure, we ended up with an overall fiscal deficit, which is projected to contract marginally by Shs 662 billion, that is 0.8 percent of GDP. From what it was in the financial year 2017/2018 - Shs 6.3 trillion to Shs 5.7 trillion in the financial year 2018/2019. We note that the fiscal deficit in financial year 2018/2019 is 5.4 per cent, which is still inconsistent with the Charter of Fiscal responsibility. 

Domestic borrowing is projected to reduce by Shs 14.3 billion, which is 1.5 per cent movement from Shs 154.2 billion to Shs 940 billion in line with the overall fiscal framework strategy.

This projected outlook will boost private sector credit growth from 12.6 per cent of GDP in 2016/2017 to 13.6 per cent in 2018/2019. The fiscal deficit projection of 5.4 per cent of GDP for 2018/2019 is above, as I mentioned, the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and EAC monetary convergence criteria of 3 per cent of GDP.

Government will have to adopt austerity measures to minimise resource wastage as well as promoting efficient use of resources in order to meet the CFR and EAC monetary criteria threshold on fiscal deficit. 

Paragraph 67, the financing framework proposed in BFP requires further re-examination. The BFP concentrates more on the expenditure side but is weak on how revenue will be mobilised. Except for strengthening efforts on tax administration and compliance, the BFP lacks a medium term strategy to strength revenue mobilisation. 

In addition, alternative financing mechanisms proposed in the NDP seem not to be targeted. For instance, while the NDP II proposed leveraging PPP financing sources, the BFP does not provide for modalities to build capacity for adequate structuring of PPP projects. Despite the PPP being considered as one of the potential sources of financing the budget, we believe that this has not been adequately utilised.

While the BFP aims to strengthen management of Non-Tax Revenue including Appropriation in Aid (AIA), this is an area where more focus is required to ensure that AIA revenues are aligned to national development objectives.

The practice has been for these institutions that benefit from AIA to collect Non-Tax Revenue and use it at source. Now, the proposed policy is for URA to collect this Non-Tax Revenue, the money gets into the Consolidated Fund and through the Single Treasury Account, the money is returned to the AIA beneficiaries. 

In addition, some of these institutions actually collect more money than they require. Therefore, we are proposing that this should be aligned to the national development objective.

We should only give them what is necessary to meet their needs and the balance should be shared with other spending agencies.

The finance ministry should formulate a medium term revenue mobilisation strategy aimed at widening the tax base as well as attracting high value investment.

Projected resource envelope for the Financial Year 2018/19

The total resource inflow for the financial year 20l8/19 is projected to increase by 0.9 per cent from Shs 29,008.5 billion in the financial year 20l7/18 to Shs 29.274 billion. This is illustrated in Table 8. 

The increase in resource inflow is attributed to increase in Domestic Tax Revenue, which is about Shs 448 billion and budget support by Shs 117.9 billion. The increasing budget support may indicate that the donor community is slowly re-gaining confidence in the country's reformed financial management systems.

However, as a ratio to GDP, the total resource inflow is projected to decline from 28.2 per cent of GDP in the financial year 2017/18 to 27.4 per cent of GDP in the financial year 20l8/19. The project support is projected to decline by Shs 301.4 billion from Shs 7.075 trillion in the financial year 2017/18 to Shs 6.774 trillion.

The external debt repayments are projected to decrease by 55.6 billion from Shs 949.6 billion in the financial year 2017/18 to Shs 894 billion in the financial year 2018/19.

The table that follows is a summary of the resource envelop of the financial year 2017/18. We start by looking at the projected revenues, which are clearly indicated. For domestic revenue, we expect that URA in the financial year 2018/19 will collect Shs 15.13 trillion. 

Non-Tax Revenue will generate Shs 417.8 billion. There is no projection for oil. The Petroleum Fund has no number there. AIA, Shs 872.9 billion and budget support Shs 152.8 billion, net borrowing financing, net domestic financing by Shs 5.9 billion and of this money, you will recall that we have domestic refinancing or debt stock  that we have been rolling over of Shs 4.9 billion. In addition, there is project support as I mentioned of Shs 6.774 billion, giving us a total resource inflow of Shs 29.274 trillion.

Now, when we adjust these resources, external debt repayments, Government of Uganda resource envelop, domestic arrears repayment and other expenditure including project support, domestic refinancing and interest repayment, we remain with a discretionary resource of Shs 12,744.9 billion. This is the money that we have to spend.

In Paragraph 73, the discretionary resources available for Government expenditure will grow by 3.7 per cent from Shs 12.291 billion in the financial year 2017/2018 to Shs 12.744 billion in the financial year 2018/2019 hence an increase in discretionary expenditure space by Shs 453.1 billion. Therefore, that Shs 453.1 billion is the increase in the resource.

However, the discretionary resource will drop from 12 per cent of GDP to 11.6 per cent of GDP over the same period.

Now the summary of the resource in flow in terms of the source whether domestic or external. We note that in the financial year 2018/19, domestic resources, the share is 76.3 per cent and external resources are only 26.7 per cent.

Paragraph 73 is on the external debt. According to the BFP, external debt constitutes 66 per cent of total public debt of $10.74 billion projected for the financial year 2017/18. 

In the financial year 2018/19, the mode of financing projects in the country will largely be 81 per cent through external borrowing while 19 per cent will be through grants. 

Among the external borrowing for projects, only 47 per cent of the financing will be on concessional or cheaper terms. The remaining funds of 53 per cent will be obtained on terms that are more expensive and the share will increase in the medium term to average at 79 per cent. The Government will access more expensive external credit to finance its investment plan in the medium term. 

Uganda faces heightened risks to this approach of external financing given that the present value of external debt to exports of goods and services may worsen from 77.5 per cent to 112.7 per cent increasing the vulnerability of the country’s external position in the event of any export shock.

Sector MTEF Allocations for the Financial Year 2018/19

The total sectoral allocation excluding domestic arrears is projected to grow by 0.1 per cent in the financial year 2018/19.  However, the share of GDP, total sectoral allocation will drop from 27.9 per cent in the financial year 2Ol7/18 to 27.2 per cent in the financial year 20l8/19 and Table 10 illustrates this. 

The highest growth in allocation will favour water and environment whose resource will grow by 12.8 per cent, followed by energy and minerals development (8.7 per cent), trade, tourism and industry (8 per cent) and works and transport (2.6 per cent). 

On the other hand, there will be a decline in resource allocation to the following sectors: Accountability, the budget will reduce by 11.3 per cent; security will reduce by 8.2 per cent; health will reduce by 7.4 per cent; and ICT by 3.4 per cent. Table 10 gives the details of the resource allocation and the shares, as I have just been describing. 

Statement of Policy Measures 

Revenue Measures

In the medium to long term, the revenue mobilisation effort is going to focus on strengthening tax administration and compliance of taxpayers. It is anticipated that growth in tax revenue during the Financial Year 2018/19 will largely result from improvement in compliance of taxpayers and strengthening of the tax administration through the following administrative measures:

    1. Expansion of the scope of withholding tax agents;
    2. Strengthening of the business intelligence function of URA to detect noncompliance; 
    3. Strengthening the risk management function and deploying the enterprise risk tool to all critical stations; 
    4. Expanding a block management system to cover other potential revenue geographical areas beyond Kampala; 
    5. Enhancing arrears management structures to recover more debt and dedicate more staff to arrears enforcement; 
    6. Implementation of valuation controls; and
    7. Attachment of staff as attachés to the embassies of China, India and Dubai (UAE).

The committee observes that the current tax regime does not provide a conducive incentive structure to encourage manufacturing at the low stages of the value chain. The regime is uniform to all manufacturing regardless of the stage of value addition along the value chain. As such, it favours importation of manufactured inputs that are at high stage value addition. Indeed, it disfavours use of local inputs and investing in more stages of value addition.

To explain the above point, when you look at the value chain for cotton, the current tax system does not seem to favour investment in processing the cotton into yarn, fabric and garment. However, it favours the importers of fabric who produce garments. That status quo is not desirable. 

Given this problem, Uganda's ability to attract manufacturing industries that offer significant value addition to our raw materials and create jobs has been heavily compromised. This should be the reason, for instance, why Uganda continues to export almost 100 per cent of its cotton, coffee, hides and skins and minerals in a raw form. Uganda’s FDI inflows have in the past three years also been declining.

To reverse this trend, the committee recommends that:

    1. Government seizes the opportunity of the investment Bill currently before Parliament to offer an incentive regime intended to attract high value adding enterprises.
    2. Explore other incentives that could be offered under other existing laws such as the VAT Act.

The committee also noted the growing threat imposed by the frequent drought to the country’s agricultural potential and the national gross domestic product. The committee recommends that in order to maintain all year round agricultural production, all irrigation related equipment and materials should be exempt from tax to avert the worsening poverty situation in the country attributed to vulnerability due to climate change.

Sectoral Priorities 

The BFP identified the following sectoral priorities for the Financial Year 2018/19: 

    1. Increasing production and productivity;
    2. Enhancing industrialisation to support job creation and exports;
    3. Investment promotion and private sector growth;
    4. Infrastructure development - energy, transport and ICT;
    5. Harnessing tourism potential;
    6. Improving service delivery (health and education); and
    7. Improving governance (pay reform, restructuring Government institutions, JLOS and public investment management).

Agriculture

The BFP is commended in providing for investment in Rwebitaba Zonal Agricultural Research and Development Institute for tea research and the National Coffee Research Institute (NaCORI) for coffee. However, it is weak in showing how production and productivity in other areas will be improved, as follows: 

1. 	The BFP rightly focusses on irrigation, particularly dealing with mandate, policy and strategy issues. However, the BFP must show what milestones and targets will be achieved with the planned investments in irrigation; how much will be achieved with the BFP investments and what will be done in the medium term.

2. 	The BFP should prioritise the use of the voucher system instead of direct distribution of inputs by Operation Wealth Creation/NAADS. This will improve the distribution of inputs to ensure that beneficiary farmers receive the right inputs at the right time to reduce wastage and corruption through issuance of vouchers that can be cashed at an appropriate by the farmer. This will ensure that only interested farmers get the vouchers and the vouchers will be cashed when the farmer is ready to plant. Operation Wealth Creation/NAADS can build on the ongoing work under the Agricultural Cluster Development Project of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) where an electronic voucher management system is being implemented. 

3. 	The BFP should provide for strengthening the Department of Crop Inspection and Certification under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to enhance certification, enforcement and quality assurance of agricultural inputs. There is need to recruit additional staff, renovate and equip certification laboratory facilities at Namalere and Kawanda research institutes with advanced equipment such as high chromatographic machines, autoclaves, cold rooms, cold trucks, green houses and operational resources for inspection and training of agro-input dealers. This will enable the department to effectively certify and track all nurseries and other input suppliers. 

4. 	The BFP should provide for district local governments to scale up agricultural extension services. There is need to facilitate the recruited agricultural extension staff to effectively provide extension services in all the sub-counties in the country. This would enhance adoption of improved technologies and increase agricultural productivity. 

5. 	The BFP should provide for the National Animal Genetic Resource Centre (NAGRC) and the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) to enhance genetic improvement of cattle herds for dairy and beef. This will enable establishment of necessary infrastructure and acquisition and installation of artificial insemination facilities at nine regional centres throughout the country.  

Oil and Gas 

The BFP should be focused on ensuring that the country achieves maximum benefits from the development phase of the oil investments. To this end, the BFP should prioritise the following:

1. 	Fast tracking the certification of middle level skills personnel for the oil and gas sector. Investing in certification will enable the country to provide the required manpower needs for the development phase of oil and gas. This is currently missing in the BFP and as such, the country will have to rely on foreign manpower and thus lose revenue and foreign exchange from the sector. 

	Towards this end, the budgets for the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and the Ministry of Education and Sports need to be reconfigured, to provide for the skills gap and certification. 

2. 	Further, there is need to build capacity to benefit from value addition on inputs required in the sector. For instance, capacity should be acquired to coat and produce paint for coating the crude oil pipeline. This will have substantive benefits for the economy. 

Instead of importing already coated oil pipes, the cost can be significantly reduced if coating is done locally, providing significant savings that are potentially higher than the cost of the factory. It also provides multiplier benefits on the economy in terms of jobs created and foreign exchange saved.

Infrastructure 

The BFP is commended for prioritising road maintenance of the existing road network; nevertheless, efforts to achieve this need to be strengthened. 

While Shs 100 tax on fuel will be imposed to raise resources for road maintenance, there is need to earmark the funds to more innovative technologies such as the low cost sealing technology and financing model proposed by Probase. This intervention will have the effect of drastically reducing muddy and dusty roads in Uganda, which are presently over 130,000 kilometres, using part of the existing budget on maintaining the dusty roads, guaranteed over a concessional long term financing model.

Madam Speaker, I will give further explanation on this. The entire road network amounts to 140,000 kilometres in the country and out of which, only 5,005 kilometres are paved. Now, if we go at the current pace, many of us and our grandchildren will never get to see tarmac roads in our areas. This measure is intended to fast track the delivery of those roads using new technologies that have come onto the market.

Further, the BFP also has to:

1. 	Deal with capacity challenges for new projects both in financing and execution, for example UNRA's absorption capacity challenges that have persisted for some time. Uganda National Roads Authority was allocated Shs 1.268 trillion external financing to construct roads in the Financial Year 2016/17. However, only 21.9 per cent of this budget, amounting to Shs 277.4 billion, was utilised citing procurement delays, constraints in land acquisition, inadequate counterpart funding, which is spread thinly to many different projects, and the slow rate of mobilisation by the contractors.

	Almost Shs 1 trillion of borrowed funds remains idle with severe consequences such as a huge interest burden and a loss of fiscal space that would have otherwise been utilised for other equally important projects like irrigation.  

2. 	Deal with the inter-modal transport system beyond roads. The BFP has continued to prioritise road transport at the expense of other modes of transportation. The BFP must balance all modes of transportation.

Energy

The BFP should balance investing in generation, transmission and distribution of electricity. Uganda has done well in building adequate electricity generation capacity. However, translating this generation capacity into demanded electricity has been a challenge. 

The sector is faced with a dilemma of having surplus supply on one hand with a deficit witnessed by consumers on the other hand. Amidst a surplus, several consumers continue to face depressed demand as electricity is load-shed due to low capacity to transmit and reliably distribute electricity generated. Further, while the country has invested in generation, little is being done to boost potential demand. As such, the BFP needs to prioritise several efforts as follows:

1. 	In the short term, there is need to invest in ensuring that all those who need electricity have it at all times (reliable supply). In this regard, the BFP should prioritise investments in adequate transmission and distribution capacity to ensure that industries and other consumers are supplied with consistent and reliable power;

2. 	In the medium and long term, the BFP should prioritise investing in boosting demand for electricity. Building adequate industrial parks and leveraging the iron ore industry, for instance, need to be prioritised. Indeed, investing in the iron ore industry alone would consume all Uganda's electricity generated.

Tourism

The BFP needs to strategically invest in key potential tourism hotspots and low hanging fruits. Key among these is adequate investment in the Source of the Nile, Namugongo shrines, Mt. Rwenzori and domestic air transport, particularly aerodromes and a regional carrier. These have demonstrated their potential as Uganda’s tourism hotspots, however the BFP has not provided for investment in these areas.

Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area

While the BFP aims to focus on efficient management of urbanisation, it does not provide for explicit activities towards joint planning and execution of projects in the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area (GKMA). The BFP needs to leverage the GKMA by explicitly defining joint planning and projects to be jointly executed in the area. It should be noted that the GKMA is a driver of over 6O per cent of Uganda's GDP. As such, dealing with issues affecting the GKMA has a potential to boost Uganda’s economy.

Other General Observations

Restructuring Government Institutions

The committee shares the view that while the creation of the different Government institutions was well intended, they have now resulted into overlapping mandates, poor coordination, wastage and increased cost of administration.

The committee urges Government to expedite the review of the existing ministries, departments and agencies with a view of reorganising and merging those with similar mandates. However, this should be carefully handled to avoid huge compensations in form of terminal benefits that could have a big toll on the limited resources. Also, Government should ensure that the restructuring takes cognisance of the high unemployment rates in the country.

Pay Reform

It should be recalled that over the years, there has been a strong agitation and industrial action over low pay across different categories of Government employees. Whereas Government has realised the need to harmonise and enhance salaries across the service, there is no evidence in this BFP of provision of funds to cater for this pay reform. A total of Shs 1.8 trillion has been indicated as required in the next financial year. However, as I mentioned, there is no provision.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, were you addressing the work which was done by the Cabinet on reforming the pay of all the civil servants? Is that what you are talking about?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes; we are talking about the general pay reforms and the agitations that have been going on for higher pay. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying that it is not provided for?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes. No resources are provided for this. However, they talk about it. Paragraphs 90, 91 and 92 will further exemplify this point. 

The Government has proposed that pay reform has to be done in a phased manner, taking into account the available resources. To accommodate this requirement, the following trade-offs will require immediate action, and this is what the Government is proposing: 

    1. Freeze all new recruitments except those on replacement basis;
    2. Indefinitely halt operationalisation of the 13 new districts and 200 town councils approved by Parliament; and 
    3. Stop Government grant aiding of private schools, universities and hospitals coupled with a comprehensive restructuring of Government.

The committee observed that in considering these measures, Government should be mindful of the social implications to the population; for example, the huge number of students who may drop out of school as a result of suspending the grant aiding of private schools and universities.

 The committee does not seem to foresee a quick resolution to these policy positions before the submission of the Budget estimates of the Financial Year 2018/19 and urges Government to come out more clearly on this matter. I think the minister, who is here, will be required to come out more clearly on this matter.

The committee recommends that the Government should implement the operationalisation of the 13 districts and 200 town councils in a phased manner, as earlier agreed in Parliament.

We have proposed some adjustments to the sector allocations, which we have been talking about as being very critical. In the Ministry of Works and Transport, we are proposing an adjustment of Shs 50 billion to finance low-cost sealing of roads; we are talking about 500 kilometres of roads. We note that the country spends huge sums of money on maintaining these dusty and muddy roads, which never get any better.

The second sector is the one of water and transport. We propose an adjustment of Shs 50 billion to implement innovative irrigation technologies among farmers, to enhance production and productivity. It is understood that when we irrigate coffee and all these other crops, the yield will multiply several times and the country’s GDP will expand.

Madam Speaker, part 2 on the sectoral observations and recommendations, which I have not presented, is an integral part of this report and should be read as such. However, for now, I beg to conclude. 

The committee has identified some policy gaps and has made numerous recommendations, which we will require to be incorporated, to generate a revised Budget Framework Paper. In particular, it should reflect the observations and recommendations of part 1 of this report and take cognisance of the recommendations in part 2. 

Madam Speaker, in accordance with Section 9(8) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and rule 144(3) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the committee requests Parliament to approve the proposed National Budget Framework Paper for Financial Year 2018/2019 with the proposed amendments. I beg to move. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and members of the Committee on Budget, for that elaborate report.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Budget on the National Budget Framework Paper for the Financial Years 2018/2019 – 2022/2023. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I was notified this morning of a minority report. That report was served to me a few minutes ago by hon. Kivumbi and hon. Cecilia Ogwal. I have neither had the opportunity to read it nor have my members read it because of the difficulties we have had with timeframes. With your permission, they can present the minority report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, who is the lead person? Hon. Kivumbi?

5.28
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I present the minority report, I would beg you, kindly, with your usual kind heart, to find time and study the implications of the procedural issues we dealt with. Being a member of the Committee on Budget, I know and I am certain that there are huge implications. I will reserve my comments for another day but I would earnestly encourage you to look into that issue.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I appreciate that you may have had some difficulties but it is hard, without getting the whole background, to make a ruling on that issue. However, I have noted the concerns and we shall follow them up. If need be, we will have to change the parliamentary calendar in many areas so that we can enlarge the time. Present your report.

MR MUWANGA KUVUMBI: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I present a minority report and I will be precise. In the interest of time, I will go straight to the areas of dissent. 

The first area of dissent is domestic refinancing. The second part is sectoral priorities, which are: 
    a) Pay reform; 
    b) Operation Wealth Creation; 
    c) Agricultural Credit Facility; 
    d) Low Uganda National Roads Authority absorption capacity; 
    e) Innovation Fund ;
    f) Vocational training institutes; 
    g) National Health Insurance Scheme; 
    h) Construction and upgrade of health facilities; 
    i) Funding to tourism sector; 
    j) Industrial parks; 
    k) Funding of thermal generators.

Domestic Refinancing

Madam Speaker, on 18 January 2018, the committee held a meeting with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. There were varying opinions on how to reflect domestic refinancing and apply section 36 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, contrary to the consensus reached on the same on 31 May 2017. 

Subsequently, hon. Bahati, the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning), made an undertaking to obtain and submit to the committee a written opinion from the Attorney-General on 21 January 2018. However, at the time of reporting on the National Budget Framework Paper, the committee had not received the opinion from the Attorney-General. It is on this basis that there was dissent with the majority of the committee on how to reflect domestic refinancing and apply Section 36 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. 

On 31 May 2017, during the consideration of the annual budget estimates for the ongoing financial year, a protracted debate arose in the House regarding domestic refinancing. Consequently, the Deputy Speaker, who was the presiding Speaker at that time, suspended the sitting and directed the minister responsible for finance, the Attorney-General and the minority report movers to hold consultations in the Speaker’s Lobby.

It was agreed that domestic refinancing is: 

    a) A domestic debt rollover that has crippled the private sector's ability to obtain credit from commercial banks. 
    b) Raising a new debt to clear an old debt. 
    c) A borrowing, hence a loan, being raised through domestic sources i.e. Treasury Bills (issued in maturities of 91, 182 and 364 days) and bonds (issued in maturities of between two and 15 years). 
    d) Renamed to “deficit financing” for it bridges Government financing gaps in execution of the national budget, operation of monetary policy and development of the financial markets. 
    e) Already borrowed money hence it cannot be a new resource inflow.

The stock of domestic debt has increased from Shs 11.6l trillion in the last financial year to Shs l2.05 trillion in the Financial Year 2016/2017. Out of the total Government securities traded in the Financial Year 20l6/2017 amounting to Shs 12.05 trillion, treasury bills amounted to Shs 3.50 trillion (30 per cent) while treasury bonds amounted to Shs 8.45 trillion (70 per cent). Banks take the largest share of treasury bills (83 per cent of the face value and Shs 2.2 trillion) while pension and provident funds take the largest share of treasury bonds, which is 54 per cent of the face value, which is Shs 4.5 trillion.

Domestic borrowing is regulated under Section 36(5a) of the Public Finance Management Act, as amended. It stipulates that loans raised from management of monetary or treasury operations shall not exceed 10 per cent of the domestic revenue of Government and shall, in any case, be repaid automatically from the Uganda Revenue Authority Collections Account held in Bank of Uganda within the financial year.

Madam Speaker, as we speak, we are going to raise Shs 15.54 trillion and 10 per cent of that money should amount to Shs 1.5 trillion. Therefore, Government should have maximum borrowing of Shs 1.5 trillion. However, as we speak, in this proposed Budget, they are going to borrow Shs 939 billion for infrastructure development. In addition, they are going to borrow Shs 4.9 trillion for domestic refinancing. This amounts to about Shs 6.5 trillion to be borrowed. This is against the Public Finance Management Act. 

It clearly stipulates - and that debate was settled - that domestic refinancing is a borrowing and it must conform to what is stipulated in the Public Finance Management Act. The minister has not made it clear; so, as we proceed, it has huge implications because this borrowed money competes with the private sector. When Government goes to borrow from the same sources as the wanainchi, banks and institutions trust Government much more and there is no money left. As such, there is no private credit. 

Two, the debt is rising -

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying that the Government is competing with the population in the country?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Yes, domestically for money to borrow. The framers of the Public Finance Management Act had intended to cap that so that if you want to borrow, borrow only 10 per cent of what you are expected to raise within a financial year and it should be repaid.

We have been carrying debt over the years, which is now about Shs 12 trillion, and it is rising. Unless we get a solution to this, there is likely to be no economic miracle and the promise of the Government to have a middle class population within this term, according to the manifesto of the NRM government, will remain a mirage.

Pay Reform

Madam Speaker, the majority of the committee proposed that all civil servants should have their salaries enhanced during the Financial Year 2018/2019, instead of the selective five per cent pay enhancement for medical workers, scientists, prosecutors, police and prison officers, the rollout pay for primary school teachers in lower ranks as well as local government leaders.

It is disheartening that after Government committed to undertake salary enhancements effective this coming financial year, they indicates that they cannot accommodate the required funds within next year’s national budget. Instead, the wage bill is proposed to remain the same as it was in the last year, at Shs 3.56 trillion - the same as this financial year.

Therefore, it is not possible for Government to undertake phased or holistic salary enhancement of any critical cadres. This indicates that industrial action is likely to resume and further hurt service delivery through patients passing away; distortion of learning schedules; and delayed execution of justice.

We therefore propose the following: 

    1. Government should translate its pay reform commitment into wage allocation to the prioritised cadres within the budget of FY 2018/2019.

    2. Subsequently, the budget estimates of this coming financial year should not be submitted to Parliament without allocations to address the pay reform commitments made by Government. 

Madam Speaker, we are only taking it a notch higher from the majority committee and saying that we need firm commitment from Government that when they bring their estimates in March, this money should be there. People need real money and not mere policy proposals, if we are to help address this situation.

Operation Wealth Creation
Madam Speaker, the majority of the committee proposes that Operation Wealth Creation builds on the ongoing work under the Agriculture Cluster Development Project, without addressing the mismatch of mandates of institutions involved.

Despite its dismal performance, Operation Wealth Creation continues to draw billions from the Consolidated Fund account through Vote 152, National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS). It is worrying that ever since Financial Year 2015/2016, the vote allocates over 80 per cent of its budget to finance Operation Wealth Creation as indicated in the table below, and Members can read.

Operation Wealth Creation raises the following critical issues that must be addressed:

    a) The UPDF is engaged in facilitating production, particularly distribution of inputs, contrary to engaging in production activities as required under section 7(d) of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces Act, 2005.

    b) The NAADS is engaged in planning and budgeting for distribution of farming inputs, contrary to promotion of modern farming inputs as required under section 6(b) of the NAADS Act.

    c) The UPDF do not provide extension services to beneficiaries for they lack the requisite skills. As a consequence, emphasis is placed on quantity of distribution rather than focusing on outputs from the agricultural inputs given to farmers. Majority of farmers have since complained of poor selection of beneficiaries as well as low productivity of crops attributed to poor quality inputs and inadequate extension services.

Madam Speaker, I informed the Committee on Budget that I made a very small calculation of the number of coffee seedlings that have been distributed in my constituency. If all the seedlings or 80 per cent of them were to mature, the whole of Butambala today, with its roads and swamps, would be full of coffee. However, when you pass through Butambala, you hardly see any coffee. Therefore, these resources are wasted.

    d) The standing orders of procedure of Operation Wealth Creation conflict with mandates of the ministries, departments and agencies. The UPDF is expected to ensure value addition and agricultural mechanisation yet this is the mandate of Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Further, UPDF is expected to promote cooperatives, post-harvest handling and marketing yet this is the mandate of Ministry of Trade, Industries and Cooperatives.

    e) Many people meet the Operation Wealth Creation beneficiary selection criteria but only a few benefit. This raises equity issues and fairness, which are risks to participation in national development. 

The UPDF should engage in productive activity for the development of Uganda as required under section 7(d) of the Uganda People’s Defence Act, 2015. Therefore, UPDF should be a beneficiary of inputs to raise productivity of crops and livestock in Uganda. The distribution of farming inputs and provision of extension services should surely be a preserve of Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries. Operation Wealth Creation should be discontinued to enable all relevant ministries and departments to fulfil their mandates.

Agricultural Credit Facility

The committee held elaborate deliberations on the effectiveness of the Agricultural Credit Facility. However, no reference has been made on the same in the report of the majority. 

In the Financial Year 2018/2019, Government intends to provide agricultural financing through agricultural credit facilities and enhancing uptake of agricultural insurance services. This intervention is inappropriate based on the following:

    1. Agriculture lacks a good financial institution that understands and is passionate about farming. The present levels of low funding have prevented agriculture from becoming a commercial activity that farmers can depend on to earn favourable income. This is in spite of the fact that finance is a key enabler in developing profitable agricultural value chains and in addressing issues of community mobilisation, cooperative development, production planning and management as well as harvesting and marketing.

    2. Financial institutions in Uganda still consider agriculture a high risk sector for lending. The perception prompted Government to introduce the Agricultural Credit Facility in Financial Year 2009/2010. However, this facility benefits wealthy farmers or companies who are engaged in commercial farming and is not an appropriate intervention to empower subsistence farmers who ordinarily lack adequate collateral to obtain machinery and equipment.

The maximum loan amount to a single borrower is up to Shs 2.1 billion. However, this amount can be increased up to Shs 5 billion on a case-by-case basis for eligible projects that add significant value to the agricultural sector and to the economy. There is no designated minimum loan amount to the financial beneficiary, the farmer or agro processor, rather Bank of Uganda can only reimburse a minimum of Shs 10 million to the participating financial institution. The primary security for a credit facility is the machinery and equipment financed, where applicable, and any other marketable securities obtained by the borrower financial institution. There is an Appendix 6, which you can refer to.

    3. There was regional disparity in access to the Agricultural Credit Facility, with most loans accessed by beneficiaries from central and western regions while the east and north have the lowest access.
 
    4. As at June 30 2017, total disbursements amounted to Shs 236.55 billion extended to 378 eligible projects across the country, of which Government of Uganda contributed Shs 117.34 billion.

The agricultural facility that mainly benefits the privileged should be dissolved and funds channelled towards establishing a national bank for agricultural transformation. This is because the money is not going to the poor. It is going to the privileged rich people who can access Shs 2 billion to Shs 5 billion while the humble farmer in Busoga simply does not have collateral or anything. 

Therefore, we are saying that money in this credit facility should go towards establishing a bank for agricultural transformation. This is the way China went and this is the way to go. We visited an establishment in China of this magnitude and it has done miracles. However, here you are only giving money to rich people.

Low Uganda National Roads Authority Absorption Capacity
The majority of the committee recommends that the negotiations of terms of external financing agreements should ensure less bureaucratic yet accountable procedures. However, this does not address poor preparedness of UNRA. Uganda National Roads Authority is a beneficiary of infrastructural loans whose absorption is unsatisfactory. The majority is attributed to inadequate preparedness for externally funded projects. Hence, only 21.9 per cent of the approved external financing for UNRA was spent, as indicated below, and yet we are paying interest. 

Madam Speaker, below is a table that elaborates the roads, the money approved, the year and how much has been spent. The Entebbe Express Highway loan, for example, was approved in April 2011 and since then, only 65 per cent has been dispatched. We have the Kampala Northern Bypass and construction of the Mbarara Bypass with only 54 per cent dispatched. For construction of a new bridge across the Nile, 35 per cent has been dispatched. For road sector support projects, in Hoima there was only 9 per cent dispatched. The Albertine Region Sustainable Development Project has only 2 per cent dispatched. For road sector support, only 1 per cent was dispatched. 

The Northern-Eastern Uganda Corridor Assets Management Project has only 1 per cent dispatched. The Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi-Kamonkoli Road has 0 per cent dispatched. All these loans have been approved. We have the upgrading of Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road with 0 per cent dispatched. The Greater Kampala Flyover Project has 0 per cent dispatched. All these loans were approved and they are accumulating interest.

Our interest payment for this financial year is the second most expensive sector we are going to spend money on, amounting to Shs 2.7 trillion. We are going to spend it on paying interest on money that UNRA borrowed and there was 0 per cent dispatch.

Madam Speaker, it was also noted with concern that unit costs of externally funded roads are quite inflated as compared to costs in the region. We are now going to the unit cost. Aware that the environment where a road is to be constructed is unique and greatly influences costs of construction, the costs in Uganda are higher than the average unit costs in the sub-Saharan Region. 

In the table below, we have gone ahead to attach the average unit costs by World Bank and IMF across the sub-Saharan Region. Take an example of the Kampala-Entebbe Express Highway-Munyonyo of 51 kilometres whose total value is going to be Shs 1.772 trillion. The unit cost per kilometre is Shs 34.363 billion –(Interjection)– Yes, that is what you will need for one kilometre of that road. They will argue that it is a four-lane road. However, even for a four-lane road, the unit cost will still go to Shs 8.6 billion per kilometre. For each kilometre, you are going to use Shs 8.6 billion to construct that road.

For the Kampala-Northern Bypass, they are constructing 17 kilometres whose total value will be Shs 237.69 billion. The unit cost per kilometre is going to be Shs 13.6 billion. Despite the fact that this road is a dual lane road, the unit cost is still so high; each lane would cost Shs 6.79 billion per kilometre. This does not happen anywhere, and building a road is not rocket science. 

Madam Speaker, I have put a table here below that details the unit cost of each road to be constructed.   

Furthermore, during the consideration of the National Budget Framework Paper 2018, it was noted that 15 oil roads were to be allocated funds but feasibility studies and detailed designs were undertaken for only two roads. Fifteen roads were to be constructed but only two roads had feasibility studies undertaken. Therefore, it was projected that it would not be possible for the remaining 13 roads to absorb the funding in this financial year, amounting to Shs 858 billion. 

The point we are making is that part of the money that we give UNRA is the money we borrow from the private sector. It goes majorly to this sector. You have denied the public money; you have borrowed the money but you have not used it.

The committee was further informed that preparation for feasibility studies and designs were ongoing. The committee was not in a position to establish the actual absorption and progress made in regard to development of feasibility studies and designs. I have indicated the oil roads in the table below. This table shows that only two roads have a feasibility study and the amount of money we are projected to finance. 

Uganda National Roads Authority is going to take over Shs 4 trillion out of the forthcoming budget and yet the absorption capacity is 40 per cent. Why don’t we give this money to sectors that are critical? The Uganda National Roads Authority can take only the money that they can use so that other sectors can get the resources. You are biting what you cannot chew.

If UNRA has used only 60 per cent - In civil society, if you are given Shs 1 billion project money and you use only 60 per cent, in the next financial year they will give you only 60 per cent until you prove that you can do better. Therefore, if UNRA’s capacity is Shs 2 trillion, let us give them Shs 2 trillion and if they do well in the next financial year, we shall give them more. 

That is what the Ministry of Health did with hospitals. They deducted money from those hospitals that never used the money allocated to them. They gave them only Shs 400 billion for hospitals and told them that when they prove that they can do better with this money, they will give them more the next year. Therefore, we have got to be hard on UNRA because we are giving them money and denying other critical sectors resources, which are not being utilised.

Madam Speaker, the money we give UNRA attracts interest every single day. Their argument is that there is no counterpart funding. We should not go ahead and guarantee any loan if Government cannot ensure counterpart funding because a loan will start accruing interest and the Government will say there is no counterpart funding. That is our position on UNRA. 

Innovation Fund

The committee held elaborate deliberations on the operations of the Innovation Fund. However, no reference has been made to the same in the report of the majority. It should be noted that the Innovation Fund has no supporting legal framework as required under Article 153(2)(a) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and section 29(2)(b) of the Public Finance Management Act. Nevertheless, the Secretary to Treasury, through a Budget Call Circular, instructed the Ministry of Science and Innovation as well as the Ministry of Information, Communication and National Guidance to develop guidelines for operationalisation of the Innovation Fund by 18 April 2017.

It should be noted with concern that the Committee on Science and Technology indicated in its report to the Committee on Budget that guidelines have not yet been formulated. It was also noted that part of the Innovation Fund was used to cater for office accommodation costs of the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. 

Therefore, Shs 50 billion should be reallocated from the Innovation Fund to other priority budget items until a legal framework is developed to guide its operations; otherwise, the money will go to buying furniture for the ministry because there is no framework paper. There are no guidelines and you are allocating money to food, drinks and workshops.

Vocational Training Institutes

Madam Speaker, this is critical to every Member of Parliament. Dissent with the majority of the committee was realised on the approach of the construction of vocational technical training institutes across the country.

Although construction of vocational technical institutes in every district or constituency is highly supported, concern was raised on the limited allocation, under functionality, low enrolment, inadequate equipping and deployment of tutors to existing institutions. The Ministry of Education and Sports in its annual sector performance report 2016/2017 also enlisted a challenge of inadequate budgetary provisions to facilitate the construction of technical schools in every district.

It is on this basis that it was proposed that until adequate funds are obtained, the available resources are geared towards establishing effective and efficient regional centres of excellence in regions without functional vocational training institutes. Once adequate funds are realised, then resumption of construction of technical schools in every district can be embarked on.

Madam Speaker, in today’s Daily Monitor, the ministry has indicated that it is going to change, but we also have a concern there. They say that they are going to upgrade six technical institutions to centres of excellence. Three are in western Uganda, one is in the central region, one in Teso and another in Lira. The whole of Busoga, West Nile and Karamoja have none. So, let us have resources because this is critical. 

When we visited Southern Range Nyanza with the Committee on Budget, the directors there noted that the critical thing today was that Uganda turned technical colleges into universities and created a skills gap in the country. Kyambogo and others were turned into universities to teach psychology, philosophy and botany. If you are going to construct three colleges in western Uganda, one in Teso, one in Lira and one in central region in Bukalasa, can you achieve regional balance in these centres of excellence?

We are not saying that the west should not have. One of them is actually on oil and petroleum, but I do not know why they think every oil and petroleum thing should be located in western Uganda. It should be in Bunyoro. 

Madam Speaker, we propose that Shs 3 billion be availed in the next financial year to start preparation and implementation arrangements for the national health insurance scheme. There is no money for this scheme. 

Construction and Upgrade of Health Facilities

In the medium term, the Ministry of Health proposed to revamp and make functional all health centres IV, including upgrading health centres II and health centres III to health centres IV in counties where they do not exist. Ninety per cent of the counties in Uganda have health centres IV, and that is 261 counties out of 290 counties in Uganda, while 29 do not have health centres IV.

Upgrading health centres III requires Shs 164.6 billion, which is Shs 5.7 billion per health centre. As earlier resolved in the last Parliament, let resources be availed for provision of these health centres IV across the board and all it requires is an additional Shs 50 billion. 

The Tourism Sector

Although majority of the committee contends that the tourism sector requires more funding to invest in tourism hotspots, the proposed additional Shs 20 billion to the Uganda Tourism Board is inadequate. 

In Financial Year 2015/2016, Uganda earned US$ 1.35 billion from tourism. This is equivalent to over Shs 4 trillion. However, in the Financial Year 20l8/20l9, the sector is projected to be allocated only Shs 119.4 billion, which translates to 0.5 per cent of the national budget. It is also imperative to note that Shs 119.4 billion translates to about 2 per cent of the US$ l.35 billion earned by the sector in the Financial Year 20l5/2016. 

Madam Speaker, this is critical. Uganda is going to earn US$ 1.5 billion from tourism but we are investing only Shs 117 billion, which is 0.2 per cent, and you want to generate more money. Why don’t you put money where you are going to immediately harvest? These are what we call “low hanging fruits”. You may go for the miracle that will come with oil but there is this one which you can pick and chew today. Therefore, more resources should be given to the tourism sector, and we have given a proposal for the amount of money to be allocated. 

Industrial Parks

The problem with the industrial parks is that they are spread all over the country yet none of them is fully functional. The one in Namanve does not even operate above 40 per cent. Why don’t you concentrate on one industrial park at a time and make it functional and then roll out another. You will have generated money and factories will be running and it will make economic sense. 

Otherwise, you are spreading yourselves thin on the ground and you are not effective anywhere. In other words, all these industrial parks are redundant. We propose that with immediate effect, the allocation of land – Well, you will read that. 

Funding of Thermal Generators

Dissent arose on whether to allocate more funds to thermal generator plants. It was noted with concern that electricity consumption does not match generation capacity. The low consumption that does not meet the generation capacity leads to hiked tariffs so as to pay for unconsumed surplus power.

The committee noted the continuous provision of funds to pay for the expensive thermal power generation, to a tune of Shs 95 billion per annum, yet the country now relies on hydroelectric power generated by Bujagali and other dams. The current hydroelectric power generation capacity is reported to be beyond the country’s needs. If we have more hydroelectric power beyond what we need, why do you invest more money in thermal generation? This money should go somewhere more useful. 

Based on the above, it would not be prudent to pay for expensive power generated by thermal generators yet the country cannot consume all the cheap power generated by the hydropower sources.

Generation tariffs per Electricity Plants in Uganda

We have a table below that shows you the tariffs for what is generated in Uganda. Thermal plants should not be allocated any funds in this coming financial year because we have excess power, unless there are interested beneficiaries.

Madam Speaker, on health, I have a sheet of paper here showing that we have approved loans for the health sector but Government is not committing counterpart funding. This is donor money going to health but Government is not providing the Shs 41 billion that will be needed. These projects will stop unless you provide counterpart funding for this sector, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member, for the report it –

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a minority report on the National Budget Framework Paper 2018/2019 to 2022/2023. It is signed by hon. Cecilia Ogwal, hon. Centenary and I.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member, for that elaborate report. Before we go into debate, I would like to touch on a few issues which the honourable member has raised. I was looking at the national objectives and directive principles on development in the Constitution. Objective No. XII provides as follows:
“Balanced and equitable development 
    (i) The State shall adopt an integrated and coordinated planning approach.
    (ii) The State shall take necessary measures to bring about balanced development of the different areas of Uganda and between the rural and urban areas.
    (iii) The State shall take special measures in favour of the development of the least developed areas.”

Honourable members, I want you, as you debate, to evaluate the proposals against these objectives. Secondly, I hope that the committees of the House, especially the Committee on National Economy, is complying with our resolutions taken last year, or was it in the last Parliament, that before a loan is processed we need to know how it was utilised. I do not know whether they are still doing that. We resolved here that no ministry will get a loan until they have given proof about what they did with the money we gave them previously. I hope that you are still doing that. We also took a resolution that no loan will be passed unless there is counterpart funding. Are we doing that?

The honourable member raised an issue about the centres of excellence. Really, if they are four, how are they distributed? Honourable members, let us not be shy about these things. If there is no equity, let us all sit here and distribute them equitably. It is our responsibility. Therefore, examine carefully where they are and when we come to the final debate, we should deal with this issue.

On UNRA, if it is true that we have the most expensive roads in the world, isn’t that a matter for investigation? This is not a mountainous country, why is it so costly? The other day, I read a report from one of the committees when I had gone to Ethiopia. The report indicated that our roads were more expensive than the mountain roads of Ethiopia. Yes, they treat us as if we are in the mountains. How can we be more expensive than the mountains? I think this is a matter for investigation but I leave it to you, honourable members.

Also, if we are borrowing all that money and it is not being used - The Kyoga ferry is not there. There is no money for Kyoga, there is no money for Kamuli-Bukungu, there is no money for Jinja-Mbulamuti-Kamuli, there is no money for the Buvuma ferry and no money for the Kigulu ferry - really? 

Honourable members, I wanted to raise those issues so that you can think about them so that when you debate, you can take those issues into account. I think there is a terrible mismatch but let us wait for the debate.

Honourable members, I do not know whether you are ready. The main report is long; I have to give you time to study it tonight. We shall start with hon. Safia Nalule tomorrow.  There are three issues we need to talk about, specifically the elder persons, the issue of the hard-to-reach areas and the issue of the money for schools, which went to Kabale University instead of the secondary schools. Those are the things we captured which should be addressed tomorrow in the debate. 

Honourable members, House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you.

(The House rose at 6.18 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 31 January 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 
