

Thursday, 24 January 2019

Parliament met at 2.41 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I have two issues to communicate.
 
The first is to inform members of the celebrations of the National Resistance Movement (NRM) Day on 26 January 2019. They will take place in Nabuyonga sub-county in West Budama South. The theme is, “A moment of glory that sets a new chapter for unity, peace and prosperity in Uganda.” I believe you have got your invitations so please do attend.

On the African Continent, we have noted with sadness the passing on of one of the music icons of Africa, a musician, a businessman and a human rights activist, a United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund (UNICEF) Goodwill Ambassador and philanthropist in the person of late Oliver Mtukudzi. 

Many Ugandans will remember him for participating here in the campaigns to promote the health of cancer patients. As for the women activists, they will remember him for his song, ‘Neria’ which was used to re-explain messages of domestic violence in the community. 

I would like, on our behalf, to extend our sympathies to the people of Zimbabwe and UNICEF that has lost a goodwill ambassador and pray that his soul rests in eternal peace. I invite the members to stand up for a moment of silence.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the second matter is something I touched on Tuesday; the issue of the campaign to end Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) in Uganda. I would like to remind ourselves that on 10 December 2009, when we enacted the law against FGM, there are things we had agreed with Government. Some have been done and others not. For instance, we agreed that Government should construct model boarding schools to help educate the girl-child, especially in Karamoja and Sabiny and these schools were to be used to keep the girls there during the season of circumcision. I know that the one in Amudat has not been built and the one in Nakapiripirit was abandoned. I think the only one, which was built is the one in Kosil in Sebei.

I would like to instruct the Committee on Education to go and visit all those places where the schools were pledged, to see what is happening so that we can address it here.

We also agreed to have a massive awareness campaign against FGM but I do not hear of it at all. 

Government had also agreed to commit more funds, especially to support the community development officers in all the affected districts but I do not think that has been done.

Finally, we had agreed that Government finds alternative sources of livelihood for the surgeons. They get a lot of money during circumcision. If they circumcised 100 girls, they would get Shs 5 million in just a few months. We had discussed that with the President but I think it has not been fulfilled so they are still there without jobs and the temptation to continue is there.

We had also agreed and allocated Shs 200 million annually to the campaign against FGM. This money is sent to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. We have been sending it for the last seven years but I do not know whether there is any report on the output of that money.

I would like to instruct the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to establish whether that money goes. By the way, it is sent to a Non-Governmental Organisation (NGO). Imagine Government sending money to an NGO to do its work. I think there is a lacuna there. 

Let the committee find out what is happening and as we wait for the Government plan of action, our committee should report to us regarding what this money is doing and the impact of the campaign. Thank you.

2.48
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for your concern for the marginalised communities and your fight against FGM. You were in the company of His Excellency the President in 2009 in Amudat District. I was still a civil servant then but I came to attend because I wanted to get the message and pass it on to the people.

In 2010, the law was passed and from that time, there was some campaign and sensitisation. Majorly, it was the development partners like UNICEF and Save the Children who were doing it. However, during the last two years of 2017 and 2018, their funding started dwindling. In 2017, the set date for the Annual Culture Day for Amudat was postponed to another date. Last year, it was postponed again because those people did not have funding. The Shs 200 million goes to the Reach Programme based in Sebei. It is that money, which is supposed to be used in these FGM districts and it is very little. 

If FGM is to end, it is through education. Madam Speaker, you are right to call upon our Committee on Education to go and do research because it is education that will help these girls. As I speak, the children of the parents who have gone to school are not being circumcised because the parents are helping them to understand the dangers of FGM. 

Therefore, let Government take action and the schools that the President pledged should be completed. For example, the one at Amudat has incomplete structures. I do not know what is going on in Bukwo and among the Tepeth. Let Government come and help us construct these schools and let them be boarding schools because that is where we shall retain these girls. Thank you.

2.50
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add to what my colleague from Amudat District has said. 

I have a community which you managed to visit last year on 3rd March when we were commemorating the fight against FGM in Uganda. Apart from international NGOs like UNICEF, which is supporting some communities in Karamoja, we do not have any other source of funding as far as FGM elimination is concerned.

We would like to thank you that the time you came to Nakapiripirit, there was a dormitory that was not completed and out of your effort, it was completed and we now have those girls accommodated. Thank you for that.

2.51
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to add my voice to what hon. Nauwat mentioned regarding to FGM. 

Madam Speaker, with all the commitment that was there then and the efforts that you put in as a person, a Speaker and as an outstanding woman of Uganda, wouldn’t it be right, since we adopted a law in this House in 2014, for the relevant ministry to come and update Parliament as regards how far they have gone regarding implementation of the agreed measures and FGM law in Uganda?

As we speak, I think that the practice is alarming and yet when we meet and discuss FGM at the African Union level with countries like Ethiopia and Kenya that have been practicing FGM, they give an example of Uganda being a role model in terms of fighting the vice.

Therefore, I am wondering whether we are losing the battle and going back to zero and yet there is a law in place. The relevant ministry should ensure implementation of the law. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a very serious issue and we had asked the Government to come with an action plan. As they do that, they should come and give us an update of what they have done. This is really important, we cannot continue like this. Therefore, remind the Minister for General Duties.

2.53
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to that of hon. Rose that at one time, this Parliament passed a resolution that all girls in districts that practice FGM should be in dormitories; they must be accommodated at school. This should not be taken lightly because we are supposed to protect these girls and when they stay at school, that season passes when they are in school.

I remember when we visited Amudat, Kapchorwa and Bukwo, we discovered that most of the surgeons come from Kenya. I wonder whether you may not also ask the Committee on East African Community Affairs to interact with our colleagues from Kenya to find out whether they have tried to put in place mechanisms of helping the surgeons from across the community to settle down. 

In Uganda, even if we go ahead to settle these surgeons, the others coming from Kenya will continue trekking in and wanting to get money and riding on our people’s lack of education. 

Therefore, I was wondering whether you would not impress the Committee on East African Community Affairs to take keen interest and make sure that they work with the other committee from our neighbouring country so that we can handle the issue as East Africa.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last year we had asked the Minister for East African Community to coordinate with colleagues in the region but apparently nothing has happened.

However, last Friday, I was with the Governor of West Pokot in Kenya and he expressed willingness to work with us to end this practice. Therefore, I would like to instruct the Committee on EAC Affairs to arrange for border meeting starting with West Pokot because he was present with us in Bukwo last Friday. Let us start from there and then UWOPA should engage parliamentarians on other side.

2.55
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern. Over the past two financial years or so, Government has been creating new administrative units, particularly sub-counties and town councils. However, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not given these units indicative planning figures since that time. This means that they do not have any budget to operate on.

I would like to seek your indulgence to find out from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development why they do not facilitate these units with budgets so that they can deliver the intended services to the wanainchi. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can we hear from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on what plans he has to support the Minister of Local Government in her work?

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Local Government units have two categories in which they are created. Some of these are created through Parliament and others through the Executive by the Minister for Local Government.

Therefore, over the last one and half to two years, we have created a number of units that require almost Shs 400 billion to be implemented. Therefore, what we are doing at the Executive level is, we are still discussing and before the budget is presented to this House, we will pronounce ourselves on how many we are taking on, in a phased manner, given the resource envelope and other priorities. 

Therefore, the Member should hold on. As we committed before in this House, let us wait until we come back with the final budget and that is when we should have handled that issue.

THE SPEAKER: It is before a committee so we shall expect feedback when you come to finalise the budget.

2.58
MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Omoro): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national concern in relation to road accidents in Omoro District, particularly in Koro sub-county that caused the population of Koro sub-county to riot on 22 January 2019. This riot brought traffic to a standstill for a period of almost three hours and the rioters held my district chairman hostage sitting on the tarmac road for three hours claiming that Government is not responding to their demands.

Madam Speaker, this incident came after a motor vehicle registration Number UG 2031S knocked a boda boda rider who was carrying a mother with her twins aged five years. Unfortunately, one of the twins died on the spot together with the boda boda rider.

The incident provoked the community and their reaction became very emotional. Madam Speaker, this reaction is not coming out of the blue. This very particular spot and within a distance of about five kilometres from that trading centre, has registered, within a period of four months, 42 cases of motor accidents. Out of these, 26 accidents caused loss of human lives.

Madam Speaker, this particular trading centre does not have road signs along the road and does not have a visible zebra crossing for the community and yet it is a very busy business centre.

Madam Speaker, I pray that the minister concerned and UNRA get on the ground and address the concerns of this community by establishing humps and also see how to regulate the speed a long that road.

Madam Speaker, the road users along this road are both from Uganda and South Sudan. The question of left hand traffic control and right hand traffic control is causing quite a number of accidents along this road. The drivers from South Sudan are used to keeping right and so far, we have registered four cases involving drivers with vehicles from South Sudan.

It is my prayer that this matter is attended to immediately before this community comes back on the road on Friday to demonstrate again. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We instruct the Minister of Works and the Minister of Internal Affairs to address the issue. The Minister of Works should address the issue of black spots. We discussed them but I think we did not talk about that particular place; we were talking about the other highways. In addition, the issue of the use of the road by different communities should be addressed by the Minister of Internal Affairs. Please give us an update in a fortnight. 

3.02
MR JOSEPH KOLUO (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national concern regarding schools that had their structures blown off by wind in my constituency. 

On 28 December 2018, a strong wind destroyed two schools: Akurao Primary School where it destroyed three blocks containing seven classes and two offices; and in Osudio Primary School in Magoro sub-county where one block of primary six and seven students was totally blown off. 

My prayers are that the ministry concerned roofs these schools before the first term opens next month, since there are totally no trees where these children can study from. 

Secondly, I request that the programme of tree planting to be made compulsory in every school countrywide to help act as wind breakers. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Koluo. I do not know if the Prime Minister can tell us how we can assist the young children study where there are no trees. 

3.03
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It may not be possible to do the permanent roofing before the school term reopens because we are talking about two weeks’ time; schools are opening on 4 February, 2019 and today is 24 January 2019 so it may not be possible. 

However, I will try to find out whether the Office of the Prime Minister can improvise something so that the children can at least settle in a shelter, as we plan for the permanent roofing. 

THE SPEAKER: On the issue of tree planting, we have been talking about it so often but it seems no one is interested in massive tree planting. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I for one I am interested and I am a tree grower. I have been informing members in this House and I will continue informing them that Government has an initiative and I remember that the minister in charge of forests was requested to come and brief us about our plans. 

Apart from having a day for tree planting, we must get down – like the churches and the other religious institutions have done – when you take your child for baptism, you must go with seedlings for planting. It is a requirement. This is what Parliament wants to see. We are doing work but we are not advertising what we are doing. 

Therefore, the minister in charge will have to come here and tell us how members of Parliament can be helped. At one time, National Forest Authority was giving out seedlings to members of Parliament who were interested in planting trees. I think what members of Parliament would like to hear is a continuous annual programme for covering this country with trees. 

The Uganda People’s Defence Force (UPDF) is doing something; they are engaged in planting trees and even prisons are doing something. Therefore, we need to use the land of Government institutions, apportion it and plant trees. Nevertheless, the minister will come and give us more information.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hope we can take it seriously. Ethiopia was able to declare a decade of trees and they were planting 10 million trees a year. Right now, they have 120 million trees planted. Therefore, we can borrow a leaf from there. 

3.06
MS MOLLY LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance that concerns the insecurity at the South Sudan border with Lamwo, which has reached an alarming rate and is causing panic to the people of Lamwo. 

Madam Speaker, our slogan is, “wealth creation.” Most sub-counties go to the border of Lamwo to farm. However, during the Christmas period, while I was home, many people got arrested. We have three girls that were arrested in Madi Opei by South Sudanese, raped and left. The girls went to town and decided to roam about. 

Madam Speaker, a one Thomas Loyera was shot dead while weeding his plantation. In July, Benson Olweny was also shot dead while ploughing his garden. In Agoro sub-county, women were arrested from their gardens and raped by South Sudanese and nothing was done. On Christmas Eve, while I was home, a 14 year old girl together with her 18 year old friend were abducted by South Sudanese, taken to their camps and gang raped. They came back and were totally disillusioned. 

The district leadership held meetings with two commissioners –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude. 

MS LANYERO: Madam Speaker, as a district, right now we have only 69 policemen. We do not have enough security. My prayers are that we need to protect our people in Lamwo, we need to relocate the army to the border because the army barracks is within and the people are at the border without protection. Thirdly, the Committee on IGAD that was assigned the task of creating boundary demarcation should speed up their process because the South Sudanese claim that we are on their land. The issue of land is critical here. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what the Government can say because we have been expecting some reports on border demarcations. If the South Sudanese are saying that we are in their land, I think it is a serious issue.

3.09
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, Gen. Moses Ali has been chairing a committee handling border problems. I pledge to get in touch with him so that we can get a report. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, but in the meantime, the issue of the crimes committed on the land; the raping of girls, abduction, people being beaten in the gardens – 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: The Minister of Internal Affairs will have to rush to the ground and save the situation. I will pass on the information.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. 

3.10
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As per our rules, any order issued by your Chair, except when appealed, shall be taken to be final. Around 3rd or 4th December, 2018, you wisely ruled instructing the Ministry of Internal Affairs not to go ahead with the issuance of the new passports until a clear explanation is given to this House. 

As we speak, Madam Speaker, new charges have been levied unto people. The current passport of an ordinary person costs about 150,000 and now all new applicants are being asked for Shs 250,000 for the new e-passport. 

However, people, through their representatives here, you and I who are in this House, have the right to be heard on how effective policy should be passed by this Government. It is this august House that should issue checks and balances to Government. 

Madam Speaker, you guided this House and stated that the Ministry of Internal affairs should come and clearly explain the following: why the cost is at that and whether the people in the diaspora are catered for. 

Madam Speaker, we have over 500 people stuck in Dubai who cannot get new passports when their passports expire or are lost. They cannot be allowed to travel because that is the strict rule of the United Arab Emirates; you must present a passport and there is no other document that you can present – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude.

MR NSEREKO: To make matters worse, Madam Speaker, even the cost of replacement - The people in the Middle East are clearly telling us that it takes them about Shs 15 million to replace a lost passport. Honourable members, you can verify this because we have people from all constituencies in this – (Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House that as we speak, some of us are holders of the African Union passport. If hon. Morris Ogenga-Latigo and hon. Anifa Kawooya were here they would agree with me. This is an African Union passport but when we reached Dubai, we were kept there for two days and I missed a flight. They said that, that passport was not recognised in the system and we could not travel. 

How about acquiring an East African passport? I think it would have been prudent for the relevant ministry to come and explain to the member states, especially to Ugandans, what the challenges of moving with this passport will be and the criteria used. Uganda is, first of all, a sovereign state even though we are integrating. There should have been a formality; it is not just a matter of announcing and agreeing. 

Of course, we have binding agreements between the partner states but I think that all those agreements should be understood by the partner states. In this case, a passport is a critical area. 

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Internal Affairs should be summoned to this House to explain to the country rather than all of us reading in the media without clear knowledge. At the end of the day, people come to us and ask and we do not have answers for the people that we represent. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR NSEREKO: As I wind up, Madam Speaker, the new rule is to the effect that you have to present a national ID because to integrate your biometrics with the new e-passport, they have to integrate your National Identification Number (NIN). Our people in the diaspora that total about 300,000 have no access to national IDs. You would imagine someone who is working, let us say in Mexico as an expatriate of Uganda, living there for a period of five years and he has no access of acquisition of a national ID from the nearest high commission and he is told that his passport expires within two years. 

Honourable members, I appeal to you that we should stand together as Parliament, following the guidance of Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we discussed this issue in December. Our last instruction to the Minister of Internal Affairs was to liaise with the Attorney-General and come to address this House first, on the issue of our sovereignty, the nature of our national identity card and the process of changing.

3.15
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true that we had a meeting with the Ministry of Internal Affairs and we harmonised the position. He now has that final position and I think had he been here, he would be in position to make the presentation.

As you may recall, Madam Speaker, you did ask about the legal implications and we have advised on that. If you ask him to come, he would give the position. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Internal Affairs should come and update the House on Tuesday because this is a matter that touches the rights of freedom of movement of the people of Uganda. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF PREPAREDNESS BY GOVERNMENT TO TABLE ELECTORAL REFORMS BEFORE PARLIAMENT
               
THE SPEAKER: In the Public Gallery, we have students from Rwenjeru CDC School, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality. They are represented by hon. Mary Karooro and hon. Gordon Arinda. Please stand up, you are welcome.

3.17
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a statement of electoral reforms by the honourable Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs who is not in the House.

Madam Speaker, following your directive to the honourable Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to present to Parliament the status of the electoral reforms to Parliament, we now report as follows. 

Madam Speaker, as you will recall, Parliament, in 2015, considered proposals introduced by Government relating to electoral reforms ahead of the general elections of February, 2016.

Subsequently, Parliament enacted the Constitutional (Amendment) Act, 2015, Act 12 of 2015 to provide for these reforms. 

The Constitutional (Amendment) Act, 2015 amended the Constitution to prescribe a procedure for the removal of members of the Electoral Commission and to require the Electoral Commission to hold a by-election within 60 days from the date of notification of a vacancy of a Member of Parliament by the Clerk to Parliament and also to require the registrar of a court declaring the seat of a Member of Parliament vacant to transmit the judgment to the Clerk to Parliament within 10 days after the declaration and to permit floor crossing in Parliament by members of Parliament within 12 months before the end of the term of Parliament. 

These constitutional reforms, together with the attendant reforms reflected in the electoral laws/Acts of Parliament, constituted the legal regime under which the general elections of 2016 were held.

As you will further recall, following the general elections of 2016, the Supreme Court in the case of Amama Mbabazi v. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and others, Election Petition No. 1 of 2016, noted that there was need to amend, among other provisions, Articles 104 (2), (3) and (7) of the Constitution in relation to presidential election petitions. These reforms were addressed in 2018 when Parliament enacted the Constitutional (Amendment) Act, 2018, Act 1 of 2018.

The Constitutional (Amendment) Act, 2018 amends the Constitution in order to provide for the time within which to hold presidential, parliamentary and local government council elections; to provide for the term of Parliament; to provide for eligibility requirements for a person to be elected as President or district chairperson; to increase the numbers of days within which to file and determine a  presidential election petition; to increase the number of days within which the Electoral Commission is required to hold a fresh election where a presidential election has been annulled and also to provide for limits on the tenure of the President and to provide transitional provisions, having regard to the amendments made; and for related matters.

As a result, there were consequential amendments to the electoral laws arising from the Constitutional (Amendment) Act, 2018. 

As a result of the amendment of the Constitution, there were consequential amendments required to the following Acts in order to ensure conformity with the amended provisions as they were affected by the Constitutional (Amendment) Act, 2018. These included the Presidential Elections Act, 2005 – (Interruption)

MS OKETAYOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Attorney-General is making a very important statement and we may be interested in making some comments but we are not seeing a copy of his statement on our iPads. It is a bit difficult to follow what he is saying.

MR BYARUHANGA: I can confirm that they have – I think the Clerk -

THE SPEAKER: Can we ask the Attorney-General to provide a soft copy to the Clerk? We can stand over this for 30 minutes while they are uploading. Please, provide a soft copy to the Clerk.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON QUESTIONS RAISED BY HON. FREDRICK ANGURA ON MEASURES TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT TO MITIGATE THE EFFECTS OF a YELLOW CLIMBING PLANT REPORTED TO SUFFOCATE TREES, FOOD CROPS AND PERIMETER WALL FENCES

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Madam Speaker, this matter was raised in Cabinet on Monday and the minister was tasked to bring a Cabinet paper for members of Cabinet to discuss. I think it is after that discussion that we will give a report to Parliament on the way forward regarding this plant.

THE SPEAKER: I see something here and I do not know whether it is not the report - Let us defer this matter briefly because I have what purports to be a statement here. Please, find the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries so that he can present the report.

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT OF THE PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO THE 73RD APU EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE MEETING AND THE 41ST CONFERENCE OF NATIONAL SPEAKERS OF THE PARLIAMENTARY UNION (APU), ABUJA, NIGERIA

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is that I have my iPad here and I can see a statement which reads, “Statement to Parliament on twining/climbing plant; Golden dodder weed by the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.” The minister has come here and told us that they have a paper in Cabinet and yet as Parliament, we requested and there is a statement.

The procedural issue I am raising is, who uploaded this statement when the matter was in Cabinet? Secondly, is this minister informed or she just came to speak for the sake of it so that we keep quiet?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I also said that I have a statement that has already been given to me. That is why I was looking for the senior minister to tell us whether this is his statement or not. Government Chief Whip, please find the minister so that we move on this issue.

3.25
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Madam Speaker, in accordance with rule 33 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I wish to lay the report of the delegation to the 73rd African Parliamentary Union Executive Committee meeting and the 41st Conference of African Parliamentary Union, which took place in Abuja, Nigeria from 5–9 November, 2018 together with the following documents:

1. 	Resolution on the role of parliaments in combating terrorism, armed gangs and organised crimes in Africa.
2. 	Resolution on the promotion of the girl-child education as an efficient way of fighting against early marriages in Africa.
3. 	Resolution on the promotion of private investments as a major factor for the development of Africa.
4. 	Motion for support to the countries of the G5 of the Sahel Region and other countries that are victims of terrorism.
5. 	Recommendation to the African states for the creation of an African solidarity fund whose modalities for financing and management would be agreed upon.
6. 	Recommendation to the African states for the creation of a special African tribunal charged with judging cases of terrorism committed on African soil.
7. 	Report of the 73rd Executive Committee.
8. 	The African Parliamentary Union budget for 2019.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. James Baba. Any comments?

3.27
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. James Baba for the statement. I thought that we could get a way forward as to what we are doing as a country to implement those resolutions that we agreed on. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe we shall transmit them to the Prime Minister and they can come back to us and we have a debate. They should report their position on the proposals from the African Parliamentary Union. We shall pass them on to the Government and ask them to report back to us. Thank you.

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT TO PARLIAMENT BY THE MEMBERS OF THE PAN-AFRICAN PARLIAMENT ON ACTIVITIES COVERING THE PERIOD MARCH TO OCTOBER 2018

3.29
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table a report of the delegation to the Pan-African Parliament covering the period March to October 2018. I would like to highlight some of the key issues covered in this report.

Madam Speaker, your representatives to the Pan-African Parliament are doing very well and in every sitting at the Pan-African Parliament, we come up with resolutions and I would like to highlight the key ones. They include:

    1. A resolution on achieving health targets and leaving no one behind.
    2. A resolution on nutrition and food systems in Africa.
    3. A resolution on African continental Free Trade Area and free movement of persons, rights to residence and rights to establishment.
    4. A resolution on winning the fight against corruption, as has been the theme of 2018 in the African Union.
    5. Resolution on persons with albinism in Africa – and I commend your efforts in promoting the rights of albinos in Uganda.
    6. Resolution on establishment of climate change desks in the member states in addressing climate change.

Madam Speaker, within this report, in 2018, Uganda participated in the elections of the Pan-African Parliament, where we competed for different positions. I would like to report that whereas Parliament recommended my candidature, we postponed our victory; we were not able to make it for the position of Deputy Speaker. (Laughter)

However, I would like to report that as a delegation to the Pan-African Parliament, hon. Anifa Kawooya was elected vice-president of the women caucus. I think she deserves applause. (Applause)

Hon. Veronica Kadogo became the rapporteur of the Committee of Trade. It is not easy to get those positions so we need to clap for her. (Applause)

Having contested for Speakership, I had to resign from the chairpersonship of the Committee of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Environment but I was later taken to chair the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) Alliance at the African Union. You also need to applaud me. Thank you. (Applause)

The other members of the Pan African Parliament; hon. Latigo and hon. Okot Ogong are equally doing very well in the committees where they are representing Uganda. (Applause) Thank you, honourable members.

Madam Speaker, I have one prayer. In 2018, at the Pan African Parliament, there was a declaration by the heads of state but also by the African Union to have a full-time Parliament. We would like to report that so far, 13 out of the 54 countries have adopted the Malabo Protocol on a full-time Parliament of the Pan African Parliament to have full legislative powers rather than advisory. I would like to bring this to your desk again that Uganda is still lagging behind. I would like to call for the support of the House for Uganda to ratify that protocol.

As members of the Pan African Parliament, we would also like to pray that the Pan African Parliament be given ample time on this Floor to present the activities fully debated by the members so that the country comes to understand the activities of the African Union and the activities that members of the Pan African Parliament carry out at the African Union on your behalf.

As I conclude, Agenda 2063 is endowed with so many areas. We would like to present this to the members but we never have ample time on the Floor. We have pending treaties and as members playing a delegated role for Uganda, we have the CADAP Declaration talking about Comprehensive Agricultural Development for Africa Programme and CADAP for Uganda. 

We would like to present this and tell the country how far we are. We want updates from the line ministries in terms of implementation of the Comprehensive Agricultural Development for Africa Programme, which was adopted by heads of state in Malabo, where the Head of State of Uganda signed.

Madam Speaker, we have the Maputo Declaration. You are a gender activist and some of the issues within the Maputo Declaration are still pending. 

Through the Food and Nutrition Alliance, I would like to report that having been the Chairperson of Agriculture in the Pan African Parliament, Uganda is among the countries that we chose to champion the Food and Security Alliance, which you are going to launch on 28th. That was the effort of the Pan African parliamentarians. We would like to see Uganda taking seriously issues of food and nutrition in terms of adapting to new technologies, especially in regard to addressing drought and floods because we benchmark in the different countries. 

Some of the pending issues in regard to our roles at the Pan African Parliament include how the countries that we represent can work together to ensure that the SDGs and the 2063 African Agenda, link to the country vision, for example Uganda’s Vision 2040 and how they are addressed at the country level.

As I conclude, I would like to thank you very much and I call upon the honourable members to applaud the Speaker for all the support she gave us last year when we were seriously campaigning in Midrand. She worked tooth and nail and supported us financially. She wrote to all Speakers and tried to talk to all member states to make sure that we got the seats. We managed to get some although we stayed one for the future. I beg to move. Thank you very much. (Applause) The report is already laid.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. Before I allow members to speak, I just wanted to go on record that it is not the House that has stopped you from bringing your business here. You have not brought anything otherwise it would be on the Order Paper. We are on record for complaining about the disconnect between the African Union and this Parliament. The problem of the passports is because the East African Community (EAC) people do not come here. They take decisions in Arusha and go to sleep. That is where the problem is. Members, any comments on the Pan African report?

3.36
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member who represents us at the African Union Parliament and the team. Whereas she has tried to highlight some of the challenges, many of us keep asking ourselves how the experiences they get from that Parliament translate into the Uganda we want. 

Many times, activities go on and they are just there for members to go and participate. Time has come for us to require our members who go there to not only sit but ensure that whatever they agree on in those respective parliaments are translated into activities and actions in this country. It will be incumbent upon them to ensure that the legislators here get to know what they have agreed on. Once we get to know what they have agreed on, we form a team to ensure that whatever they agreed upon is translated into action points here.

Our governments must also respect these institutions, which we set up as an African continent and as East Africa. These bodies are put up by these governments but quite often, the resolutions made by these institutions are ignored. They agree to ratify certain agreements but they never do anything. Madam Speaker, there are so many agreements at the AU that are not ratified here and quite often, you have complained and asked what Government is doing. Why are we not complying with the agreements that we take resolutions on?

On so many occasions, we keep on talking about the Maputo Declaration on health. We are now handling the National Budget Framework Paper but it never appears within our analysis of the budget. I think it is high time that we got serious about these matters and ensure that whatever is agreed upon in those institutions is respected here. Thank you very much.

3.39
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was taken aback when the honourable member representing us in the African Union told us that they were held in Dubai in the United Arab Emirates for two days because they were holding Pan African passports. Uganda is a sovereign country with our passports. I was wondering why you handed in the Ugandan passports and took the Pan African passports. Why did you give in our passports? 

With the Ugandan passport, you can travel anywhere and you will not face any problem – (Interjection) – Just a moment. I was wondering why you preferred to hand in the Ugandan passport and travel with the Pan African passport.

Secondly, I would like to agree with my colleague who has just been on the Floor of Parliament that Uganda goes and signs many international protocols, including the Maputo Protocol on Agriculture and Food Security. You were there in South Africa, representing us from Uganda. When others are talking and implementing the Maputo Protocol of 10 per cent on agriculture and food security, what do you say? 

The Abuja Declaration on Health of 15 per cent - You are supposed to follow up some of these issues. Honourable Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, what percentage has Uganda put in the food sector? It is less than five per cent. Moreover, in the Abuja Declaration, we said it should be 15 per cent. 

We go to international conferences and agree to resolutions but when we come back to our country, we do nothing. It embarrasses us. It goes across different sectors; human rights, the World Bank - Last time, the minister said we are doing very well and yet the Auditor-General is saying that 41 per cent is high for Uganda. 

We must walk the talk when we go to international conferences. When we support the motions and declarations being tabled, we must come back home and implement them. Otherwise, you embarrass Uganda. It is because of such embarrassments that you see what is happening in Entebbe. I think the UN issue is supposed to come on the Floor of Parliament because it is serious. We discussed this matter here. However, when the international community looks at what we are doing on the ground, they think otherwise.

Honourable ministers, these are some of the things you should take seriously. When you go to international conferences and sign agreements –(Member timed out.)

3.42
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Pan African Parliament representatives from Uganda for the job well done. Sincerely, you have done a good job, taking into account the positions you are holding in that Parliament. 

I am here to make an analysis on why the protocols and resolutions are not implemented in Uganda. Any Ugandan would want to see all those resolutions and protocols implemented. However, the problem must be understood. I have heard that one of the resolutions was to make sure that corruption is fought. The problem is only corruption. It is a resolution on its own but it is stopping other resolutions and protocols from being implemented. 

This is a challenge to all of us, as leaders of Uganda and the people. Do we have the moral authority to fight corruption? That is what we have to start with because there is no way that Uganda is going to fight corruption if the leaders do not have the moral authority. Remember, we are the examples. 

Therefore, I do not expect those protocols and resolutions, including the one against corruption, to be implemented if the leaders cannot lead others by example. We admire other countries, which are implementing the resolutions and protocols. That means that their level of corruption is not the same as ours. We must accept that we have not done a good job on fighting corruption. We go to FM radios and talk about other things and forget corruption. We go to our constituencies to talk about other things and we forget corruption. Even our children have not heard a lot from us as we fight corruption. 

Therefore, as leaders, we need to come out to fight corruption. Then, all these resolutions and protocols will be simple to implement in Uganda. Thank you.

3.45
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the other members in thanking our representatives at the Pan African Parliament for the great work they are doing for our country. More so, I thank them for the promotion of food and nutritional security, not only locally but also at the African level and juxtaposing Uganda as a great country in its efforts aimed at food and nutritional security.

Locally here at Parliament, we coined our theme, ‘Zero hunger constituencies’ by the end of our term of office, especially under the Food Security Forum of Parliament. In the recent past, in partnership with FAO, we have formed a parliamentary alliance for food and nutritional security. However, these steps are to promote the country and also our efforts, as leaders, in promoting food and nutritional security.

Notwithstanding, I would like to register my great disappointment about the deteriorating quality of food on the market in the country. The food we eat is a risk to our lives. Recently, KCCA authorities discovered somebody who was preserving meat using formalin. My question is, by the time this person was discovered, how many people had consumed the meat preserved using formalin. Not a long time ago, somebody was arrested for slaughtering a dog to be served on the market. Yes, it was in the news.

As you drive from Kampala to Masaka through Mbarara, we are told that if marabou stork can be accessed, they are slaughtered, roasted and served to the travellers as food. The passion fruits that we eat have deposits of mineral elements from fertilisers that are used during planting. The story is long. The milk we drink is adulterated; it has water and other elements in it. 

If you challenge UNBS on the quality of the food we eat on the market, they cannot take full responsibility. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is here. Who is responsible for monitoring the quality and security of the food we eat from the markets? 

Madam Speaker, my call is to Government to own up regarding its responsibilities. Whatever agency of the Government that is responsible for protecting the lives of the citizens, they should augment their efforts in monitoring the planting, harvesting, preparation and security of the food that is sold on the market. I thank you.

3.49
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to applaud and congratulate the Ugandan delegation to the Pan African Parliament. You may not be aware but I think it is important for us to record that it is the Ugandan delegation that introduced the mainstreaming of the Youth Committee in the Pan African Parliament. Whereas now we have the gender mainstream and the women committee mainstream, we did not have the youth mainstreaming. I would specifically like to thank hon. Amongin for moving that motion on the Floor of Parliament for it to be adopted. It has transformed the lives of the youth on the continent.

I would also like to implore the Pan African delegation to bring to Parliament the resolutions they have passed that need to be domesticated. We do not seem to be aware of what is discussed there so it is important that you highlight the areas that we need to domesticate so that we can move together with other countries on the continent.

The issue of democracy and human rights is dominating the African Continent. I remember at one time when it came on the Floor of Parliament I had to drive out my troop because Uganda was one of the countries that had not signed the treaty. I think sometimes we really embarrass our Government if we do not highlight those issues, which are not done intentionally.

It is also in the interest of Government to follow up some of those issues. You remember, Madam Speaker, when we tried to campaign for our own to take up leadership in the AU. It became very difficult because the gymnastics of politics in the continent is very complicated. You have to be aligned to the French speaking, to the Arab speaking and so many things. Therefore, we need to discuss all these issues and make them a reality.

Finally, because of the role the Pan African Parliament is playing in monitoring elections, it is important that the issue of elections is also harmonised in the continent. This is because they get involved in monitoring elections all over the continent and it is –(Member timed out.)

3.52
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, PWD Representative, Western): Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity and I wish to thank my colleagues and Members of the Pan African Parliament for representing us well at the continental legislative body.

Some of the issues that the leader of the delegation presented to this House are indeed pertinent and affect us as Uganda in our foreign relations. She mentioned our lack of commitment to pay membership and subscription to international organisations and that affects our performance, as Uganda. 

I, therefore, urge that Government looks into this matter to fulfil our obligations to international fora where our presence and membership must be very effective. The Pan African Parliament ideally should drive its agenda from our national parliaments and the resolutions that they pass should be implementable. 

The Pan African Parliament has addressed many issues, as my colleagues who have spoken before have said. The Pan African Parliament has considered issues of food security and continental stability but the role of African parliaments in getting involved in conflict resolution is minimal. We need our national parliaments to be involved in conflict resolution because that will go a long way in ensuring stability across the continent.

We implore you, our representatives at the Pan African Parliament, to take keen interest in this matter to ensure that our national parliaments can raise a stronger voice in this continental body to resolve conflicts in Africa.

Madam Speaker, I feel that this body could also make more contributions, particularly on food security. It is absurd to import maize from the United States of Africa when there is over production in the African neighbouring countries. We fail to transport the food that we over produce to areas where there is scarcity –(Member timed out.)

3.56
COL FELIX KULAYIGYE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank our representatives to the Pan African Parliament. However, I would like to correct a wrong picture, which I have heard on the Floor about our performance as a country.

I have here a UNDP final report on the MDGs and I quote paragraph (2), “Uganda’s overall MDG results are impressive although progress has not been uniform across all the goals.” Paragraph (3) states, “Uganda’s most important success is under MDG I - Income poverty, which was reduced by two thirds surpassing the 50 per cent reduction specified by target (a)(1).” Surely the country deserves applause on that one.

Then paragraph (4) says, “Another important achievement has been controlling the spread of malaria, the leading cause of under-five mortality. The malaria prevalence rate among children fell by more than 50 per net in just five years between 2009 and 2014.”

Paragraph (5) states, “Government investment in rural water supply has brought significant progress. The share of the rural population using an improved drinking water source increased from 52 per cent in 2001/2002 to 72 per cent in 2012/2013.”

Madam Speaker, if we do not shout about our achievements and we keep - I am quoting a UNDP report; it is on your iPads if you Google. Therefore, let us not downplay our own achievements. I thank you.

3.58
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate our comrades in the Pan African Parliament, more especially hon. Amongin,, for the good presentation and for the hard work.

We have been singing a lot about the Abuja Declaration, which was signed with or without reservation. Agriculture, particularly, is supposed to be a driver of our economy. When we talk about poverty, it is because we have not responded positively to the Abuja Declaration in terms of budgeting. Right now we are in the budget period and we should analyse the budget. We sign but we do not implement.

When it comes to health, we know that our health facilities are not doing well because of budgeting but also when budgeting, we should say that at least 15 per cent of the national budget should be given. We have never come close to 15 per cent and our people are dying.

They have also introduced the nutrition aspect. We will also analyse those new resolutions and protocols and see which ones to domesticate in Uganda. However, we should be mindful of diseases, which are killing us these days because of eating inedible food sometimes.

Sometime ago, I saw plastic eggs and I am sure some of you also saw them because they were in public. We eat without knowing. Therefore, we have to be very conscious of what goes into our stomachs otherwise, we are eating harmful things. In addition, we do not know the effect of eating chicken, which grows in two weeks. 

Therefore, I would like to thank the Members of Pan African Parliament for this presentation and we need to take it on. Honourable ministers, let us follow up, when we talk about protocols or resolutions, whether African or –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we note the reports in (6)(i) from the African Parliamentary Union and the report from the Pan African Parliament. Thank you for the contributions.

We are not able to proceed with item 4 because we have not been able to upload the minister’s statement. We shall defer it to Tuesday but in the meantime, let us handle item 5.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER ON QUESTIONS RAISED BY HON. FREDRICK ANGURA ON MEASURES TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT TO MITIGATE THE EFFECTS OF A YELLOW CLIMBING PLANT REPORTED TO SUFFOCATE TREES, FOOD CROPS AND PERIMETER WALL FENCES

4.01
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, this is a statement in response to questions raised by hon. Fredrick Angura from Tororo County South, who wanted to know the measures taken by Government to mitigate the effects of a yellow climbing plant reported to suffocate trees, food crops and perimeter wall fences.

Currently, crop production is at 30 per cent of the potential partly due to crop pests and diseases and declining soil fertility. These pests include the recently reported parasitic weeds like striga, the congress weed, Lantana Camara and of recent, Golden Dodder commonly known as Cuscuta campestris. 

Golden Dodder is thought to be native to North America in Canada, USA and Mexico and parts of South America and has recently spread to Africa including Uganda.

The weed attacks a wide range of naturalised species and native plants that are growing in grasslands, open woodlands, coastal vine thickets, gardens, degraded land, banks of watercourses and wetlands. The weed has currently spread to nearly all regions of the country. I would like to say, especially in the Eastern Region, that when one drives through Busoga, Tororo area and even Bukedea, this plant can be seen hanging on other plants. 

The description of this plant is that the weed is an annual stem parasitic plant, which lacks normal roots and leaves but bears flowers and fruits. The weed has a very distinct appearance, consisting mainly of leafless, smooth, yellow or orange twining stems and tendrils, with inconspicuous scales in the place of leaves.

This Golden Dodder has yellow to pale orange true stems, which generally do not twine and attach to the host but produce tendrils of similar appearance, which form coils and a specialised root-like sucker that penetrates other plants - which you should call the hosts because it is a parasite - and obtains water and nutrients from it. 

The seedling has only a rudimentary root for anchorage. The root and shoot below this initial attachment to the host plant, soon die, leaving no direct contact with the soil. The dodder seeds are spread by wind, water, birds, other animals and man on machines and planting material contaminated by dodder seeds. 

Reproduction is by seed, which can germinate under relatively high temperatures. The seeds can remain viable for more than three years. After being ingested, they are said to maintain their germinating capacity and vitality for up to 10 years. Immature seeds are said to germinate faster than mature ones. 

Although the seeds are viable and can readily germinate, this Cuscuta species can only survive the seedling stage if they get a host immediately after germination before the food in the cotyledons is finished. Therefore, their major means of disposal at the local scale is plant fragments that are carried by people, especially children because of their bright colour and appeal and they later throw them on other plants or vegetation where they attach themselves very fast and send their haustoria or root-like structures into the host plant.

The best way to manage the weed is by avoiding the ways of its dispersal. The following are the recommended management measures:

1. 	Do not throw dodder plant parts onto other vegetation.
2. 	Practice crop rotation with a 3-4-year cycle of unsusceptible crops such as wheat, maize, sorghum, millet, grasses, Napier and lilies.
3. 	Collect dodder plant fragments thrown on other vegetation and destroy them by burying them 60 centimetres deep.
4. 	Plant fruit tree seeds that are not contaminated with dodder seeds.
5. 	Wash the pruning equipment with water before moving from infested to clean areas.
6. 	Dispose of the water into a pit 60 centimetres deep.
7. 	Keep fields free of weeds that may serve as alternative hosts to the dodder weed.
8. 	Remove the dodder infestation by hand before onset of the seed then destroy by composting.
9. 	If only a few branches are affected, prune the infected portion of the host plant below the point of attachment.
10. 	Weed out the dodder before it attaches to a host plant.
11. 	Reduce the dodder infestations by removing the alternate host plant just below the point of dodder attachment; and
12. 	Spray – this is easy also although it is a chemical. You can use 2,4-D Amine 720 grams  per litre or Glyphosate and repeat this action after 30 days. This must be handled with care because these may affect the host plant. 

The most effective way to manage the dodder is the mechanical removal; let it dry, then burn or bury it deep over 60 centimetres to avoid regrowth.

When the parasitic weed was first reported in the eastern region in 20l7, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) organised a training workshop on 27 May 20l7 in Mbale for al1 district agricultural officers in that region. They were sensitized on the technical aspects of management and control.

Fact sheets were developed and disseminated to advise the public
on the proper management of the weed. Mapping out exercise is on-going to establish the extent of spread. Sensitisation of the public using the various media channels is also on-going.

More regional sensitisation workshops have been planned to take place across the country. We have dispatched a team because we have some chemicals - Glyphosate - in store to handle the bushes because it is also a parasite on plants that are not in gardens. Therefore, we need to handle it in the various districts.

Due to its spread by people, the public needs to desist from carrying its parts and if they do, destroy them or dry them on the surface other than on living plants and thereafter dispose them by burning or burying them deep 60 centimetres. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Angura, any supplementary questions before I ask hon. Lokii to say something small?

4.12
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the statement. In fact, what he has elaborated on is what is happening down on the ground.

Honourable minister, you have talked about a workshop that took place in May 2017 to sensitize the district leaders and agricultural officers on the same. However, is this sensitisation continuing? I am asking this because from 2017 to date, the plant has spread across. We are getting worried knowing that cassava is one of our staple foods yet mosaic disease has attacked it. This is affecting the different species of cassava that we are now trying to maintain.
 
Are your staff on the ground doing the sensitisation? Is there any report of workshops organised in Tororo or closer to the communities other than the regional ones?

Finally, honourable minister, the challenges are enormous about this. The pesticides you have talked about, are they available in the countryside where our people can also buy them? You have talked about the sensitivity of using of these pesticides; can they go and advise people on how to use them in order for us to mitigate this? Otherwise, I thank you for the statement.

4.14 
MR JOHN LOKII (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance to –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Just ask the question - we have moved from that item. I gave you chance because the minister is here; just ask your question.

MR LOKII: I am raising an issue to do with the outbreak of Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) in Moroto District. Now that the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is here - the Commission of Livestock Health and Entomology has slapped a ban on the sale of livestock by instituting a quarantine, which has seen all the cattle markets in the area shutdown. 

Madam Speaker, Moroto District lies in the cattle corridor, meaning that more than 70 per cent of the households depend entirely on livestock for both food and income. The issue has exacerbated because this is a purely dry season; therefore, even acquisition of food by these households is complicated.

My prayer to the minister is to institute immediate control measures by providing the vaccine to be able to control the outbreak of FMD not only in Matheniko County but also in other districts within the cattle corridor in the country.

The quarantine is easy to institute but the quarantines in Uganda usually take too long, stretching to as far as three years yet one cannot expect the cattle market in Uganda to be closed for that long because it affects the distribution of income in the country.

4.16
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for his response. However, using 2,4-D Amine and Glyphosate is very dangerous because it burns all the grass. How are the farmers going to use that chemical on their crops?

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should not only wait for oral questions to update us. In Busoga, we equally have a very stubborn weed locally known as Kayongo; it suffocates everything in the garden. When that weed attacks for example five acres of maize, one cannot even harvest a sack. 

However, that weed has been around for a long time but the ministry has not come up with a solution. Therefore, since the agriculture minister is here, maybe I can also take advantage so that he can answer me.

4.18
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. At least I have an advantage to move in the eastern region. Honourable minister, what you have said is exactly what happens but you have not provided solutions.

If this weed gets a milk-tree fence, it spreads around like an umbrella and covers it and eventually kills it. It has affected many families. Last week I was in Pallisa where hon. Amoit lost her father. In their home, all the trees were covered. I even told her to look at it; about one acre was covered.

Honourable minister, we keep talking about food security and climate change but you are just instructing poor people to go and buy this, burry it and yet we have extension workers. Is it not shame for you to come to this House and speak like a layman talking to voters? 

What are you doing as ministry? How can you just come and talk like this? We want to see people on the ground doing the spraying. It is everywhere - I come from Tororo where hon. Angura comes from, it is spreading wildly. I saw it in Mbale and Soroti and I wondered what the yellow plant was. As you have said, it is attractive; people will pick it and take it away. 

Honourable minister, give us strategies of how this weed can be controlled. The pesticide you are telling us about also kills other plants. Therefore, I beg that you to come with clear strategies. You have only told us how it moves and that is what we already know; can your ministry swing into action? Thank you.

4.20
MS ALUM SANTA (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, you have explained how the weed looks like and the causes but that cannot help us as a country. 

I once went for a field visit in Iganga and we found this beautiful purple weed. It suffocates all the plants around it. I remember seeing a one-acre garden completely destroyed and when you try to uproot it, it is so hard and deeply rooted. Honourable minister, you have a research department in your ministry; what is that department doing that it cannot come up with a remedy to this problem? 

Secondly, while in the field, we got to realise farmers had been just left to “To whom it may concern.” There had been no sensitisation at all on how this weed could be uprooted from the garden once and forever. Therefore, when you talk about sensitisation, I keep wondering where you are doing this. Is there any monitoring unit? Are there extension workers to particularly help with this? 

This weed is not only in Eastern Uganda; even in the North, some of these weeds are coming up. Therefore, I do not know where we are going as a country in terms of food security, if we do not handle this critical issue. Thank you.  

4.22
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries used to have extension workers throughout the country. I expect these extension workers to keep sending reports to the ministry; that there is something strange in our area; that there has been an outcry about this strange plant. 

Most of our people - 70 per cent of Ugandans - are engaged in agriculture. Therefore, if this plant can suffocate the food crops, what are people going to live on? Honourable minister, if you do not have money, bring a supplementary budget on the Floor of Parliament so that your ministry goes and destroys this plant. 

When there was Foot and Mouth Disease somewhere, there was a supplementary budget brought here and we allocated money to go and get rid of it. Honourable minister, we want you to get up so that you go and destroy this disease because our people are engaged in agriculture. This weed is in Bugisu and everywhere in this country so what are our people going to do if it spreads? 

4.23
MS REHEMA WATONGOLA (NRM, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to thank the minister for the information he has given to this House.

However, I am also not satisfied with the facts he came with. My colleague mentioned earlier on that we have a weed called Kayongo in Busoga. In all the regions, Busoga is the poorest; we are crying of poverty and now we have that weed yet the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has done nothing about it. Instead of coming down to the ground, the minister is giving information that we use the spray method, which needs money. 

Madam Speaker, why do we waste money in workshops and not go down to the grassroots where the problem is? The minister was aware of the problem after he carried out research but up to now, the people he invited to the workshop have not yet actually delivered the message. I have never heard of the measures the minister has talked about in my district. 

In Busoga, that weed is a herb to the traditional healers. It is called, “Sinini Nambula Buzimbu” which literary means a plant without an origin. We are told that if it is carried on firewood and the firewood is used to cook food, then the whole family will get disturbed and start fighting and killing one another. Therefore, it is a very dangerous weed, for which the minister must provide a solution. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.26
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. Any attack on the food security of our country is a serious one. We are aware that we have two clear seasons and when our farmers are affected, it becomes difficult to restore the food situation in any region. Therefore, I propose that the minister comes up with a clear strategy on how to eliminate this weed. 

Madam Speaker, we have now heard of specific regions being affected, especially the eastern part of the country. However, some of the weeds started like that; for example the Kariba weed, which is on our water bodies - we kept watching it until all the parts of this country were affected. 

I also propose that the honourable minister comes with a comprehensive strategy to stop this weed from widely spreading to other parts of this country. The minister informed us about the actions taken from 2017. Can he also brief this House on the impact of the sensitisation that has been done and the ones that are on-going? Is there any reduction in the spread? 

Lastly, its flower looks so beautiful and the way it spreads - for example, by wind - people get attracted to it –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it was an urgent question but I allowed a few people because of the nature of the subject. Let us hear from the minister. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I mentioned that this weed’s colour is appealing to our people. That is why most of them do not want to remove it from their fences or plants. We really had to intensify sensitisation because education is power. They have to know that if we leave the –(Interruption.) 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are dealing with a very serious matter, which touches the food security of this country. Before the minister came in, a colleague had informed us that there is a Cabinet Paper being worked on to respond to the question raised. I am tempted to believe that probably the paper is what will address the issues. 

Isn’t it procedurally right, Madam Speaker, that basing on the answers that the honourable minister is giving, we wait for the Cabinet Paper, which the junior minister had informed us about? 

THE SPEAKER: The minister was making preliminary remarks and now he is going to answer. (Laughter)

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are taking the issue of this weed very seriously. We have done the research and we are sensitising the public. The only problem is that this weed is also found in uncultivated bushes. Where the farmers are working, in many cases, they remove the weed from the plants but what about in the bushes? 

This is where we are going to deploy our staff. We have the glyphosate and I really would like to request the Members that if your constituency is badly affected, we are ready to deploy and get to the ground. We do not want this weed to spread; we know its effects, if we leave it to spread. Some countries have faced a very big problem with this weed.

Somebody talked about the Cassava Mosaic disease. Madam Speaker, we have worked with hon. Fredrick Angura and have tried a variety in Tororo, which was affected by the Cassava Mosaic. We have taken there a new variety which has really worked well. I think he has not forgotten NaROCAS I. In that region, it seems Nase 14 is attacked by the Cassava Mosaic virus while in other areas like the North, Nase 14 is not affected by the Cassava Mosaic. 

The minister of state is here and will talk about the Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) in Moroto and the related problems. However, generally FMD is a disease that is easy to control, if we agree as Ugandans to be disciplined. It is a virus but it is like a cold. If one does not sit near somebody with a cold, then they will not catch it. Therefore, the quarantine is only for keeping these animals out of contact with the other unaffected animals. 

However, our population lacks the discipline and that is why we cannot stop FMD. Otherwise, technically, in three weeks, this virus can go by itself if a cow does not infect another.

4.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The problem of FMD in Karamoja will be handled because we are very sensitive to Karamoja. In Karamoja, the cows are the people’s source of livelihood. 

Secondly, Karamoja has a project and money. You passed here $40 million for that region. In Karamoja, we have been vaccinating and the honourable member can confirm because he is actually veterinary doctor. We will continue to vaccinate and this problem will not be prolonged because we have the money to buy the vaccines for Karamoja. It is a different matter from the other districts where we lack money to buy vaccines.  
THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I would like to welcome the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and to wish him a happy new year. We will have question time for 45 minutes.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

4.34
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker for the opportunity. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what plans does Government have to increase the token or allowance given to the local council one chairpersons for the great service they do for the country?

4.35  
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, I appreciate the concern expressed in the question by the honourable member about support for the LCIs and other LCs. This is a matter that Government is giving active consideration. The responsible minister will be coming, after Government has completed the consideration of this matter, to report to this august House.

4.36
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, you are pretty much aware that State House pays sportsmen. Last week, I received a complaint from some athletes that they have not been paid for several months. What do we have for these athletes? 

I know very well that for the past eight years, we have had a number of athletes win many medals and I know we cannot pay them on a monthly basis – (Interjections) - I have already retired and I am “eating” my own money. However, I am more concerned about those who are representing us and they have not received any payment while they prepare for the next Olympics in 2020. I would like to know what we have allocated to them. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Before the Prime Minister comes, I have also been accosted by athletes. When I go for functions, they come with their medals saying, “Madam, we won a medal but we have not been rewarded.” They said the President promised gold medal winners Shs 5 million and bronze medal winners some money; they are walking around with their medals.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is true that Ugandan athletes have done very well and raised the name of the country very high internationally. In recognition of this, His Excellency the President, on behalf of Government, has given them definite support in different ways. All I can say is that what the President has promised will be fulfilled. There may be a slight delay but I will ask the minister responsible for sports to aggressively follow it up so that Government meets its obligations and promises to these patriots.

4.38
MR EDWARD SSEMBATYA (NRM, Katikamu County South, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In 2006 - about 12 years back, His Excellency the President pledged to tarmac Bombo-Kalasa Road through Ndejje University Main Campus. However, to date, nothing has been done. May I know from the Prime Minister whether it has been considered under the budget estimates for 2019? This is an issue that is overdue. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, this is one of the few promises made, which have not been fulfilled yet. Nevertheless, the point is very well taken. I will crosscheck on the facts and let the honourable member know what the actual position is with regard to this coming budget.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you could also check the Budget Framework Paper on that issue.

4.39
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that we have fishing communities in this country. Government has come up with a number of measures to help different communities except the fishing communities. May I know which special arrangement or programme you have to help the fishing communities like you have helped those in animal and     Hon. Prime
crop husbandry? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, aquaculture or fishing in general enjoys the full support of Government. After all, you very well know that the fishing industry rose and earned us a lot of money but because of bad fishing methods that sector almost got destroyed. The Government came in and gave powerful interventions and as a result, the sector is coming up. Therefore, we support the fishing industry.

However, I think this is such a major issue that I will ask the minister responsible to come and apprise this august House on the concrete measures being taken by the Government to revamp this important industry.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, in December 2016 I was with the President at Lolwe Landing Site during the campaigns and he instructed the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to design a programme for the fishing industry; the way we have the feeds for animals, he said that give them the feeds. They do not have nets and so on; it is really outstanding.

4.42
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In 2017, a list was read in this Parliament of the hospitals that were supposed to be rehabilitated and one of them was Busolwe Hospital in Butaleja District. It is now coming to three years yet no work has been done. Prime Minister, for how long shall we wait for this?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I am fully aware that Busolwe Hospital, which has been in a bad state, is one of the hospitals due to be renovated. The programme for renovation of hospitals is available with the Minister of Health. I, therefore, propose that my sister gets the date and timing for renovation of Busolwe from the responsible minister.

4.43
MR LAWRENCE MANGUSHO (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to get the information from the Prime Minister regarding the status of the procurement process for the Kampala-Jinja Highway. For some of us who struggle with the eastern route, the journey from Kampala to Jinja is very tedious and there are many companies claiming to have won the contract. We would like to know the status of this road. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the country and the East African Region is waiting for this road because it is true that the Kampala-Jinja Highway, instead of being a road, is a roadblock in terms of fast travel. The procurement process is underway. Evaluation is going on and we expect results to be announced in due course.

4.44
MS REHEMA WATONGOLA (NRM, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, a cholera outbreak has been confirmed in some parts of Kampala. However, there is a factory producing bottled water called Dew. It is confirmed that this water killed 180 people in Tanzania. In my area, people are very worried because they got information that this water was sneaked into this country. How have you helped this country to stop the importation of this water into this country?

THE SPEAKER: What is the brand of the water?

MS WATONGOLA: It is called “Dew” and we have soda known as “Mountain Dew.” Therefore, people are wondering whether it is the soda or the water. When you Google, you will get that information.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, if there is such a product that is injurious to the lives of our people, I would have straightaway expected the responsible department of Government to take the immediate steps to correct that situation. We will take this information and give to the responsible department to ensure that appropriate action is to taken to protect the lives of our people.

4.46
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, last year this Parliament committed the Executive arm of Government to provide two briefs on:

    1. The plan by Government to rejuvenate the Uganda Airlines; and
    2. The affirmative action plan that Government has put in place to address the inequalities highlighted in the Equal Opportunities Commission’s report for 2018, where it highlighted inequalities at sub-regional levels – access to education, health, electricity and tarmacked roads.

Hon. Prime Minister, may I know from you, as the Leader of Government Business in Parliament, when these two briefs will be provided by the Executive to the legislative arm? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, as far as Uganda Airlines is concerned, we are on course. It will only be right that the responsible minister comes and updates this august House on the progress being made. It is also true to say that this year, you and I will be able to fly Ugandan Airlines. (Applause)

On the progress being made on the Equal Opportunities Commission’s report, I will ask the responsible minister to come and apprise this august House on the progress being made to ensure that the distortions are appropriately corrected.

4.49
MS STELLA KIIZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are two Government programmes whose progress I would like know. Some time back we passed a loan for Lake Victoria Water Management and Development System. I would like to know the progress of that project. 

Secondly, some districts have voucher systems for carrying expectant women for check-ups and we are supposed to roll it out countrywide. I would like to know how the progress of that programme in order to have it rolled out to all our districts because it is in demand by our women. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, on the question of assisting our pregnant women, it would be right that the Minister of Health gives a progress report on the matter. On the second point on Lake Victoria, again, the minister responsible should give a progress report to this House because as you know, projects go through different stages. I would want to know where it is and when operationalisation and implementation of the project will take place.

For the colleagues I have talked about who are due to give statements to this House, I expect that all these statements will be made within the next four weeks.

4.51
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County South, Dokolo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In 2016, the President promised the people of Dokolo to take over two secondary schools; that is Adeknino Secondary School and Okwongodul Modern Secondary School. These are two sub-counties without a secondary school.

The President informed members of my community that these two secondary schools would be taken over by Government and aid would be granted to them. I would like to know from the Prime Minister how far they have gone with effecting the President’s promise. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, Government taking over schools is a phased programme and the Ministry of Education and Sports is responsible for its implementation. The ministry has this programme available and has schools as they will be taken on as time goes on. I advise my distinguished colleague to get this programme from the Ministry of Education and Sports and see when the two secondary schools will be taken over by Government, as promised by His Excellency, the President.

4.53
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Two years ago, this House made amendments to the Public Finance Management Act, which created and opened doors for Islamic banking. Everything was done but up to now, nothing is in place. Can we know from the Government what has hindered the progress and beginning of a new era of Islamic banking?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, hon. Sebaggala’s concern is our concern. We have discussed this matter a number of times. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will come next week and tell this august House why we have not actualised its implementation. My firm conviction and our view is that the Government and Uganda is losing. The sooner we have Islamic banking operationalised, the better for our country. The finance minister will come next week and give us a progress report.

THE SPEAKER: The minister is directed to come on Wednesday to report on that.

4.54
MR DAVID LUKYAMUZI (Independent, Busujju County, Mityana): Thank you very much. Hon. Prime Minister, Butayunja Sub-County was gazetted to receive power by the end of this financial year. However, up to now, nothing has been done. Can I get from you the status of that programme? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I did not hear; what was the issue?

MR LUKYAMUZI: I would like to know the status on the extension of electricity to Butayunja Sub-County in my constituency.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, as colleagues know, it is now Government policy to embark on free connections of power to the wanainchi. Therefore, it is just a question of time before your county benefits from this programme. Indeed, we would like every part of Uganda to benefit from this so that the amount of power we are generating can be consumed and generate revenue so that we can, in turn, service the loans that we got to build these dams and prepare the country for take-off. (Applause)

4.56
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, it is almost six months since we approved a request by Government in this House to pay traders who lost their businesses in South Sudan or who supplied goods to South Sudan but were not paid.

There were about 10 companies that were approved here but up to now, they have not been paid. If at all they have been paid, then maybe it were a selected few yet we approved them here. You requested that you have the money but you needed permission and it was granted. However, there is nothing up to now. The traders are stressed. Some of their houses are up for sale by banks. They are still crying and running after the President. Can we be updated?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the honourable colleague has raised a serious matter. It is true this House discharged its responsibilities and as you know, an agreement was made by the two countries that money should be paid. Even the Government of Uganda agreed to pay this money on the clear understanding that the Government of South Sudan would meet its obligations. 

The Government of South Sudan has not yet sent the requisite documents to confirm this. Nevertheless, the Government of Uganda is pursuing this matter to make sure that all those who legitimately supplied to the Government of South Sudan indeed are properly paid. Government is pursuing the matter.

4.58
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, towards the end of the last financial year, Government presented a list of about 30 districts that were supposed to benefit from hard-to-reach-areas allowance. This financial year, the district local governments got information that they should prepare to receive that allowance and I am speaking because Kween District was among them.

However, to date, they have not received it. Can I get a response on the progress and when the civil servants expect to receive or benefit from the hard-to-reach allowances? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I do not have specific information on the matter but the Ministry of Public Service, which is responsible for sorting out this issue, will within two weeks come to this august House and give an update on the hard-to-reach allowance.

5.00
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, the Fountain of Honour, His Excellency the President, is championing the study of science-based subjects. As far as I am aware, the foundation is set from secondary schools. However, a majority of our secondary schools lack science laboratories. One of such schools in my constituency is Gweri Secondary School with a population of over 1,500 students. 

May I know what plans are in place because even when I cross-checked with the budget of the Ministry of Education and Sports, the secondary schools development fund is under unfunded priorities. What plans do we have to construct science laboratories and libraries in most of these secondary schools? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I agree with the Member that teaching of science is crucial. For the transformation of this country, you need catalysts to do that. That scientific knowledge will help that process. The Ministry of Education and Sports, in a phased manner, is building and equipping laboratories for secondary schools. 

5.01
MR FRANCO CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you. Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that there is increasing demand to create new administrative units right from sub-county to district level. There is a grant called Discretionary Development Grant (DEDEG), which has not increased despite the number of new administrative units coming on board. This is the only grant that the local government units utilise to put some discretionary development programmes in their respective areas of jurisdiction. 

Now that we have started the budgeting process, may I know from you what plans Government have to ensure that the budgetary allocation to DEDEG is tripled in order for the local government units to be able to serve their people appropriately?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, this is a budgetary matter which I will not go into at this juncture. Suffice to say that while there is demand for new districts and more local government units, there is essentially a moratorium by Government on that matter except the districts where Government has already agreed to create new districts. 

Secondly, there may be exceptional circumstances where the moratorium will be lifted. Generally, there is going to be a slowdown or reduction in the creation of more districts and administrative units. The budget process will take into accounts the new local government structures that will be put in place so that they can be able to work well.

THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Zaake, join me in welcoming retired Judge, Dave Daniels, from Seattle. He has come to observe the proceedings of the House.

5.04
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (Independent, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware of the deportation of foreigners to Rwanda, which is a member State of the East African Community. I wish to know the circumstances surrounding the deportation and what binds us with Rwanda. 

DR RUGUNDA: Your question is on a matter under investigation. Therefore, when the investigations are complete, this House will be informed. The House will also be informed about the state of relationship with our neighbours including the Republic of Rwanda.

5.06
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you. Mr Prime Minister, in an unplanned and a hasty manner, the Ministry of Education and Sports has halted partnership with private municipal schools as far as Universal Secondary Education (USE) is concerned with effect from the next financial year. This is a challenge to Government-aided schools within municipalities because they have received too many students who are more than the classroom blocks they have. Also, the teacher to student ratio has overshot. May I know from you the plans you have to address this crisis?

THE SPEAKER: As I welcome the Prime Minister, join me in welcoming a delegation from Moroto. They are up here in the strangers’ gallery. They are represented by hon. Fred Angella and hon. Stella Atyang.

DR RUGUNDA: On the point raised by hon. Mwiru, there appears to be a discrepancy on the decision taken with the numbers on the ground. This is rather an administrative matter that the Ministry of Education and Sports should sort out as soon as possible with the private school owners so that the wanainchis are not, in any way, frustrated.

5.07
MR BASALIRWA ASUMAN (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you. Hon. Prime Minister, as we speak, the Judiciary has a challenge of case backlog. At the same time, five judges are due for retirement. I would like to know what interventions you have to ensure that the Judiciary is fully resourced in terms of manpower so that issues of case backlog are addressed.

DR RUGUNDA: Arrangements are underway to recruit more judges to make sure that this backlog is dealt with. 

THE SPEAKER: Can I know from the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs whether this has been budgeted for? The chairperson of the Committee on Budget should note that issue. If they are going to be appointed, we need to know whether the money is there. 

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, I am a member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and this is one of the issues we raised. There are no budget provisions for the numbers increased by Parliament but also there was no process to replace those who are due for retirement.

THE SPEAKER: So, it remains an issue, honourable Prime Minister.

DR RUGUNDA: The role of Government is to sort out distortions and ensure things that are not in order are put in order. Government will do that. (Laughter)

5.09
MR GEORGE KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In 2013/2014, the President of this country was attracted to Kayunga District on matters concerning land evictions. For over a month now, we have had helicopters flying over Galilaya sub-county. We do not know what is happening; the district leaders and the people in the area do not know what is happening.

Therefore, may I ask the Prime Minister if he knows what is happening because the district leaders including myself, the Member of Parliament of that area, do not know what is happening? People are scared because they fear that these helicopters are coming to chase them away from their land.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister.

MR KUMAMA: Should I repeat the question? Okay. I would like to know why helicopters have been flying over Galilaya sub-county for over a month now, and they fly as close as 100 metres above the ground. Therefore, the people are scared and do not know what is happening. 

May we know from the Prime Minister what the intention of this is, because the districts leaders and Members of Parliament do not know? People are asking us if they are safe or destined for eviction.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, there appears to be something special and attractive in the area. Government is going to take special interest and we will share this information with this august House as to why there is special interest in Galilaya.

5.12
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County Koboko): Thank you. Uganda is hosting close to two million South Sudanese refugees, and I would like to applaud Government’s policy on refugees and for receiving these people for their security and safety. However, the consequence of this is causing us a lot of problems at the border. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I need your intervention in these two respects: One, because the South Sudanese have left their country, their backyard is controlled by rebels who are logging Afzelia trees and they are being shipped through Uganda with clearance of Uganda Revenue Authority (URA). How can we be culpable in this looting when we are hosting their refugees and they are not in protection of their areas?

The honourable Minister of State for Local Government even visited one of the areas where this logging is taking place. I have personally written to the environment state minister to stop the shipment of these logs through my constituency but up to now, this practice is still going on. Mr Prime Minister, can we have Government intervention to stop the looting of South Sudanese logs/trees through our territory? They can pass through other routes but not through Uganda.

Secondly, because the rebels have nothing to eat there, they come raiding our territory. We have a border like the Busia border in Koboko and four times now, they have come to raid villagers’ cows. So far, four cows have been slaughtered; they just cut the meat with the skin and they carry it across at night. 

People are terrified and they need protection. There is a small army detachment in a place called Kagoropa but it is not enough; there are very few soldiers. Can we get reinforcements to make sure the people of Busia in Koboko are protected while we look after their refugees in Uganda? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I suggest you ask one question at a time. Now you have asked so many. Okay, Prime Minister, respond.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, on the question of the trees and logs, this is a matter that the two governments of Uganda and South Sudan will handle together. So, if there is something wrong, then we in Uganda can play a role to make sure that this wrong thing is corrected.

With regard to security, I do expect that the Uganda People’s Defence Forces and other security agencies will, without any doubt, ensure that Ugandans are protected. This information, I am sure, is already known. Nevertheless, we will reinforce this information to ensure that Ugandans are indeed protected from those forces that may be crossing the border with bad intentions to harm them.

5.15
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate that Government of Uganda drilled a number of boreholes in this country - I have been to Nakasongola, Gomba, Buliisa and other areas. However, the boreholes are breaking down every day and night. 

I was in my constituency and I travelled to 10 Local Council (LC) areas and that problem was fronted. They wanted me to buy sometimes 10, 20 or 17 pipes. I was giving Shs 200,000 per LC as a token as a Member of Parliament. I could not just leave because they would ask, “Where are you going; what are we going to do?” 

Madam Speaker, there is a serious problem with water. I would like to ask the Prime Minister what plan Government has to help the district local governments to get enough money to maintain their boreholes. In my district, they can only maintain 11 boreholes per annum. What plans does Government have to make sure boreholes are maintained and Members of Parliament do not suffer as far as maintaining boreholes are concerned? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, maintenance of boreholes is essentially a simple matter. You need to have technically trained people within the community who will be able to maintain these boreholes. In case there is a major fault, then the water ministry will help the districts concerned.

5.17
MR MICHAEL TUSIIME (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the Prime Minister. In 2014, the Government of Uganda initiated a project for the construction of a 400kV transmission power line from Masaka substation through the districts of Lwengo, Lyantonde, Kiruhura and Mbarara and subsequently to our neighbouring countries. 

That line was constructed and commissioned. However, the Government undertook the process of making an evaluation of the properties of the project affected persons. They conducted this process and completed it in August 2015. These people were put on notice not to put their land to use and told to open accounts and wait for compensation.

It is five years down the road and the project has since been commissioned, but these people have not received payment. It has also come to our knowledge that part of the payment in regard to the project affected persons was supposed to be made by the Government of Uganda as per that agreement.

May I know from you, therefore, Mr Prime Minister, what plans and timelines we have to ensure that these affected families, who are about 620 -

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, please answer; he is repeating himself. 

DR RUGUNDA: The point raised by Ndungu Tusiime is valid. It is true that there are a number of projects for which Government of Uganda was supposed to provide counterpart funding but when the time came, that money was not available. 

As you know, we have already taken a decision that no loan will be taken if counterpart funding is not available. Therefore, the focus now is to clear the backlog, and the people affected by this project are among those who will be cleared. The details of clearing them can be got from the line ministry or from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

5.19
MS JULIET KYINYAMATAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, there was an abattoir that was constructed in Kibanda Subcounty in Rakai District with a lot of Government funds and it was later on abandoned. My question to the Prime Minister is: When will you open it for the use of the people of Rakai and the neighbouring districts? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: If it was abandoned, it should be completed first. The details of compensation and payments should be available in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development or the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, or in the line ministries.

THE SPEAKER: I hope the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has noted that it is completed and not commissioned. That is the problem.

5.20
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there are veterans who fought for this country and they were made to retire in 1993 but most of them have never received their retirement package. They only receive promises whenever it comes to election time.

When should we expect these people, who lost their limbs at the expense of some other people who are enjoying, to be paid? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, as far as I know, a lot of these soldiers, who retired from Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) and the National Resistance Army, have had their benefits paid. For those who have not, there is a mechanism to pay them. By the way, it is not only those but also the former soldiers of the Uganda Army. 

The commitment of Government, therefore, is to make sure that our patriots, who sacrificed for the peace and security of our country, are properly paid. We regret the delay.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, I hope you will also consider the Kings African Rifles. They are not very many but they have still not been paid. 

DR RUGUNDA: All those who are entitled will receive their payments. By the way, we must make sure that we are paying the right people, hence the critical point of verification.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have used 50 minutes and exceeded our time. Leader of the Opposition, use two minutes. Members who will not contribute today will get the chance next Thursday.

5.23
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues to raise. One is about students of Makerere University who do not have lecturers right now. A number of staff have been suspended – I think over 40 of them. What do you say about that?

The other thing is about the central forest land in Gulu District. My people of the Holy Rosary Village in Queen’s Avenue Parish in Laroo Division have been given notice to leave that place on 31st of this month. However, last year, we deliberated on the Floor of Parliament and said those people must stay as the minister comes up with something. What do you say about it? How can we save our people? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I agree with the Leader of the Opposition that on the question of forests, we did say that there was need to do more work so that we are thorough and there are no people who are taking advantage of that situation. I do not expect any evictions or taking of forests since we are still awaiting a position from the minister responsible. 

Secondly, on the issue of Makerere University, it is a rather unfortunate situation that our famous university, which is so highly reputed, is having this little impasse. I do expect that the leadership, students, staff and the administration of Makerere University will be able to sort this matter out, in collaboration with the ministry responsible. All of us should work to encourage the people concerned to make sure that this impasse is sorted out as quickly as possible so that normal activity and programmes at Makerere can resume.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us go to the next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO URGE GOVERNMENT TO ENCOURAGE PHYSICAL EXERCISES IN THE COUNTRY

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will note that we have omitted items No.8, 9 and 10. We have been calling them out every day on the Order Paper but the chairperson and the vice-chairperson are not available; so that is where we are.

5.26
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The motion for a resolution of Parliament to urge Government to encourage physical exercises in the country is moved under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. The motion reads:

“WHEREAS Objective XVII of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy mandates Uganda to promote recreation and sports for the citizens of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS the National Day of Physical Activity has been marked as the second Sunday of July every year as part of a campaign to raise awareness on the growing burden of Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs) in Uganda;

AWARE THAT in order to realise the benefits of physical exercise, one requires daily commitment and consistency and therefore dedicating one day in a year is insufficient to realise the benefits;

CONSIDERLNG THAT the World Health Organisation recommendations on physical activity for health requires that throughout a week, including activity for work, during transport and leisure time, adults should do at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity physical activity, or 75 minutes of vigorous-intensity physical activity or an equivalent combination of moderate and vigorous intensity physical activity achieving at least 600 MET-minutes;

FURTHER AWARE that the road network in the country does not facilitate safe daily exercises due to lack of provision of walkways and cyclist lanes, as evidenced by Annual Crime Report, 2015, which indicates that pedestrians and passengers continue to be the most vulnerable category of road users constituting 4l per cent and 26 per cent respectively of the total number of persons killed in 2015, and l,311 pedestrians were killed in road accidents.

COGNISANT OF THE FACT THAT the primary and secondary schools in the country do not accommodate the growing number of pupils in the city and with many of them having no provision for sports fields intended for physical activities, further increasing the risk for non-communicable diseases and compromising the health of our future generation;

RECOGNIZING the need to create on enabling environment for routine physical exercise amongst the citizenry;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that:

1. 	Every Saturday, from 7.00a.m. to 11.00a.m., is designated as physical exercise hours for all Ugandans.

2. 	All higher institutions of learning, primary, secondary schools and work places provide health fitness plans and spaces for staff and students.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. Please, justify.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to first of all commend you. Having realised that Members of Parliament must be fit, together with the Parliamentary Commission you decided to establish a fully-fledged gym, which is helping us to keep fit.

Madam Speaker, you will realise that most sports facilities in this country and the playgrounds around town were sold and even some halls are dysfunctional. Above all, some of us who are interested in exercising find it very difficult to run along the streets or the roads here in Kampala because it is every risky. Remember one time when the late Kasiwukira was killed in the morning hours as he was trying to exercise. Since then, Ugandans have been sceptical. 

Therefore, if we have this physical exercise day and all Ugandans are aware that this is the time for exercising, it will encourage most Ugandans to participate and thus reduce on non-communicable diseases. As we talk now, many people in Uganda are suffering from diabetes and high blood pressure and they cannot even access drugs because they are not in our hospitals. Therefore, if we participate in this, I am very hopeful that we shall even lessen the burden on the Government to procure these drugs in our hospitals.

Madam Speaker, I wish to cite the example of Burundi. Every Saturday morning, you will see all citizens, right from the age of three, exercising. In addition, the people who participate are the poor because they were sensitised. They are aware that they do not have the capacity to buy drugs because they are very expensive. Therefore, to avoid succumbing to such diseases, they participate. 

Madam Speaker, I know some other people, maybe the Seventh Day Adventists, might ask what they are going to do if we talk about Saturday. Our aim is to sensitise and after this is massively accepted in our country, you can look for any other day. If we gazette Saturday, it does not mean that people will run for all those hours, from 7.00 a.m. up to 11.00 a.m. We have gazetted that time but you can run for few minutes and go to work. The rest can run on Sunday, especially the Seventh Day Adventists, since you would be free - much as it will not be gazetted - or after 6.00 p.m. or before 6.00 a.m. on Saturday.

Madam Speaker, it would even help our security personnel, mainly the police and the army, because most of them are even unfit, with very big stomachs. Even if you tell a security officer to go and chase a thief, very few can manage.

Honourable members, I beg for your support so that we fight non-communicable diseases by participating in physical exercise. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let me invite the seconders, hon. Denis Obua and hon. Jalia Bintu. However, I am happy with the first leg but I have a slight difficulty with the second one. Maybe you can address it. The first prayer is good but the second one has implications. However, let us debate.

5.26
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I was approached by hon. Mbwatekamwa to second this motion, I did not hesitate. The reason is that the subject matter we are talking about – physical activity – is a matter of life and death.

Madam Speaker, we are aware that in all things that we do as human beings, there are both negative and positive effects. The food we eat, the vehicles we are driven in, the airplanes we fly on, the bicycles we ride, to mention but a few, have both negative and positive effects on us. What mitigates the negativity is nothing else but physical activity.

Hon. Mbwatekamwa talked about our gym at Parliament and I want to salute you because as the institution of Parliament, we are leading by example. I want to come back to whether we are utilising that facility or not. However, lack of physical activity can contribute to or be a risk factor for the following - I am not a doctor but there are doctors in this House and they will agree that what I am going to state is right:

It contributes to depression. For those of you who have suffered from depression, it is partly attributed to lack of physical exercise. It contributes to diabetes. We have patients who are on insulin and this is partly because of lack of physical exercise. To women of Uganda, it is also a fact beyond doubt that it is a risk factor for breast cancer, colon cancer, migraines, cardiovascular diseases, etcetera.

Therefore, when such a motion is moved on the Floor of Parliament, it is a wakeup call to you and I, who are seated in this House. We normally get very little time to do physical exercise. You go from your house straight to the car, and you drive to the constituency without even resting along the way. You sit for like four to six hours up to your next destination. It is very unhealthy, honourable members. This is a wakeup call to the people of Uganda and to us, the legislators, to lead by example and practise what we preach.

Madam Speaker, on the health club at Parliament, when I saw this item on the Order Paper this morning, I went to check on it. I was happy but also disappointed. I was happy in the sense that I found some few names, especially of Members of Parliament, because that is where my interest was, who normally access the facility. I was disappointed because that facility is grossly underutilised.

I am not praising myself - this is subject to verification - but the record I set in that gym one year and six months ago on the treadmill has never been broken. I told the American-trained gym instructor and the German-trained gym instructor that once it is broken, they should call me the following day to set another record to be broken. I am still waiting for that. 

All in all, I am encouraging you, Members, to make the best use of the gym. In a nutshell, apart from probably Gen. Katumba Wamala, the fittest Member of Parliament is hon. Hamson Obua followed by hon. Gaffa Mbwatekamwa. Hon. Mbwatekamwa lives in Mbalwa. When we were training for the East African Community Games, he would run from Mbalwa to Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA) grounds every morning from Monday to Friday to train. After training, he would run back. I would like to salute him because the fact that he has brought this motion means he is leading by example.

Honourable members, I would like to urge you to support this motion because it is good for our health and our people’s health, and it is good for us in terms of having a healthy mind in a healthy body. I would like to salute hon. Mbwatekamwa. When you got to me, I told you I would support you and I would like to support you so much. 

Honourable members, let us be mindful of these physical activities and our personal physical fitness and even nutrition. The people the Parliamentary Commission has employed in the gym can even advise you on your personal nutrition. Although many times when our children come back from school, they ask us for Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC), the kind of food they eat there is not healthy. 

Therefore, let us make the best use of our facilities so that we are able to have a very healthy country. In that way, we are able to spend more on prevention rather than cure of the diseases that are associated with non-engagement in physical activity.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to submit and to second the motion. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know this issue is not a joke. In Ecuador, they have an Act to enforce sports and it is by law; so it is not a joke. 

5.43
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I stand to support the motion urging Government to encourage physical exercises throughout the country. 

The country is hit by non-communicable diseases. If you visit any clinic today, you will even find a child of one year suffering from diabetes and high blood pressure. This never used to happen, especially those days when we had not changed our lifestyle.

Today, somebody will call a boda boda to her doorstep to pick her and they ride her up to her work place. After working, she will again sit on the boda boda up to her home. She has neither walked nor sweated; whatever she has consumed is still intact. That is why I stand to support hon. Mbwatekamwa’s motion that we need to change our lifestyle and habits, especially when we come to our workplaces; we need to take time off to walk. 

Madam Speaker, remember when we went to Copenhagen with you; we met their Chief Justice riding a bicycle. When we interacted with her, she said she had to burn the food she had consumed because she has to live healthy. However, in Uganda, even with our infrastructure, if you decide to run or walk, you have nowhere to pass. You are competing with boda bodas, vehicles, tractors, goats and dogs. 

I think the Government needs to take the issue of having physical exercises seriously. I know the Government gazetted Saturday, which is supposed to be a day for people to work out. However, that one day is not enough. When you visit the hospital and they diagnose you with hypertension, they tell you to go and do exercises. It is very costly. Even when you go to the gym, it is not enough – (Member timed out.) 

5.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to suggest to the House that we might have to consider separating the two legs, as put forward by hon. Mbwatekamwa. Nevertheless, I thank him so much. 

It is known world over that the best treatment for stress is exercise. If you take a quick stress test in this House, you will find that almost 100 per cent of the Members here have got a certain level of stress illness. Therefore, it is critical and especially important for the people above the school going age to get involved in exercises, as proposed by hon. Mbwatekamwa. 

I wish to support him on this and to also mention to you that after the gazetting of the day of national exercise, the Ministry of Education and Sports went ahead to draft the legislative programme to include exercise. The Bill is on its way to this House. I request you, Madam Speaker, to consider the second leg of introducing exercises in schools and providing space and so on to be left to the Ministry of Education and Sports. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, that was my worry because if we resolve on No. 2, it means the institutions of learning - primary, secondary - and workplaces have to incur costs. It involves money.

5.48
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support hon. Mbwatekamwa’s motion but I think as a nation we should consider our institutions of learning. If we want to strengthen this, we should begin with our institutions of learning, right from primary school up to university. 

Madam Speaker, we used to have Physical Education (P.E.) during our primary school days. We used to have days when we knew that early in the morning, the teachers and pupils would have that exercise. However, these days, academic competition has taken over; pupils or students come in the morning and have lessons up to late in the night. You can hardly find any time for students to have physical exercise. I think we should encourage the Minister of Education and Sports to make this compulsory in our schools.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the moment you talk about physical exercise, some of the people may think that we are looking at situations where you are going to involve a lot of money. There is a lot that you can do without even spending any money. We come from different homes, but even skipping with a rope for about 100 times before you can sleep in your house is very cheap. It can also help you as far as exercising is concerned and avoiding diseases related to having no exercise. 

Finally, our eating habits – However much we exercise and we do not trim or get the best eating habits, we will not improve. We have a tendency of eating very late. You eat at 11.00 p.m. and immediately go to sleep. How can you sleep with a belly that is full of food? That is poison and at the end of the day, you are going to suffer from non-communicable diseases.

Some of our people think that if you have a big belly, you are well off and it is prestigious and a sign of being rich. I think we should teach our people otherwise, unless you are a pregnant woman. As a gentleman you are not supposed to have a belly but you must be as smart as you see me and as you see hon. Gaffa Mbwatekamwa. Thank you very much.

5.51
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I would like to support the motion that is before the House. Hon. Gaffa Mbwatekamwa, you have my support on this one. 

I would like to appreciate him for bringing such an innovative motion because many of us live a life that is a bit sedentary. When this motion comes before the House, I know many of us are touched. We may look fit and healthy but internally, we may not be that healthy.

Madam Speaker, I think this motion is very timely. My biggest concern is that we are discussing this very important motion and the minister in charge of education and sports – well that has come up in the prayers - but also health in particular – 

Many of these diseases which we are talking about are the most expensive to our country - diabetes, high blood pressure, cancer and all these similar diseases. Our nation is battling with them and has no proper solution. If you relate the cost of treatment and medicines to the effect on our budget, I think that this is a very serious area that we need to support, as a Parliament. 

I would like to focus on issues of awareness. How many Ugandans know about diet in terms of the carbohydrates and proteins you are supposed to consume, and balancing the diet when you are eating? This is an area which the Ministry of Health needs to take up seriously with public education, sensitisation and awareness creation. This is because our people really have limited knowledge in terms of proper feeding.

There is this issue also in our African society that big is better. This is particularly for the men in the country that tend to encourage women to have the excess body fats with the assumption that a large woman is more beautiful and presentable. However, world over, the small size seems to be taking over. 

If you want to live a good life and if you look at the developed countries, you will not easily find huge women but you will find small-bodied women; why? They understand that small is healthier and very good. I see hon. Jacquiline Amongin smiling –(Laughter)– but I am just trying to challenge you because I also think that as Africans, we have got our attitude wrong. We need to tell our people that small is better and so we need to exercise. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think we should say that “small is good”. (Laughter)

5.54
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Madam Speaker, allow me to thank hon. Gaffa Mbwatekamwa very much for this motion. I admire hon. Gaffa Mbwatekamwa because I am aware that he runs for long distances in the morning. I congratulate him for that and he has perfected that discipline. I think it is out of that experience that he would love to see every one of us either encouraged or forced to do the right thing.

Hon. Monicah Amoding has indicated that our budget will be supported seriously by this preventive mechanism, if we encouraged all Ugandans to ensure that physical exercises are done. The problem is known and can be estimated in terms of cost and in terms of the deaths we have had, and the solutions are known because doctors always encourage on this. If we have failed to work on this through advice, hon. Gaffa Mbwatekamwa is advising Government to use other means to ensure that these Ugandans do the right things. Therefore, I support this motion seriously. 

However, I am not convinced about the time he has proposed – 7.00a.m. to 11.00a.m. There are some congested parts of this country during in the morning, and places like Kampala and Wakiso could be congested. We could think about the afternoon, say from 3.00 p.m. to 5.00 p.m., on the same day.

Again, I think if Government is going to take this matter very seriously, it implies that we have to provide for these runways. Kampala Capital City Authority and all the districts, town councils and municipalities must start thinking along those lines. They have to gazette places where people can do physical exercise. 

I would like to end by emphasising the need for sensitisation. Whenever I am in my constituency and I move out to do physical –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion talked about institutions but I think we need to also talk about the communities. Supposing we are at a gombolola or muluka, we can ask the gombolola or muluka to set aside some land. We can think about that.  

5.57
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am in full support of the motion moved by hon. Gaffa Mbwatekamwa. People who are physically and mentally fit are hardly prone to the medical conditions that are being mentioned here, like cardiovascular diseases, coronary thrombosis, type 2 diabetes, etcetera. 

Cycling is very popular in countries like Netherlands. In Netherlands, the number of bicycles is much higher than the number of residents in all the cities. It is one stone hitting two birds - bicycles are encouraged to promote physical fitness but they also solve the challenge of climate change and global warming. 

Of course, they have done it as a solution to the nightmare of traffic jams in their cities. Their cities hardly have the kind of traffic jam that we grapple with in Uganda here. Carbon monoxide and greenhouse gases that are emitted by these vehicles are minimised in these countries. That is why the quality of life there is improved, because of bicycle riding.

Madam Speaker, I would discourage my brother from having the usual roadwork from Mbalwa up to downtown Kampala here because he must be consuming a lot of carbon monoxide as he runs along the road. This is because our roads are packed to capacity with vehicles –(Interruption)

MR ANGURA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give my brother, hon. Nambeshe, is that you should not underrate running as exercise and maybe even supplement it with gym work. He talked of running and ingesting those fumes because you are running amidst cars.

Madam Speaker, I would like to share an experience that I had a few years ago. I developed a headache that was constant. I went to doctor after doctor and I was only diagnosed with something I did not know but I just had to do exercise. I was given Panadol only and I started exercise. At that time my blood pressure level was coming up but now I am doing well. 

MR NAMBESHE: I would like to thank my colleague. When I gave way I thought he was giving me information but it seems he did not get the point I was trying to advance. I was discouraging running along these roads where the vehicles emit a lot of carbon monoxide. 

There are better and open places where I would encourage my brother to do exercises from. Even doing it at home in the compound would be better. There are a lot of exercises, including sex, - (Laughter) - which can help with weight loss and the risk of getting these chronic diseases. (Member timed out)

6.02
MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to thank hon. Mbwatekamwa for this important motion. 

This motion has come at a time when Ugandans really need to be awakened about the importance of physical exercise. It is very sad to note, as honourable members have alluded to, that the physical exercise which was very popular in primary and secondary schools has died out. This is because many schools have lost their playgrounds. Institutions like Shimoni Primary Teacher’s College and others have lost their grounds where this exercise could be done.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, as a Member pointed out earlier, people now concentrate on academics in schools, not knowing that a healthy mind needs a healthy body. A child comes to school very early, there is no physical exercise and they are in for classwork up to 10.00 p.m. I think it is very important that we sensitise Ugandans about physical exercise. The importance of physical exercise has already been emphasised by Members.  

Madam Speaker, we need to be ambassadors and sensitise our local communities during the various functions where we get opportunity to speak. We also need to bring on board a number of stakeholders, particularly local governments and others, so that the message can go to the people. This is because, as already emphasised, many Ugandans are very unhealthy not because they want but because they are not aware about the importance of physical exercise.

I think it is very important that we, as Parliament and people of Uganda, take it upon ourselves to ensure that this is properly implemented and all other strategies are put in place. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.04
MR JOHN TWESIGYE (NRM, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my colleague, hon. Mbwatekamwa, for this motion. This motion is timely. 

About two weeks ago, I visited a doctor and I was feeling pain all over my body. He asked me to give a history of what I had been doing the previous day but I had forgotten that the previous day I had walked from my home through the hills for about three kilometres and went back home. This is something I had not done for some days. He just told me, “You have done the right thing and the only thing I can tell you to do is to continue doing exercise.” After checking my body mass index, he told me that I was at the borderline and I got scared. 

I think this is a wake-up call. Most of us have a challenge, especially when it comes to doing exercise. We leave home very early in the morning and go back late or travel to our constituencies, as one colleague mentioned. We get tired in the process of performing our daily activities and our bodies get lazy and we do not do any exercise. In the process, we get affected and start developing lifestyle diseases.

I encourage everybody to support hon. Mbwatekamwa’s motion. It has come at the right time. We have been going through the Budget Framework Paper and we realised that in the Ministry of Education and Sports’ budget, there is nothing about having a policy that forces primary and secondary schools to participate in sports activities. The district councils responsible for sports have been neglected and there is no clear budget line supporting this area in primary schools.

I propose that the Ministry of Education and Sports, in addition to the recommendations he has given, takes this up seriously and forces these schools to ensure there is time for physical exercise. When we were growing up, we used to go with balls made out of banana fibre to school to play. However, these days when you are in the constituencies, children ask for footballs which are sold in shops and they are not readily available to every school. The playgrounds are also no longer there. It is a big problem. 

Again, I encourage Members to support hon. Mbwatekamwa and where necessary, let us make adjustments in the Ministry of Education and Sports to ensure that we encourage the schools – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: His contribution has reminded me that we have football and netball teams in our villages but we have no athletics teams. I think all Members here have got football and netball teams in their constituencies but there are no athletics teams. We need to talk about this. Having a village running in the morning would be really nice.

6.07
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion but we need to focus the motion on Ministry of Education and Sports and any other ministry that is a stakeholder. 

Kampala Capital City Authority should help us stop the construction of open drainage channels. You may want to walk in Kampala but the drainages are open and you cannot easily walk. Most of my voters walk from Nansana to Kampala. Maybe they regard themselves as poor but they are healthier than some of us who drive to Kampala. Therefore, I would like us to refocus this motion; KCCA should construct walkways or runways so that we walk to work safely. This has been done over the years and I think we should encourage ourselves.

Secondly, Ministry of Education and Sports, instead of schools doing gymnastics in the morning, they now have parades without exercise. Parades are used for providing instructions on issues like cleanliness. That is a good thing, but they should have simple exercises before students go for classes. 

These days, playgrounds have been reduced to buildings, schools are in people’s houses and there is no space for our children to exercise. Therefore, we encourage the Ministry of Education and Sports to give guidelines to schools that in the mornings, our pupils should begin with exercise before they go to their classrooms.

Lastly, there is an example here in Parliament. I will not mention the employee but she used to come, sit somewhere in an office and within no time, she developed clots. She had to change the job to become a researcher now because she could not afford to sit from morning to evening without doing exercise. 

Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) should be encouraged to streamline exercise in their workplaces so that at least a secretary can stand up to do exercise and if she cannot do it alone, it is done as a group. Even in Parliament, we are suffering because of sitting in committees in the morning and in plenary in the afternoon.

As hon. Obua said, the gym we have down here is underutilised. We should encourage ourselves to be small and portable. I used to have a big stomach but these days, people commend me for having reduced my size and I feel healthier. So, please, let us encourage Members of Parliament. The doctors are here and they will advise us. We should –(Member timed out.)

6.11
MR GORDON ARINDA (NRM, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, this motion is very timely. In the last one or two weeks, I have seen about five people who have just collapsed and died, including the famous “Solar Man” – most of the Members of Parliament know him; he just collapsed and died.

Three days ago, one of my constituents, a young woman in her 30s, collapsed and died. There was a lady who recently collapsed in Wandegeya and died. Somebody has just been walking but he or she just collapses and dies. Quite often, the biggest cause is lifestyle diseases. I think this motion is very timely and if we want to address lifestyle diseases, we need to adopt this motion. 

Some of our subcounties and parishes do not have playgrounds. I think we need to emphasise the issue of playgrounds where people can do their exercises from, especially at the subcounties and parishes. We are not only looking at Kampala people; we are also looking at the people in the villages.

It is an open secret that 60 per cent of the women in Kampala are obese. There were research findings that were released – I think last year – showing that 60 per cent of the women in Kampala are obese. That is a very serious problem. They are obese –(Interjection)– Yes! (Ms Amongin rose_) – Not you. (Laughter) It was basically on Kampala and you are from Ngora. (Laughter) The point is that it is not only women. Men are also obese but the research focused mostly on women. I think we need to do more to make sure that our women also do a lot of exercise.

The issue of athletics is very important. Through athletics, I discovered talent in Bushenyi. There is a serious athlete who is based in the Netherlands. He has already won six medals and is doing very well. In doing athletics and exercising, we also get talented people who can excel.

Finally, a healthy body makes a healthy mind. As Members of Parliament, we –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: We could maybe consider a monthly run in the constituency. You run with the army of bataka.

6.13
DR MICHAEL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion which hon. Mbwatekamwa has tabled. 

First and foremost, the motion is in line with achieving Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) No.3. Secondly, the World Health Organisation (WHO) recommends 60 minutes of exercise for children between five and 17 years and also between 75 and 150 minutes of exercise per week for 18 to 63 year olds. That is what the motion is proposing to do.

Thirdly, in this era, the Ministry of Health is promoting health promotion and prevention of the diseases that have been mentioned. If I could give you a bit of the statistics; over 100,000 Ugandans die of non-communicable diseases per year, which is about 30 per cent of the annual deaths. When you go to Kiruddu Hospital, they run an NCD clinic which attracts about 700 patients per week. Sixty of their admissions are NCDs while 50 per cent of their mortality is from non-communicable diseases. This consumes a lot of their budget yet we know very well that actually, physical exercise can significantly reduce the occurrence of NCDs.

Hon. Mbwatekamwa, who moved the motion, has allowed me to give you a testimony. Actually, he was on insulin treatment but it was only stopped through doing exercises. That shows that he is actually a witness of what works. 

Finally, I would also like to urge the Ministry of Education and Sports to expedite the Bill on physical exercise and sports to be presented to this House. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.16
MS JULIET KYINYAMATAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion brought by hon. Mbwatekamwa. I am very sure that it is timely. 

I would like to encourage Ugandans that it is very important to create time. The best example is that we have a very good facility that we are not using. Therefore, however much the sports department in the Ministry of Education and Sports puts in place all the playgrounds, balls and all the facilities for exercising, if there is no individual willingness, it will still stay the same.

Non-communicable diseases are connected to lack of exercise and poor diet. Even when you exercise enough but you have a poor diet, it will still bring us back to the statistics that our colleague just gave us about NCDs. We need to make sure that as Ugandans and Parliament, we sensitise our communities about creating time. Let us not be selfish to ourselves by concentrating on making a lot of money and profits instead of concentrating on our health. You might make a lot of money thinking that you are too busy, but you will spend the rest of it treating NCDs like cancer that has become a very big problem.

Also, we need to talk about cultural issues in the communities where we come from. People believe that as a woman, you are not supposed to run. In my culture, if you are a woman, you are supposed to walk slowly and not to run. You gain a lot of weight and in the end you are diagnosed with all those NCDs. 

As Members of Parliament, we need to sensitise our communities that things changed and the environment that was so green has changed and needs more human input to make sure that we protect ourselves from these NCDs that have become killer diseases.

Lastly, we have suffered in promoting sports in our constituencies. It is now labelled on us, Members of Parliament, because of the Ministry of Education and Sports. I do not know whether it is because there is no budget for it. If there is no budget for it, it is high time the ministry submitted its budget so that we support them. Even if we talk to the people, it is not going to be enough. 

6.19
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion because of the health-related solutions we can derive from physical exercise. Apart from health, I know that it will make people more active. And an active body and mind becomes productive even economically. It may reduce idleness.

Madam Speaker, my opinion is that exercising is about mind-set. Often, the information about exercising is in the public domain but people have not taken the initiative to implement it. I feel this is the moment we should inculcate this as part of our daily routines. It should not be done once a week. If it becomes part of us, even when you are aging, you will have added value to your body at a young age rather than waiting until you are caught off-guard to start exercising.

I would like to appreciate your efforts, Madam Speaker, to have a parliamentary gym. Here, there are different groups of people including persons with disabilities. I visited that place and it is so beautiful but the things in there are not modified. I asked the instructor what they have for people with disabilities and he said they can give us exercises that we can do in our rooms. However, when we are here, we would love to be mainstreamed. 

The issues in this motion should not only be pegged onto the Ministry of Education and Sports; it should be taken as an issue to be mainstreamed in all the sectors. Community Development Officers and everyone else should talk about this issue so that our communities participate in it. We know the importance of exercising and there is nothing much to emphasise about doing exercises;  you are capable of anywhere. 

For those who run –(Member timed out.)

6.22
MS JOSEPHINE BEBONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague and neighbour for bringing up this motion. I always see him running up the hill of Naalya. It is really healthy. I must say that it is not for Members of Parliament only but for everyone. 

This morning, I visited a lady from my constituency who was brought here with diabetes. She had diabetic wounds. So, you can see the complications, which come when you lack the exercises we are talking about. This lady lost her leg. When I saw her this morning, I shed tears because she used to be a very active businesswoman in my community.

When I was still practising midwifery before I joined Parliament, we used to tell pregnant mothers to exercise so that they can prepare enough to get the energy to push babies and to avoid the swelling of the lower limbs from too much sitting. That is why I am saying that exercising is for everyone. Even when the mothers have delivered, we encourage them to do exercise so that they can hasten the recovery process.

So, I am encouraging my colleagues that we should take it up to our communities. As the Speaker has said, we should also look at the grassroots. We have said a lot about Kampala but it is high time we sensitised our rural communities. Let it start with us. Wherever we speak to the public, we should continue talking to them about exercising. If they have some space, they can start practising so that we do not wait until a motion is passed.

I had an experience in Kyankwanzi when we were there for the first time as soon as we joined Parliament. Some Members of Parliament were lazy to wake up in the morning to do the morning runs. However, the days we spent there, you would run for three days and feel that you are physically fit. You would even feel like the whole body is fresh. So, thank you very much.

6.25
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank my brother for the motion, which I fully support. The issue of creating awareness on the benefits of physical activity and burning off excess fat is very important. It is also important to help Ugandans understand the link between inactiveness and the non-communicable diseases. 

The cases of sudden deaths are rising especially in the countryside. It is unfortunate that, as Ugandans, we do not have a good culture of going for regular check-ups like in the developed world. People should be helped to understand the causes of some of these sudden deaths, like when you find somebody dead in his hut because he collapsed and died. There are people especially at the grassroots who do not understand that somebody can just die like that. Therefore, we should do all it takes to create awareness. 

As some of my colleagues said, I always find it very difficult to exercise when I am here unlike when I am in the constituency. I think it is an issue we should try to look at. I stay around Najjera and I always feel I should exercise in the morning or evening but it is not easy. You cannot find space. It is very difficult to move along the road. I remember one day, I was discussing it with my sister, hon. Achiro and she expressed the same concern. 

So, it is an issue we should look into. When I talk about awareness, there are many people at grassroots who feel somebody is okay when he or she is overweight. When you try to cut weight – like I am really struggling to – some of them get worried. “Hey, what is happening? You are losing weight.” They feel losing weight is a big problem and yet, you would feel rather healthier.

We need to do a lot in creating awareness to help many –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you could get a bicycle in your home. For me, I have a treadmill and two bicycles in my house. If you cannot join the team, you can ride a bicycle in your houses.

6.28
MS CATHELINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam speaker. I also rise to support my colleague, hon. Mbwatekamwa. This is the day we have been waiting for. We have time and again brought issues concerning diseases and sickness in the country not knowing that some of them are caused by our laziness and unfitness.

I would like to inform you that we have been had poor performance in the schools across the country. This is brought by unfitness. Exercises restore memory and in some parts of the districts, some pupils have been known as poor performers because of poor exercises.

I would like to tell you that we have been attacked by these thieves. To my concern, with strong bones and muscles which the Bakiga used to have, we would be fighting back to get rid of those simple thieves.

In the current situation, where we have all been availed by lifts, you would wonder even from here to third floor, we use the lift. Even honourable colleagues, here, we are not safe. Therefore, I would like to support my friend and colleague hon. Mbwatekamwa that this should be rolled outside Kampala city.

6.30
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka County North, Luuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion whole heartedly. Honourable colleagues, I have been a sportsman since my childhood but some time last year, something came up to my mind and I convinced myself that it was time for me to give up on sportsmanship; little did I know that I was convincing myself to unknowingly take poison.

After a period of a few months, I started developing certain funny complications including over sweating all the time. When I went to the clinic, my sugar level was at 16. There and then, I was declared diabetic.

Madam Speaker, it was not an easy moment for me because the youthful doctor who did the tests ended up scaring me that I had only a few months to live. You know the scare of diabetes and some other related non-communicable diseases; there is no cure.

However, when I moved to Dr Lulume Bayiga, who is a specialist in the field of diabetes, he advised me not to worry about this and that I was still a young man who can live close to 100 years. The only medication for diabetes is exercising. 

When I resumed my physical training for just only a few weeks, I went back to the clinic and the same doctor who did the tests the other day was asking me why I had gone for a diabetes test. I reminded him. He asked me to direct him to Dr Lulume’s clinic. When we went back with him, they did some serious tests and luckily enough, again, they found out that the raising level of sugar was out of stress. I was not diabetic.

Therefore, honourable members, as the honourable members were submitting, I realised and made two observations. The unfortunate part of it is that the ministers who are in charge of the health docket are not in the House. However, using some simple elementary economics, the amount of money the Government will save out of taking this motion very seriously can put up a road of more than 100 kilometres per financial year.

Secondly, when the honourable member raised the issue of obesity, the honourable colleague from Kumi took to the Floor. Obesity is calculated using height and the weight. The biggest percentage of Members of Parliament when I look around, are obese by 2, 5, or even 20 kilogrammes. Therefore, honourable members, I want to call upon you to support hon. Mbwatekamwa’s motion with all your energies such that we can save a lot of money, which we can use for some other developmental issues. Thank you.

6.35
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, PWD, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to thank hon. Mbwatekamwa for this presentation. This will cause a fundamental change in the health of our population because a sick population cannot be productive. Therefore, once we improve the health of our population, there is a high likelihood that even production in this country will also improve. 

What is required is that the Ministry of Health should take the lead in guiding the population on the nature of exercises that each individual can take by giving various options. Our levels of health vary from one person to another.

It is absolutely imperative that the Ministry of Health can offer many options for the population to pick which type of exercise one would undertake. That will go a long way to make many people to get involved. 

I wish to agree with the Minister of Youth and Children’s Affairs that the Ministry of Education should involve our children and pupils and students right from primary schools up to university because the communicable diseases like hypertension and diabetes no longer discriminate. They even infect newly born babies. They infect mothers and it is across board; whether young or old, one can get diabetes or hypertension.

Therefore, the involvement should cut across from the children up to the old population. Of course, our schools are the best catchment areas to ignite this process of physical exercise. We are aware that we are spending colossal sums of money in purchase of drugs. This should, therefore, be taken seriously by Government because it will cut expenditure on the amount of money that we are spending to import – (Member timed out.)

6.38
MS LUCY ACHIRO (Independent, Aruu County North, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the mover of the motion urging Government to encourage physical exercise for all citizens in Uganda. I listened carefully to hon. Obua’s submission. He explained that lack of physical exercises can lead to diseases like diabetes, high blood pressure and depression. It is true but there are other things that a family can go through because of lack of physical exercise.

Lack of physical exercise has led to many family breakdowns. As you grow fat because of lack of physical exercise, most men leave their partners and move on. I remember myself at university, I was small, portable and looking good. (Laughter) As you grow big, it becomes an issue in the family.

Therefore, I would advise, ladies and gentlemen - Some men are too big; you cannot handle.  (Laughter)You understand. Exercise is one important thing that we should always put in our minds.
Secondly, you have always talked about gender-based violence in our communities. Most of the men like insulting the women, claiming they are out of shape. Sometimes, we get so emotional and fight back and you feel like you should pack and move away. Imagine, you give birth by caesarean to somebody’s child and then, he turns to abuse you. At the end of the day, people fight.

Some people avoid physical exercise and resort to drinking alcohol with a belief that when you take “Kasese-kasese”, you will lose weight. These are some of the things we should put in our books and minds; to avoid family breakdown, we should do physical exercise.

Secondly, most private schools are just in small places. For anyone to have –(Member timed out.)

6.41
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the House in appreciating the mover of the motion, hon. Mbwatekamwa. The motion is timely. 

Most of us practice physical exercise when we get out of the country because of the environment. I would like to emphasise the point my colleague raised. You cannot even ride a bicycle in this city even at home. There is no space and it is high time Government started planning paths for bicycles if we are to encourage physical exercise. 

Some of us would want to ride bicycles but you see the risks involved. You cannot even walk in this city because as you are walking, boda boda is also knocking you off the pavement. No one seems to care. The environment is not good.

When the mover was moving the motion, I was wondering how Government would encourage physical exercise. I remember in 2002, when we went to the Netherlands, we found that the number of officials who ride bicycles is more than those who drive. We tried to inquire because we went on environmental studies. 

One of the ways of encouraging environmental conservation to reduce carbon dioxide emission is to encourage people to ride bicycles. They give tax incentives to those who ride bicycles. If you do so, they give you some tax cuts so you find more people riding bicycles than those who have vehicles. It may be difficult to implement here but I think it is still within their docket; they can think about how to encourage people. It would also reduce on congestion with in the city.

I would like to talk about members of Parliament. We do not have time. We eat lunch and come for meetings, then we leave here at 7.00 and reach home at 10. We are the potential victims because you eat at 11 p.m. 

If you do not change your eating habits and you only take hot water and sleep - we eat at 11 p.m. every day, which means we are at risk. Can we do something about it and be exemplary in Parliament? By the time we reach home, it is very late but sometimes, we are too hungry. (Member timed out.)

6.44
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion. Health workers have told us that non-engagement in physical exercise attracts non-communicable diseases like hypertension, diabetes and obesity. They have continued to tell us that prevention is better than cure. Involvement in physical exercises will help us minimise the occurrence of these diseases.

Whereas some people think that physical exercise is about going to the gym, there are other activities. For example, at home, you can get involved in cleaning the compound, washing clothes and cleaning the house and that way, you will be stretching your bones. The muscles will be stretching and you will be burning the calories and moreover, free of charge. People go to pay in the gym. 

Members have talked about Ministry of Education and Sports providing play grounds. Study alone makes a child dull. There is need to provide the play grounds in the schools. Even without play materials, just have space for the children and you will see them making their own local materials. Just tell them to go and play and you will see some with balls made out of old clothes or banana fibre and ropes out of sisal. Therefore, space is important for these children. They can create their own play materials.

Whereas we are encouraging the Ministry of Education and Sports to encourage schools to have play grounds, in some districts like Amudat, we do not have sports officers. The one we have is a games master of one of the schools who is called to help during the ball game time and during athletics. There is need to have sports officers in all the districts if physical exercise is to be promoted. 

Also, for our people who are not in school, there is need to have play grounds in the subcounties and the district headquarters. They can develop their talent. They may not have gone to school but they have the talent. Those who are good at football –(Member timed out.)


6.47
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to add my voice in thanking hon. Mbwatekamwa for this motion. Madam Speaker, I start by sympathising with you because you start sitting here at 2pm and sometimes, you leave this place at 10 p.m. 

I would like to give a very humble proposal that perhaps we could adopt what is in Zambia. In Zambia, they sit for two hours, have a break of 30 minutes and come back. 

Madam Speaker, I am very worried for you. We still need you and it is a humble request. I know people have been talking about going to the gym but part of exercising is even what I am doing now. When I am talking, I am stretching my hands and that is part of exercise.

Madam Speaker, today, I had a special order for my lunch because of what my nutritionist told me to eat. However, somebody asked why I was punishing yourself and I said, “I am not complaining.” What I am eating is what is required for my body. That is the perception that many of us have. They think they must have kalo or rice. If it is not there, then they have not eaten but what has your doctor told you to eat? Even if you exercise but you are eating too much, the exercise might not work.

Secondly, the walking spaces - I was in Denmark. They have open free places where after walking, people go and sit. The open places encourage people to walk. However, how many of these places do we have, for example, in Kampala?

There are other ways of exercising like other Members have said. I was attending a function in my constituency on Sunday in a Parish called Lacor. I joined about 600 members of a Catholic Women Association, old and young. They played a song and they started by matching for about one kilometre. During the time for music, they all got up. They were behaving like children- (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Complete the sentence 

MS LUCY AKELLO: Looking at the way they were doing it was so beautiful because even a 70 or 80 year old was able to do that exercise. At the end of the day, they were sweating and happy. Whenever I am in the constituency and I see any group dancing, I join. It is not just for votes but it is also for myself because when I dance, they say this woman is very social but they do not know what I am doing for myself. At the end of the day, I will sweat, go home and bathe and sleep. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.51
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Mbwatekamwa for coming up with this motion. Madam Speaker, when we went for the Parliamentary games, we were very challenged by way the Burundians were going about with their physical fitness. 

Most of them would be on the road trying to run, walking. We admired them very much. I thank hon. Mbwatekamwa for seeing it fit to come up with this motion.

Madam Speaker, I was in China around 2013. What I saw there was unbelievable. Even the old people had time for physical exercises. They would put for them a radio and about 20 of them dance and shake every part of their bodies. No wonder, their life expectance is high. 

Therefore, I feel that through physical exercises, even our life expectance can improve as a country and that will go a long way in improving our status at the global level.

Madam Speaker, apart from helping us in lowering the budget by addressing the problem of the non-communicable diseases, I feel that it is the right time we apportioned responsibilities to different ministries. For example, the Ministry of Education and Sports, during our Government, we had physical exercises at least for 30 minutes from 10 to 10.30a.m. That would help the children by keeping their minds alert in whatever they were reading and making them physically fit. In addition, even adults, when you do exercises, you feel light, even the brain functions better.

Therefore, I feel the Ministry of Education and Sports should make sure that there is time for physical exercise on the timetable. They should also regulate private schools. Government schools in rural areas have playing fields but in urban areas, people just start their schools without provision of play grounds for physical exercise and this is something, which can be regulated by the Ministry of Education and Sports. I feel this should be a requirement.

The Ministry of Local Government can help us in sensitisation and making -(Member timed out.)

6.54
MR FRANCO CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion and to encourage all of us to embrace the recommendation of physical exercise. One of my constituents was hospitalised in India and he spent enormous amounts of money but when he got there, the doctors told him that the best treatment he could have is exercise. Every other day, I see him walking. 

Therefore, I realised that sometimes people acquire those non-communicable diseases because of their behaviour. In our African culture, it is not part of us to practice or do exercises. You see people walking, running and sometimes, people think they are wasting time.

As Parliament, we can champion this and see if probably through our public relations office, we came up with some radio or TV sports like the ones we normally do. We can alert people of the dangers of lack of exercise so that by the time we go to the constituencies to participate in the exercises with our constituents, they have already appreciated the reason they need to exercise.

We can even make it once a month as a constituency-walking day. You go and walk with your constituents either for, say, five kilometres. It is also a way of interacting. I really appreciate that we need to exercise and burn some calories that we have in our bodies especially for us Members who drive all the time. Let us buy treadmills, put them in our homes, at least 10-15 minutes every morning when you wake up is good enough for you to keep fit. 

Therefore, hon. Mbwatekamwa, I fully support the motion that we should have some designated days for exercising. However, I would also propose that, Madam Speaker, you allow Parliament to do a promotion, the way dangerous images are displayed on cigarettes when they want to bar people from smoking; that “when you smoke, your lungs will look like this.” Probably it can help us change our behavior and attitude in order to have a healthy society. 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.57
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE: (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the whole of last year, I went through a very difficult period in my life. When you sent me for treatment in India, they took me to a department and I was so surprised that a full hospital department with doctors and consultants is categorised as a “Sports Clinic.” You cannot imagine how some countries have invested in physical exercise, as a way of improving the lives of their people. 

Madam Speaker, some countries have gone as far as coming up with a National Physical Exercise Policy for their people. In these few minutes that I have, I would like to propose the following: 

I had to buy a stationary bicycle, on promotion at Shs 800,000. This means that on other days, that stationary bicycle costs much more money. We should stop taxing sports equipment as if they are luxuries, especially those for children. 

Madam Speaker, you ruled here that all roads should have public toilets. We should also come up with a resolution that all roads should have walkways because most of our people who want to go out and do road work killed in accidents. For example, the late Sezi Cheeye was out doing exercises when he was knocked dead. I know about other three people who died while trying to exercise on the roads. 

Madam Speaker, if you take this one on and say for whatever loan we shall be approving, it must have a facility for walkways so that we encourage our children to walk to school, our people should walk to work – forget the other political walk to work. 

When you go to European countries, whenever you ask for a distance, they will always tell you in terms of walking. For example, they could say it is a 15 minutes’ walk. I am also proposing that the Ministry of Education and Sports stops licensing schools that do not have attachments to sports fields. For example – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute to conclude.

MS NAMBOOZE: Even if a school does not have a play field, at least, it should show the Ministry of Education and Sports that they intend to take the children to a particular place for exercises. 

When we were young, every morning, compulsory Physical Education would start a class. Even in our homes, we have substituted playing for television watching and computer games. Those things will kill our children. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

I support the motion. I beg to move. 

7.01
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in appreciating hon. Mbwatekamwa for the motion and I stand to support it. 

There is no doubt that physical exercise is very good for our health. I was in Burundi with the Parliamentary Sports team and part of our success was because all of us were physically fit. We were able to defeat each team we faced decisively; in football, volleyball, athletics and all other disciplines. This was partly because members of Parliament were physically fit. 

As we advocate for physical fitness, we only need to be cautious about one aspect; that people must be advised. Before they undertake any form of physical exercise, they need medical guidance. Our individual health does not necessarily allow us to do all forms of exercise. 

In this country, when we talk about physical exercise, people think about running, playing football and gym. However, when you speak to the physical instructors, they will recommend which kind of exercise you can undertake. Therefore, as we debate this motion, we must have that at the back of our minds. Our people must first seek professional advice before they take on any form of exercise. Otherwise, we risk having incidents where people could die while running or on the pitch and other incidents of the sort. We need to know which kind of exercise is suitable for our bodies. 

THE SPEAKER: I am aware that the gym manager -  he sent me a document about food and exercise. I do not know whether he has done that for everybody but I think we can ask him to assist the Members and guide them. 

7.03
MS ANNA ADEKE (Independent, Female Youth Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the entire House by thanking hon. Mbwatekamwa for moving this motion. I support this motion because I know its genesis. We were in Burundi and we were going together to participate in the athletics. I was going to run 1500 metres and he was going to run the relay and the 200 metres. Therefore, hon. Mbwatekamwa has carried on with his promise to introduce the motion. 

What we saw in Burundi was admirable. People were running on the streets. They joined each other to exercise and stretch after the exercise. You did not have to belong to a group to join them. People were feeling free and confident and they felt safe being able to do this on the streets. 

You cannot get that kind of safety in Kampala. I witnessed a runner who was hit by a taxi around Naalya. These taxis just branch off the road anytime. They do not care for the safety of others or which pedestrians are on the street. 

Therefore, we have to get support from the Ministry of Works and Transport also. We have to plan our cities and streets properly. Even the traffic police should offer support to the road users because people cannot feel safe. If they do not feel safe, they will not exercise. 

I think the motion is timely for us, as members of Parliament, to check ourselves and question the role of exercise in our schedules. One of the regrettable things for us, as members of Parliament, are the images that come out during the State of the Nation Address when members are dozing. The media is always looking out for which members of Parliament are dozing or which ones are taking off their shoes to relax. This is as a result of our lifestyle, which makes it very difficult to concentrate for long hours. When someone is reading pages of a speech, you just sleep because that is your resting time. 

Exercise will help us to be more alert as we are attending to our duties. In time, it would have been better – (Member timed out.)

7.06
MR DENIS OGUZU LEE (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join in commending my honourable colleague for moving such a strategic motion, which requires strategic thinking. We must be able to move and deal with all prohibitions to physical exercise; some of which have been ably highlighted by hon. Betty Nambooze and my colleague, hon. Anna Adeke. 

There are issues of affordability and access to exercise equipment that we must deal with as well as safety concerns. I think we should enshrine it in our building codes that buildings must be able to have spaces for exercise. 

Most importantly, the success of such undertakings in many countries is the role of leadership. We need exemplary leadership. I have seen in Rwanda the President has to go and run while he is engaging in cleaning exercise and we hardly see the role of leaders in these things.

Therefore, I would like to implore all the leaders in this country to be exemplary if we are to advance this motion.

Finally, I have been wondering who is going to lead this. Many times such great proposals come from this House but they are shelved. Who is going to bell the cat? We will say Ministry of Education and Sports will do it and they will never do it. We have seen a role to be played by the Minister Youth and Children’s Affairs and nobody seems to be taking the lead. A number of the ministers are not here like, Minister of Health and I do not know at the end of the day, who is going to be at the forefront of leading this wonderful motion. Maybe, we will need clarity on that. Thank you.

7.09
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have listened, meditated and understood the views that all Members have said. I am very happy and would like to thank hon. Mbwatekamwa, the only dog in the House. You know with dogs, they do not sit in a car but run from place to place. They can determine where to end or stop somewhere and urinate and they proceed to another place. That is basically what I can say about hon. Gaffa Mbwatekamwa.

I first want to affirm what my colleague hon. Nambooze talked about. At the moment, even these sport days are rare in most of our districts. Sometimes, for the entire year, nothing is there in terms of sports.

Madam Speaker, allow me to read some few statements here. There is somebody called Carol Welch, who said: “Movement is medicine for creating change in a person’s physical, emotional and mental state.” This implies that if you do not walk and exercise, you are very sure and confident that emotionally and mentally, you are going to have challenges.

Joseph Pilates said, “physical fitness can neither be achieved by wishful thinking nor our right purchase.” This is something that is very critical to us as a country. I remember when we were in Korea one time, this thing called physical fitness is in a programme and it is enshrined everywhere; everybody knows you must do it. In Uganda, it is not there.

According to Edward Stanley, those who do not make time for exercise will have to make it for illness. If you do not create time to exercise, you should be ready tomorrow or the other day to be hospitalised. This is an appropriate motion for all of us. I thank you very much.

7.12
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda County North, Mitooma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 12th  to 18th  February, 2018, Makerere University organised a non-communicable disease symposium at Munyonyo and I attended. I was shocked to find out that 70 per cent of the people in the whole world between the ages of 30 to 69 suffer non-communicable diseases and 80 per cent in middle-income class countries. Prof. Ibingira, the Principal College of Health Sciences, Makerere University said for Uganda, we are at 40 per cent but it is because we do not capture much. What did we learn? This was because of lack of exercise. There is an element which they raised and hon. Lucy Akello touched the one of eating. I was told that 80 per cent of your weight is more or less what you eat, how you eat it and when you eat it.

Madam Speaker, when you go to our committee meetings, some of us eat ourselves to death; Mandazi, chapati, samosa and we put a lot of sugar in tea. Someone takes four cups and they bring more - we are dying –(Laughter)- and let us be honest. 

Let me give you an example. I have a watch and a feet beat here that monitors every step I take in life. Today, I got my report. In 2018, I took 554,000 steps. They were worth 252 miles and I burnt 100,000 calories. All the 252 miles were the same as running around an Olympic track 108,000 times. Do you know what is very funny? All these were like burning calories got out of 417 scoops of ice cream. You take your children, girlfriends or wives for ice cream as a dessert. Ice cream alone could bring you all these problems.

Finally, we have a problem of the gym –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude.                   

MR TAYEBWA: I am talking about the problem of the gyms. I have gone to gyms and you get an instructor and he even breaks you. We do not have any standards and certification for gym instructors. Every gym around - you move and for someone to wire your house, he needs a certificate. For someone to do something, he needs a certificate. However, for someone to show you how to turn your arm and stretch, they do not need any certification. Anyone can be a gym instructor whether they break your back or give you a wrong exercise and you die disabled. We need to look into that, Madam Speaker. With that, I support the motion.

7.15
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County South, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I like a Member of Parliament who said that we need to do strategic thinking when we are debating this motion. When you look at the causes of various diseases that we have, it is not about lack of exercise but rather the type of food we eat.

I would like to bring to your attention that in our country, we eat a lot of carbohydrates that get stored into our bodies. In America, many of their people who are suffering from obesity, did not go into encouraging people to do exercise but they encouraged people to control the type of food they eat. In fact, that reduced the amount of suffering by 80 per cent.

I would like to appeal to this Parliament, after we have debated this motion, we need to know the structure of our population. A total of 80 per cent of our population live in the rural areas and they do a lot of manual work and exercise. 

This motion is basically on the elites, those who feel they are educated and must only sit in their cars, offices and homes and do nothing. Lazy educated people. Why should we have lazy educated people? This is because of the type of the lifestyles we live.

Madam Speaker, people think that when you are fat, you have money and you are happy. That is the perception we have in the country and that is what people want to show to others – that when I have a big belly or I look fat, it means I have money and I am happy. That is why they eat carelessly.

Madam Speaker, as we debate this motion, we need to know the structure of our population. Whom are we debating for? It is not for the rural people - the 80 or 90 per cent of our people – but about the 10 per cent who think they are enjoying on behalf of the 90 per cent but actually, they are enjoying to their graves.

We need to change our perceptions and encourage our people that the types of diseases we have –(Member timed out.)

7.19
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, taking on from where hon. Okot Ogong has ended, the attitude that we have regarding the size is that size matters. I keep wondering why when we met here in Parliament people asked: “You, hon. Nandala and hon. Okot Ogong have been in Parliament. Why have you kept the same size?” They think we should now be big. That mindset is a very wrong one and it goes back to our attitude regarding size. It is important for us to check what we eat – how do you maintain your lifestyle with professional guidance?

Madam Speaker, in this Parliament, we had started a programme that every morning they would check our pressure levels as we would come in. However, I am very disappointed that Members complained; “Why are they checking us every morning.” That is why it was stopped and yet, it was for our own good.

Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to you – you are the chairperson of the Parliamentary Commission, this must resume. As you come here every morning, they must check your pressure level. It helps us. 

I was sharing with hon. Nambooze here that in some cities, they have elected people whom they call “bicycle mayors” as morale boosters to mobilise. The only thing Government gives that person is a bicycle and in most cases, they are young people. He rides around and he is introduced at public functions to encourage people to do exercises. When he rides a bicycle, everybody follows. This is something that we need to emulate.

My colleagues have talked about Burundi but even in Rwanda – when we were there for the East African Parliamentary Games last time, we were all shocked to wake up at 5.00 a.m. to find that everybody was running. It is at 5.00 a.m. every weekend. It is something that has been adapted and it helps those in the urban areas but we must also go to the rural areas. 

We must also segregate because there are exercises that should be done by the group like ours but what about the young generation? That is why the schools were very important with Physical Education which, unfortunately, our education system seems to be removing it from the curriculum. It is something, which must be revived if we want to have a healthy country. Thank you.

7.21
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, in the World Bank, everybody who walks to office will get where to bathe and they are paid for that because they want people to be healthy. I would also like to advise – if you do not mind – that you get closets for us to put our suits here so that every morning, we can run from home, come here and bathe and again put off the suits and go back home. It is even going to cut on fuel costs. (Laughter) It will even help others to emulate. If they see Nandala walking, others will also walk –(Interjections)- About death and security, you are not so sure when you will die. If a car knocks you, it is too bad but that is what I am saying.

Madam Speaker, there is a problem with our culture here. I have seen people who go to the gyms. A man or woman enters the gym, he or she sweats and when he or she comes out he or she eats four kilograms of pork and drinks six bottles of beer. (Laughter) What has he done? He is just adding more problems. You rather not go to the gym but stay and do exercises at home.

I would like to tell colleagues here that it is very important that after every six months, they go for check-ups. I went for check-up. They checked and said “you are okay” but they discovered that I had bad cholesterol. I was moving in a train from Virginia and the doctor was calling after very minute. When I got up, I saw that I had got many missed calls. I went and he said: “I want you back here quickly. Your cholesterol is bad and any time you are going to get heart attack and die.” However, I was assuming that I was healthy –(Interjections)- hon. Okupa and I are slim. We shall tell you why we are this size. 

I want to tell you that as much as you are doing exercises, you should also check yourself. I went somewhere and got colleagues who like taking energy drinks. You get someone swallowing red bull. You are killing yourself. You would rather take coffee. In fact, Madam Speaker, give me space here. I would like to bring Bugisu Arabica Coffee for Members to test and that will do them better. Hon. Nambeshe is here and he will tell you that when you drink Arabica Coffee, you will think a thousand times better. People think I am intelligent but it is because of coffee. (Laughter) You better take that coffee –(Member timed out.)

7.24
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to commend my colleague for bringing such a motion on physical exercise –(Interjections)- This is not a motion meant necessarily for me alone. (Laughter) As I can see, all eyes are on me. I sympathise with those who do not do exercises. You may be small and I may look endowed – I am not big or fat. I am just endowed. (Laughter) However, I would rather be endowed but healthy. 

The most important thing as we adopt this motion tonight is that we have to let the public, especially those who really have to, consider exercises as a serious thing. When I go to my village, I get a hoe and dig and the women in my village practice and they are very hard working. They do agriculture. They are already exercising and sweating. However, for you, you have an office or car with air conditioning.

Madam Speaker, we need serious information, especially those working in offices. I think the elites are ignorant about their health and that is serious because they do not have rightful information on nutrition. It is very important for us to know what we eat. I was born fat. Actually, if you saw me when I was young, I was already huge. People will never be the same but the most important thing is for you to be healthy. 

If I do not do exercises – hon. Okot Ogong can tell you – we do a lot of exercise. Whenever we are moving, we are always in the gym with hon. Okot. He is a very good example. However, I can assure you that if I do not do exercise for one week, I will not even be able to talk on this microphone because I believe physical exercises also help you to think. You cannot challenge me that you have been doing all these things every day, from morning to evening, and you go and eat and sleep. You would be killing yourself indirectly.

Colleagues, this motion is alerting some of us who are also seated in this House to take action and the action should start today, not tomorrow. (Applause) I know there are some of us who have sat here and listened to the different people –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 30 Members have spoken on this matter. When I was listening in, I felt an indictment that we have provided the facilities but apparently, very few people are using them. I was here thinking whether the Commission should arrange two days a week when we can come for exercises. I do not know. I am thinking aloud but I will take it to the Commission because it will ensure that we are able to do exercise for at least two days.

Secondly, we cannot just leave this debate here. I was thinking that the Committee on Education and Sports could take it up, improve on it - because there are areas we need to build – and come back here with a proposal so that the Government is here to listen so that they take this. It is a very serious issue indeed. Is that okay, honourable members?

MR OKOT-OGONG: Madam Speaker, I need to also bring it to your attention that I also like going to the gym but have not had the opportunity to come to our gym. From my assessment, there is lack of aeration in our gym. When you are doing exercise and aeration is poor, you are actually killing yourself.

I would like to appeal to this Parliament to get a place that is well aerated and we will all come to that gym. My assessment – and I think most Members have seen it – is that without proper aeration down there, we are doing more harm than good. Therefore, we would like to appeal to the Commission to provide a better place so that we can always go there.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me all that support. My second prayer reads, “All the higher institutions of learning, primary, secondary schools and places of work should provide health fitness plans and spaces for staff and students”. When it comes to this issue, the Ministry of Education and Sports can maybe take it up with the institutions.

There are some things – with your guidance – which I think we can do. For example, my first prayer requires us to set a day in a week and we live exemplarily. I think that one is in our mandate and we can begin it. We can even encourage all the Ministries, Departments and Agencies and employing bodies to do this because I have realised that some MDAs like the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development are doing it. I wish to applaud the honourable minister plus the Permanent Secretary, Mr Pius Bigirimana. 

I am also informed that the Office of the Prime Minister has set a day when they do it to help their staff. I have a feeling that with your guidance and if you would accept, you champion this. The President of Uganda gazetted at least a day in a year and championed that. I would wish to see Rt Hon Kadaga, our Speaker, champion this day such that we can kick off. We are prepared but the moment they see you as a leader and as members of Parliament, I am telling you it will be the day Ugandans will accept and it will be gazetted. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, taking into account the proposals, do you accept that we send it to the Committee on Education and Sports to refine it?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, please, include the Committee on Health.

THE SPEAKER: We need someone to process it and bring it back here for debate. They are doing it for us to come here and then, we can bring on the other ministries. We want a leader.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, you gave a directive about us checking ourselves - like you had started - on a daily basis when we come here every morning. Our medical staff is here.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us start again tomorrow. Arrive here and check yourself before you go to your office. Then you can sit down happily. It is in your interest. The Government Chief Whip, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa is not here but there is a day she told me that they found her blood pressure was almost 300. She told me figures, which I could not believe. I asked, “you are still walking?” She said she was walking but did not know how. I think it is important that we check our blood pressure. Let us encourage Members.

Honourable members, I put the question that the motion be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)


THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We are going to take up the proposals. It is very important. Hon. Mbwatekamwa, thank you very much and honourable Members, thank you for your support.

House adjourned to Tuesday, 29 January 2019 at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.33 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 29 January 2019.) 

