
  
Wednesday, 29 January 2020

Parliament met at 2.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I will cause an alteration in the Order Paper to accommodate a statement from the Minister of State for Health in relation to drug outage, which she will make at appropriate time. 

Another issue that I would like to point out is that hon. Okwir from Moroto County seems to have some difficulty with placement on the committee. We will formally handle that tomorrow when the matter is placed on the Order Paper. His issue is that he does not have a committee he has been withdrawn from a committee, which he thinks he should go back to since a vacancy has occurred in it. I will deal with this issue tomorrow and see where to place him. 

As I said yesterday, tomorrow, if the House agrees, we could start the sitting at 10 o’clock and do two hours in the morning and do another three hours in the afternoon to see if this could help us with the budgetary issues. The assurance was given yesterday that by this evening, the Budget Committee will have finalised the report so that by tomorrow, the report is uploaded. 

If that happens and I get to know by closure of business, then the House will be adjourned to 10 o’clock tomorrow. In case they are not ready and they still need tomorrow morning to finalise with certain things, then we can only sit in the afternoon and that would have implications on our Friday, in which case, we will have to come back on Friday morning to deal with these things. 

We do not want to exceed the timeline provided in the law. Therefore, we will try to do our best given the timeframe provided in the law. Thank you very much.

We have a lot of businesses. Today, we need to finish at least two Bills. I see the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has also brought two other requests. Let us see if we can finish with those ones and then we can close. Thank you.

PRESENTATION OF PETITIONS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member is not here. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE TRAFFIC AND ROAD SAFETY ACT 1998 (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

Clause 19 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 19 stands part of this Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22 

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Robert Kafeero): Mr Chair, on amendment of Section 37 of the Principal Act, Clause 22 is amended by deleting paragraph (d). 

Justification

It is to ensure that every driver goes through training of drivers from a licensed driving school.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I rise on a point of procedure. Usually, when we are handling Bills, especially when it is a Government Bill, the relevant minister moves a motion for the Committee of the whole House to sit but we did not hear a motion for this particular one.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The Bill was already at the Committee Stage. We only adjourned from the Committee Stage. 

MR ATIKU: Okay. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You know, sometimes when we do things too many times, we forget them. (Laughter) Honourable chairperson, did you propose the amendment to delete paragraph (d)? 

MR KAFEERO: Yes, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, is the deletion of paragraph (d) in clause 22 agreeable? 

2.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Mr Chairman, I agree.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the amendment as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 23

MR KAFEERO: Mr Chairperson, before clause 23, I propose an insertion of a new clause immediately after clause 22 as follows:

Amendment of Section 38 of the principal Act 
Section 38 of the principal Act is amended:
    a. In sub-section (1) by substituting for the words, “Group A, B, F or H” the words, “Group A,A1, B1, B, or G”;
    b. In subsection (2) by substituting for the words, “Group CM, CH, DL, DM, DH, E, G, or L” the words, “Group C, C1, C1E, CE, D1, D1E, D, DE, F, or BE”.

Justification

It is a consequential amendment, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

New Clause, agreed to.

MR KAFEERO: Mr Chairperson, there is also another amendment of Section 39 of the principal Act. Section 39 of the principal Act is amended in subsection (1) by substituting for the words, “Group A, -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is this one?

MR KAFEERO: It is a new insertion to the amendment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Why didn’t you bring the whole thing?

MR KAFEERO: I am sorry, Mr Chair. Let me do it. Section 39 of the principal Act is amended in subsection (1) by substituting for the words, “Groups A, B or H” the words, “Group A, A1, B1,B, BE or G.” The justification, it is a consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you will recall that I already put the question for the approval of the inserting of the new clause and the chairperson is now taking us back with amendments that he did not present earlier.

Therefore, I have to put it again that the new clause now as proposed be approved?

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause agreed to.

Clause 23 agreed to.


Clause 24

MR KAFEERO: Mr Chairman, I am on clause 24 of section 42 of the Principal Act. Clause 24 be amended by deleting the entire paragraph (b). Justification is that the requirement for the minister to prescribe other validity period for the driving licence is not necessary since the proposed subsection (3) which clearly provides for the 12 months, three years and five years as the possible validity for the driving licence is sufficient.

Also, Mr Chairman, the requirement for retesting a driver before the first renewal of a driving licence is unnecessary since the driver would have been tested before being issued the initial driving licence.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear honourable members? I put to the question to that amendment?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25 agreed to.

Clause 26

MR KAFEERO: Mr Chairman, clause 26 is amendment of section 51 of the Principal Act. Clause 26 is amended by substituting for the words “not exceeding three hundred currency points or imprisonment not exceeding six months or both”; the words, “not exceeding one hundred currency points or imprisonment not exceeding one year or both.”

The Justification is to make the penalty punitive and reasonable.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 27 agreed to.

Clause 28

MR KAFEERO: Mr Chairman, clause 28 is amendment of section 57 of the Principal Act. Clause 28 is amended by inserting the word “one” between the words “exceeding” and “year” appearing in the last line of the provision.

Justification is to ensure clarity by providing for the option of imprisonment for the offence.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  That is clear. I put the question to that amendment?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 29

MR KAFEERO: Mr Chairman, clause 29 is substitution of section 61 of the Principal Act. Clause 29 is amended by substituting for paragraph (2)(n) as follows:

“(n) To take measures to foster a change of behaviour of road users so that a person does not put himself or herself or others at risk.” Justification is that it is unrealistic to place the burden of altering the behaviours of road users on the competent authority.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is clear honourable members. I put the question to that amendment?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 30

MR KAFEERO: Mr Chairman, when you sent us to harmonise and receive new proposals for amendments, I received one -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  And you are giving it to me now.

MR KAFEERO: That is a copy, which was taken to the Clerk’s Office. This was brought by hon. Tony Ayoo. I do not see him here, but I do not know whether at this particular movement we can consider it because it would fall in -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  If you have adopted it, proceed.

MR KAFEERO: Thank you. Mr Chairman, funds for the competent authority.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  What clause are we dealing with?

MR KAFEERO: It will be immediately after 29.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:   So you should say that.

MR KAFEERO: Immediately after 29, insertion of a new clause; “Funds for the competent authority. 

There shall be funds for the competent authority for purposes of implementing the Act as follows:

    a) Monies appropriated by Parliament for the purposes of the competent authority.
    b) Fifty per cent of motor vehicle registration.
    c) Fifty per cent of driving licence fees collected.
    d) Fifty per cent of public service vehicle licence fees collected.
    e) Concession fees from services that the ministry may concession such as vehicle inspection etc.
    f) Any other fees that the minister may determine.”

The justification is that we need funds to operationalise all the clauses of this Bill if we are to ensure that safety on our roads is enhanced.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I would like to make a comment on the amendment by the chairperson of the committee in line with the Public Finance Management Act. I think we need to harmonise them; it is not necessary to create another fund where you are collecting - I think their proposal from what I am hearing is that 50 per cent of the money you collect, you put it in the fund and the fees.

And we have worked throughout since we passed the Public Finance Management Act to have one consolidated fund and then the budgeting is done and appropriation is done by Parliament at the centre.

Therefore, whatever the authority wants to do, it can do it through appropriation by Parliament by looking at the activities of the authority. Therefore, I would like to suggest that we have to look at the Public Finance Management Act and reconcile with the proposed amendment before we finally pass it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I draw your attention to Section 29 of the Public Finance Management Act. The proposed amendment seems to be at variance with this provision. 

All monies must go to the Consolidated Fund and then be appropriated from there for purposes that are provided for under specific votes.

The amendment therefore cannot stand in light of Section 29 of the Act. This amendment is invalid in law.

MR KAFEERO: Most obliged, Mr Chairperson.

Clause 30 agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49, agreed to.

Clause 50, agreed to.

Clause 51, agreed to.

Clause 52, agreed to.

Clause 53

MR KAFEERO: Substitution of Section 111 of the principal Act:

Clause 53 is amended -
    a)  In sub-section (1) by deleting the words “or in charge of” –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that a new amendment?

MR KAFEERO: Yes.
(b) by deleting the proposed sub-section (2);
(c) by deleting the proposed sub-section (3); and
(d) by deleting the proposed sub-section (5).

Justification 

(i) 	The words “or in charge of” are ambiguous in relation to the offence created and may be prone to abuse during implementation.
(ii) 	The proposed sub-section (2) is impractical since police officers are not competent to extract blood samples or even carry on the required test. The proposed section 113 under clause 55 is sufficient. 
(iii) 	The proposed sub-sections (3) and (5) are discriminatory since it only requires drivers of Government vehicles to have zero alcohol limit yet the proposed sub-section (1) provides for a prescribed alcohol limit for other drivers. The proposed sub-section (1) is sufficient for all drivers. 
(iv)	The proposed deletion of sub-section (5) is consequential.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. Honourable minister, are you agreeable to this?

Ms kabatsi: I agree to no discrimination.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. I can now put the question to the amendment as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 53, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 54, agreed to.

Clause 55

MR KAFEERO: Clause 55: Substitution of Section 113 of principal Act. 
Clause 55 is amended - 
    (a) In the proposed subsection (1)(i) by deleting the words “or in charge of”; and
(ii) 	by deleting the proposed paragraph (b);
(b) 	in the proposed sub-section (2)(i) by deleting the word “pedestrian”; and 
(ii) 	by deleting the proposed paragraph (b).

Justification:

    (i) Consequential ; 
    (ii) The proposed subsection (1)(b) is prone to abuse.
    (iii) It is unreasonable and unjustifiable for a police officer to require urine specimen from pedestrians. The object of the provision is to regulate driving under the influence of drugs and not pedestrians.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Did they want to test pedestrians also? –(Laughter)- Honourable members, the amendment is proposed.

Mr ssemujju: Mr Chairperson, I would like to seek clarification from both the chairperson of the committee and the minister on the proposal for a police officer to stop and ask you to accompany him to a health facility for a urine test.

There was a time I was driving from northern Uganda at night and a traffic policeman stopped me at around Kiryandongo. It was already late but he told me to go to a police station because I did not produce a driving permit. Of course, I referred him to the law and eventually, we agreed.

Now you are telling him that he can stop me and look for a health facility. Sometimes, these facilities are not there. If we are not near a health facility, I do not know which distance I should drive with a police officer to go looking for a facility for me to produce urine sample.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, what are you proposing?

Mr ssemujju: I am asking about how they are going to implement this. Maybe they know how so that I can support the proposal. I see a big problem here that you are giving a policeman on the road power to tell me, “Accompany me to look for a facility for you to give me urine so that I can check your alcohol levels.”

MR KAFEERO: Mr Chairperson, indeed this was a major concern even in the committee. First, the committee unanimously agreed that the police do not have the technical capacity to check blood samples. 

As such, the policeman will use the breathalyser. However, if the driver insists, even after testing, that he is not drunk, police will have leeway to take you to a health centre to confirm whether you have drugs or alcohol content in your blood, which is more than the limit.

Therefore, blood samples will not be taken instantly at the roadside. It will be after your insistence that you are not drunk and probably the machine is not calibrated. If you do not trust the machine – the breathalyser – then you go for a medical check-up. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear now? I now put a question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 55, agreed to.

Clause 55, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you see, it is not about the loudest voice; it is the number of voices. (Laughter) Therefore, you cannot win a vote in this House in the voice vote, if you are alone and you are really doing your best to make it overshadow the rest. But well tried, hon. Ssemujju. 

Clause 56, agreed to.

Clause 56, agreed to.

Clause 57, agreed to.

Clause 58

MR KAFEERO: Mr Chairman, Clause 58 is amendment of Section 119 of the principal Act.
Clause 58 is amended by substituting for the words “three hundred currency points” the words “one hundred currency points”.
Justification: To make the penalty commensurate to the offence.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 58, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 59

MR KAFEERO: Clause 59 is amendment of Section 120 of the Principal Act. 
Delete clause 59

Justification

Section 120 of the principal Act was repealed by the Roads Act, 2019. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, honourable members? The proposal is for the deletion of clause 59. I put the question that clause 59, as proposed by the chairperson, be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 59 deleted.

Clause 60, agreed to.

Clause 61, agreed to.

Clause 62

MR KAFEERO: Clause 62 is amendment of Section 123 of the principal Act.
Substitute for clause 62 the following: 

Section 123 of the principal Act is amended – 
    (a) By substituting for sub-section (5) the following:
“(5) For the purposes of this section –
(a) ‘authorised emergency motor vehicles’ means a motor vehicle, trailer or engineering plant for the purposes of the police, fire brigade, ambulances, the military motor vehicles or the armed forces and such other motor vehicles, trailers or engineering plants, as may be designated by the minister, in consultation with the chief licensing officer by a statutory order. 
(b) 	‘Emergency’ means a serious, unexpected or dangerous situation requiring immediate action.”
(b) 	In sub-section (6), by substituting for the words “not less than fifteen currency points and not exceeding sixty currency points or imprisonment of not less than six months and not exceeding two years or both” the words “not exceeding two hundred currency points or imprisonment not exceeding two years or both.” 

Justification

For clarity and to avoid abuse under the guise of emergency. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is clear, honourable members. Honourable minister, do you agree? 

MS KABATSI: I agree.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 62, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 63

MR KAFEERO: Mr Chairman, clause 63 is the amendment of Section 125 of the principal Act. 

Clause 63 is amended in paragraph (a) by substituting for a proposed sub-section (1a with the following – 
“(1a) Notwithstanding sub-section (1), where an accident arising directly or indirectly from the use of a motor vehicle, trailer or engineering plant occurs to any person or to any motor vehicle, trailer or engineering plant, any other road user or person may stop if, having regard to all the circumstances, it is reasonably safe to do so and shall ascertain whether any person has been injured, in which event he/she may render all practicable assistance to the injured person;

    (b) By deleting the proposed sub-section (1f).”

Justification: 

    1. It is unreasonable to make road users duty bound to offer assistance to accident victims at all times. This is also likely to make road users evade accident victims because of the heavy obligation imposed on them. The road users should help whenever practicable. 

    2. The good faith test of the proposed sub-section (1c) is sufficient and where the test is not made, a judicial officer adjudicates the matter accordingly. 

MR NIWAGABA: I have realised we now seem to be going into legislating for the Good Samaritan Principle and I am not sure whether this legislature should delve into that. 

In that regard, I strongly oppose the provision, particularly the proposed amendment. First of all, it does not even impose a penalty if this Good Samaritan Principle is not complied with; so it remains hanging. I would invite the chairperson to simply abandon his proposed amendment.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Chairman, just in addition, I do not understand what the motivation is. If I am a good person and I see someone injured and crying on the roadside, it is up to me to stop or not. I do not know why it should be statutory for one to stop – in my vehicle. 

MR TIMUZIGU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Things are changing and security, sometimes, is not guaranteed in certain places. You find that someone pretending to have got a problem or an accident; when you come out to help them, you find that they are robbers or are waiting to kill you. Therefore, if we make it a law, then, we shall have made it a law for some people to die at the hands of robbers or even assassins.

I would want to bring this proposal that we delete that section and we leave it as it has been, because so many people have – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do we delete the section or abandon the amendment?                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           

MR TIMUZIGU: We abandon that amendment. Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

MR WALUSWAKA: Mr Chairman, I remember what we captured in the reports is that there are cases where you get someone in an accident and police takes you as if you are the one who has killed the person. You take him to Mulago and there are a lot of statements required of you. 

In that report, we said that when you go, you should not be duty bound to be the witness in court. That is what we agreed. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: When I first went to law school, they taught me something called the “drowning child principle”. 

A man was sitting near a pond. A child walked into the pond, played around and started drowning and the man looked on and the child died on the man’s watch. So he was taken to court and charged. 

His defence was that he was under no obligation to interfere with the child’s right to do whatever it wanted. If the child wanted to drown, it was its right. He had no duty or care for that child. 

The court said no, you had a duty to save that child. You neglected that duty so we find you guilty. He was convicted and jailed. 

I do not know whether it is the same principle here that you see people dying and you go on your way yet you could have helped save them. 

MS ACHIENG: In the Bill that was brought to this House, it states very clearly that “notwithstanding subsection (1) where an accident arising directly or indirectly from the use of motor vehicle, trailer… any other road user or person shall stop, if having regard to all circumstances it is reasonably safe to do so”.

You cannot tell whether it is safe, but also most importantly, the committee is proposing that rather than use the word “shall” – because “shall” is a must. It is mandatory. You must stop. But the committee is saying, let us use “may” so that it is then up to ones judgment to decide whether to stop or not. 

I remember one time I was driving and a child of about five years tried to stop me. The person I was with asked, do you think that child is alone? Where does that child get the courage to stop you?

I think, if we abandon the committee’s amendment, then that means that what is in the Bill will stand, and therefore it becomes mandatory but if we go by the committee’s proposal, which I think is reasonable because it does not make it a must, then that would suffice. Thank you.

MR SSEMUJJU: Actually the committee does not change anything. The proposal in the Bill says, “having regard to all the circumstances…” that would mean you “may” because even the proposal in the Bill qualifies that you need to be sure. You are actually saying the same thing using different words. 

My fear is that you cannot make this sort of intervention statutory. Let it happen naturally. If I take a risk, there is no way of telling me to take the risk, if I do not want to take it, it is my decision. 

MR OKUPA: I do not know what type of heart hon. Ssemujju has in opposing this proposal. In fact, I had an issue with the committee; there is no need to put the word “may”. We would have gone the way the Bill is proposed. 

I think it is just a sense of responsibility, having a heart for those in need. I think that is the spirit of this proposal in the Bill. We should be humane enough to care for those in need. 

At one time, coming from the constituency at about 4.00 a.m. on Tirinyi Road, I met an accident. Two buses had collided and no police vehicle had come and no one had the audacity to stop. I stopped and started making communications to try to help and save the situation. In that, we were able to save some children. I did not even realise that there was an OB of mine in that accident. In the end, we were able to have some of these people saved. If I had not stopped, possibly all would have died.

Another time on Mabira Road, I found another accident. A small vehicle had hit and entered into a trailer. We did not stop because I had fear, like my brother there had. When I reached Kampala, I got a call from Kasilo that two boys who were in that car had died. And guess where they were from. They were my neighbours from the village. The driver of the trailer was not there and no one stopped until morning. That is when they were cut out of their vehicle. That is what changed my heart that whenever I get to a scene of an accident, I must stop because possibly if a person had stopped, they could have saved a life. 

To me this does not injure because it has provided for the ‘may” to be there which is catered for in the statement “in having regard to all circumstances it is reasonably safe to do so and shall ascertain whether any person has been injured”. I think the way it is here caters for that. 

Mr Chairman, I am trying to appeal to the colleagues that let us approve it the way it is in the Bill because it may be you or me that is saved by such a person tomorrow with that type of regard. Thank you. 

MR NIWAGABA: I still feel the entire clause as proposed by the mover of the Bill and the amendment is redundant. When you look at the clause, it is basically aimed at a road user or any other person who has witnessed an accident. We are trying to leave it to his discretion, first of all to determine whether it is reasonable to help. People have always helped, with or without this law. 

Secondly, even if he helped or does not help, there is no penalty provided for. Assuming he helps and by way of helping he is actually speeding up the death of the injured in a bid to help or he has not helped at all when he should have done and you are not penalising him. 

The entire amendment in my view is redundant; it does not add any value. Let us leave the status quo as it has been.

MR OKUPA: Can I seek some clarification from you? Can you, Hon. Niwagaba, help me comprehend the example the chairperson has given of when he was a student at law school vis-à-vis what you are saying? Can you relate these two things to help me understand which way I should take?

MR NIWAGABA: You see, this particular law we are looking at is essentially part of the criminal law. It is basically a law that regulates by way of prohibition. The example the chairperson has given is in the rhythm of civil law – what principle does a neighbour have to another person especially when something of this nature has happened?

In my view, the law of good neighbourhood, which applies to road users and the likes, should be left in the rhythm of the civil aspect. Even if you legislate, as we have legislated, if anybody has that hard heart, he will still not stop to help and he will say: “I did not help because I found it not safe since the law says I must first ascertain that it is safe for me to help.” Why should we start legislating on what people should do as Good Samaritans? In my view, let us leave the Biblical position without legislating on it.

MS LUCY AKELLO: Mr Chairman, I tend to agree with hon. Niwagaba. I think we need to do more about our humanity than legislating. You might put it in the law but how many people are going to utilise it? I had a scenario. I was driving late from home and in a very dark place, I got a man lying on the road and I actually thought he was dead but he was not. I had to think twice on whether to stop or not. My instinct told me to stop.

When I stopped, I actually saved his life because he was drunk and he lay in the middle of the road. For me, it comes back to the human heart that we have. We may have it in the law, but people will not make good use of it. We may say “may” or “shall” but it will still be redundant. Let us work hard to sensitise our people that you need to help your neighbour and I think this is what will help us more. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR ONZIMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have a slightly different view from the two submissions. You may have a human heart that you should go and help but I think there should also be an element in the law where you are permitted to go and help. If you are not permitted and something happens, one will ask: “Why did you go?” That is the angle from which I look at it. Your involvement must be backed by the permission of the law. You may go there on humanitarian grounds but if something happens, they will ask: “What permitted you to act?” 

Although we are looking at the legal element, it is in our heart that we can decide. Somebody may say you came and picked the phone or did this and that. If your involvement was not backed by the law, somebody may question it. From that angle, there could be some sense. Thank you.

MS WATONGOLA: Mr Chairman, I would like to support the committee chairperson’s proposal. The reason is that, for example, some drivers cause accidents and leave the victims on the road because of fear. If those victims were assisted, they would at least have life. However, because of fear, the driver will just run away because he knows that maybe he will be put in the cells. 

If we have something like this and avoid “shall” and have “may”, it can work out to the extent that those victims will be assisted. If we do not have this law, a person will just drive anyhow and leave the victims suffering on the road. Let us leave the section and maybe delete the word “shall” and replace it with the word “may”.

MS GALIWANGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Accidents have occurred many times and there have never been incidents where people have abandoned people at accident scenes. People have always had a good heart and in many cases, like I think about two weeks ago, the police officers were minding about the vehicles but the people were saying: “No, let us first deal with life.”

Nobody had told them there was no law whatsoever to do so. If we legislate to tell people that “you must do this”, again, we might change their attitude. They already have a good heart. If anybody has a bad heart and you want to force that person to have a good heart, it will not work out. People have always helped. We cannot legislate to say you must do this. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we need to wind up this. There are two things. One, there is always this mistake we make that “may” is discretionary and “shall” is mandatory. There are situations where “may” is mandatory. For example, if we say an applicant will provide “A, B, C and D and the licensing officer may grant that licence”. In that case, where the applicant has provided all “A”, “B”, “C” and “D”, that “may” becomes “shall” because the licensing officer now has no discretion since all the conditions have been met and he must now issue the licence. Once you have examined the circumstances and it is clear there is no danger, it becomes a must whether you put the word “may” or “shall”.

Two, when does a moral obligation become a legal obligation? When does something we ordinarily do based on our morality become a legal obligation? The remote point I would like to state is that in drafting laws, one of the principles is that it must be capable of implementation. Considering these issues, is this provision one of those we want to have in statute books? Honourable committee chairperson and honourable minister, with regard to these issues, is this one of the provisions you want to have in the statute books?

MR KAFEERO: Mr Chairman, having considered the proposals in the debate by colleagues and having re-digested the proposal in clause 63, for and on behalf of the committee I withdraw the proposal to amend but also propose that the minister finds it appropriate to withdraw this whole proposal to amend or even put it in the law.

MS KABATSI: I agree to remove all these proposals.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal now is that clause 63 be deleted. I now put the question for the deletion of clause 63.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 63 deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 63 is deleted. Clause 64? [Mr Ssemujju rose_] Is it clause 64? Can you give me a copy of your amendment?

MR SSEMUJJU: I do not have amendments. I am simply seeking guidance. Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: For seeking clarification; the time has passed.

MR SSEMUJJU: I am going to vote.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes; you are going to vote now since you do not understand - but that is fine. 

I put the question that clause 64 stands part of this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 64, agreed to.

Clause 65, agreed to.

Clause 66, agreed to.

Clause 67, agreed to.

Clause 68, agreed to.

Clause 69, agreed to.

Clause 70

MR KAFEERO: Insertion of part VIA in the principal Act.
Clause 70 is amended -
(a) In the headnote of the proposed section l3lA, by inserting immediately after the words “motor vehicle”, the words “trailers and engineering plants”.
(b) By substituting for the proposed section l3lH, the following:
“l3IH. Periodic inspection of motor vehicles for environmental and road safety compliance.
All motor vehicles shall be inspected periodically for environmental and road safety compliance and in the case of public service vehicles, every after one year and other motor vehicles, every after two years.”

The justification is: 

    (i) For consistency with the substantive provision. 
    (ii) For clarity and ensure that all motor vehicles are periodically inspected to ensure environmental and road safety compliance. 

Insertion of a new clause:

Insert a new clause immediately after clause –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we deal with the amendments first?

MR KAFEERO: Much obliged, Mr Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that amendment has been proposed for clause 70 of the Bill. The amendments were clearly stated by the chairperson of the committee. I will put the question to those amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 70, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 71

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, do you have a proposal?

MR KAFEERO: Before clause 71, I propose an insertion of a new clause. Insert a new clause immediately after clause 71 as follows:

“Repeal of section 135 of the principal Act.
Section 135 of the principal Act is repealed
The justification is to avoid duplication of laws, since section l35 is similar to section 52 (2) of the Roods Act, 2019.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, are you agreeable to that?

MS KABATSI: I agree to it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is the proposal from the committee. I put the question to that proposal.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

Clause 71, agreed to.

Clause 72

MR KAFEERO: Clause 72, Mr Chairperson.

Substitution of section 146 of principal Act
Clause 72 is amended in the proposed section 146:
    (a) By substituting for the proposed subsection (1), the following:
“(1) Any person driving a motor vehicle, trailer or engineering plant on a road shall carry a copy of his or her valid driving licence of all times while driving and on being so required by a police officer in uniform to produce an original driving licence for examination, to do so within seventy eight hours.”
(b) 	In the proposed subsection (2), by substituting for the words “forty eight hours”, the words “one hundred twenty hours”.
(c) 	In the proposed paragraph (c) of subsection (3), by inserting the word “valid” at the beginning of paragraph (c).

The justification is:

    (i) To require drivers to carry copies of driving licence and vehicle registration books at all times and to allow reasonable time within which to produce originals when required and 
    (ii) For clarity,

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members that is the proposed amendment. You have heard the amendments, as proposed by the chairperson. I do not know whether in (c), it is only the word “valid” or “a valid”.

MR KAFEERO: Let it be “a valid” instead of “valid” alone.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That reads better. 

MR KAFEERO: Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I now put the question to the amendment? [Mr Nzoghu rose] Did you submit your proposal? Where is it?

I will put the question to the amendment, as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 72, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 73, agreed to.

Clause 74, agreed to.

Clause 75, agreed to.

Clause 76, agreed to.

Clause 77, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think let us go to clauses 20 and 21 because we handled that when the chairperson was still in his bed or something like that. He had proposed some amendments there. 

This is to say that Parliament starts at 2.00 p.m. If by 2.00 p.m. you are not here, you mess up the proceedings of Parliament, especially when you are the chairperson of a committee. This should not happen again.

MR KAFEERO: Much obliged, Mr Chair. 

Clause 20 is the amendment of Section 35 of the principal Act. Clause 20 is amended-
    a. By substituting for the proposed sub-section (1) the following:
“(1) A person shall not drive any class of motor vehicle, trailer or engineering plant on a road unless he or she is in possession of a valid driving licence or a copy of a valid learner’s driving licence in respect of the group of that motor vehicle, trailer or engineering plant.”
    b. By substituting for paragraph (b) the following:
    a. By substituting for sub-section (2) the following –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is not clear. You are saying “by substituting for paragraph (b) the following” but there is nothing thereafter.

MR KAFEERO: Mr Chairman, let us disregard the first (b). 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You are the one who read it. 

MR KAFEERO: Thank you for the correction. The correct one is;
    b. By substituting for sub-section (2) the following:
“(1)	Whenever required by a police officer, a person shall provide the original copy of the driving licence or learner’s driving licence referred to in sub-section (1) within seventy-two hours.” 

Justification

For clarity and ease of implementation by ensuring that a driver of a motor vehicle carries a copy of a driving licence at all times and only provides an original driving licence within 72 hours whenever required. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is clear. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think the principal aspect should be the original one or a copy. This is because in the submission of the chairperson, he is emphasising more on the copy than the original driving licence. Personally, I thought we would have someone present the original driving permit or a copy of the original permit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You see, if you have shown the original one – they are only making it easy because most people find it easier to carry copies of the permits. If you provide the copy and there are doubts and the original permit is asked for, then you have 72 hours within which to produce it. There is no conflict. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Chairman, I need a clarification from the minister. These days, they send you the log book online. It is upon you to print it and it would look like a duplicate. Therefore, I do not know whether this would be considered. You can just print it online and move with it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Okupa, that does not apply here. We are talking about the driving licence. I do not know why we are bringing in motor vehicle licence because we have already passed it in a clause. 

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to request members, especially hon. Nzoghu, to understand why we said “copies” –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That one is already done. 

MR WALUSWAKA: Okay, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question to the amendment as proposed by the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR KAFEERO: Mr Chairman, as we go to clause 21, I would like to put you on notice that I will recommit clause 72 just to align an error of “78 hours” to “72 hours.” It was just an error in –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you deal with this amendment, please?

MR KAFEERO: Most obliged, Mr Chairperson. Clause 21 is on the amendment of Section 36 of the principal. Clause 21 is amended -
    a. In the proposed sub-section (1), by substituting for paragraph (a) the following:
“(a) Group A: motorcycles with a cubic capacity exceeding 125 cubic centimetres and a power not exceeding 11 kilowatts”
(b)	By inserting a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (a) as follows:

“(b) 	Substituting for sub-section (2) the following:
(2) 	An applicant for a Group F driving permit shall, before being granted the driving permit, hold a driving licence in Group B, BE, C, C1, C1E, CE, D1, D1E, D or DE, which equates to a maximum permissible weight of the maximum permissible number of passengers to the engineering plant, which the equipment proposes to drive.”

Justification

    1. It is to clearly distinguish Group A motorcycles from Group A1. 
    2. It is a consequential amendment arising from the regrouping of motor vehicles to comply with regional and international classification. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I heard the chairperson of the committee read cubic centimetres. Did he mean cubic metres? What were you referring to? 

MR KAFEERO: It is cubic centimetres. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If it is cubic metres, what type of engine would that be? (Laughter) An engine of one cubic metre would be quite something. 

Honourable members, I now put the question to those amendments as proposed by the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us deal with this consequential one, which the chairperson of the committee put me on notice about. 

Clause 72

MR KAFEERO: Thank you for your indulgence, Mr Chairperson. In clause 72, we did propose 78 hours instead of 72 hours to be consistent with clause 20.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think that is consequential. I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the rules on recommitment are clear. Once the Committee of the whole House has reported, that is when you can recommit. Once we are still at the Committee Stage, you only call it a review.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Mr Chairperson, I wanted the chairperson of the committee to clarify something because when we sat in the committee meetings, we had taken a position on clause 22, which he missed. If he can deal with it at the moment, then we will not come back for re-committal. 

Therefore, I thought that the chairperson could look at the matter relating to the director of transport instead of the competent authority. If it is permissible-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 22 was in the amendments submitted. However, he has not done it.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: That is why I am asking the chairperson because he -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is what I am also supporting because clause 22 is clearly on the amendments proposed by the committee. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: And we had another amendment that the chairperson has agreed to so if it pleases you, we can-

MR KAFEERO: Mr Chairman, the honourable colleague highlighted-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you have an amendment of clause 22?

MR KAFEERO: Clause 22 (a) specifically where we had suggested that wherever-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What I see from the report is that clause 22 is amended by deleting paragraph (d). That is what is in the report.

MR KAFEERO: And that one has been dealt with and we are not changing it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes we did not amend it because you were not here.

MR KAFEERO: I was there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Were you here already?

MR KAFEERO: Yes. I began on clause 22. However, there is something that we skipped which he wants to highlight and I do agree with him. During those days when the ministry was still Ministry of Works, Transport and Communication there used to be somebody called, “Director of Transport and Communication.” Now he is no longer there and there is “Director of Transport”.

However, also the new amendments have suggested that this duty of licencing of driving schools and instructors should be handled by the competent authority and the head is the chief licencing officer.

Therefore, if you do agree, we could change wherever there is “Director of Transport and Communication” and we put “Chief Licencing Officer” because we shall need somebody to sign on. In the competent authority, there are so many people but we need some individual to append signature.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Who is this individual?

MR KAFEERO: The individual should be the chief licencing officer.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, where does that appear?

MR KAFEERO: It appears in clause-

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you. Mr Chairman, the functions of the chief licencing officer is taken care of in clause (3) and we have enumerated it very well and aligned it and brought all the functions together. Therefore, it would really make sense and we had discussed this in the committee that under clause 22, that responsibility would be aligned to the chief licencing officer; which is very well taken care of under clause 3.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  But then clause 22, you are proposing an amendment in clause 22.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: In the proposal it was stated that director of transport. I can-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Oh yes. It is director of transport.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: So instead of the “Director of Transport” we had agreed that the “chief licencing officer” could be.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. Honourable members, that is the proposal in clause 22 (a) that the description “Director of Transport” should be changed to “Chief Licencing Officer.” I put the question to that amendment?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.


MR TURYAMUHWEZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am still seeking clarification in clause 20 amendment on section 31.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  We have passed clause 20; unless you want to propose amendment, we cannot open it. Let us go to the remaining clauses.

Clause 17

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Chairperson, we had had a discussion about this, what is the harmonised position? I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the committee since I did not receive any other amendment. If you have your amendment with you that I have not seen-

MR JONATHAN ODUR: This is not an amendment but I - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Then why are you standing up?

MR JONATHAN ODUR: I want to clarify so that members understand. What happened to clause 17 is that in the Principal Act, it has been replicated the same way except that it has been enumerated into ABC the objection that hon. Ssemujju raised yesterday.

The only addition that came is that now they are adding a second licence from the chief licencing officer. In the Principal Act, even the word “approved” place of business existed and it was there in the old Act. Therefore, it is no longer something new.

However, it is now adding that you have two licences one from the industrial Act or the trade and then one from the Chief Licencing Officer. Therefore, the question for the chairperson to deal with is whether somebody should get two licences to do the same business. If the chairperson concedes one licence could be dropped and we only use one.

MR KAFEERO: Mr Chairman, I think a licence from the chief licensing officer would suffice so we can drop the other licence and leave the rest as it is.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What paragraph is the other licence? What are you proposing? Do you want to delete (c) in the Bill and not in your report?

MR KAFEERO: Mr Chairman, we could delete (c) in the Bill and we maintain the others.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, the proposal is to delete paragraph (c) in clause 17 as now been harmonised. I put the question to that amendment?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17 as amended, agreed to

Clause 18

MR KAFEERO: Mr Chairman, we had proposed to delete (6) in the Bill. However, after further consultations, even with the new presidential directive of being able to follow on those vehicles that commit crime, the committee agrees that clause (6) is reinstated in the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  It has never been removed. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 18 as it is stand part of the Bill?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

MR KAFEERO: Clause 2, Mr Chairman, is amendment of section 2 of the Principal Act. Clause 2 is amended;

    a) By substituting for the definition of “medium Omnibus” the following: “’Medium Omnibus’ means a motor vehicle used for the carriage of passengers and having seating accommodation of more than eight people in addition to the driver’s seat but not exceeding thirty people in addition to the driver’s seat. Motor vehicles of this category may be coupled to a trailer, the permissible maximum mass of which does not exceed seven hundred kilograms”.

Justification is to achieve clarity and ease implementation by ensuring that the sitting capacity is determined by the number of people instead of the number of seat which can be prone to abuse.

    b) The definition of “manufacture” by repealing paragraph (b).
Justification is that it is a consequential amendment arising from the deletion of spare parts under clause 17.

    c) By substituting of the definition of “pre-arranged rides”-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Can we understand the “manufacture” by repealing paragraph (b). Where is paragraph (b)? Is it in the principal Act?

MR KAFEERO: Yes, in the principal Act, there was provision for spare parts being licensed for sale or dealing. We deleted it in the new amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is the deletion of paragraph in the principal Act and not in the Bill?

MR KAFEERO: It is in the principal Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The record should be clear because we might go looking for (b) in the Bill whereas it is not there.

Mr kafeero: Thank you, Mr Chairman.
 
c) By substituting the definition of “pre-arranged rides” the following:

“Pre-arranged rides” means the provision of a platform whereby a passenger requests a driver for a ride through a digital network and the driver accepts the request from the passenger.

Justification

For clarity since the provision presupposes that it is the driver that accepts to be driven by a passenger.
(d) In the definition of “transportation network company”, by inserting immediately after the word “connect”, the words “license drivers and”

Justification

To require a person using the digital network to connect to both driver and motor vehicle to willing users for ease of identification of drivers and the respective vehicle by the users. This will also enhance safety.
(e) Insert the definition of “tourist vehicle” as follows:

“Tourist vehicle” means a motor vehicle that is specially designed and built for transportation of tourists and is imported into Uganda by licensed tour operators.

This is for clarity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposed amendments in clause 2, which is the definition or interpretation clause of this Bill. Words that have been used that require defining have been so defined.

MR KAFEERO: Mr Chairman, on the last one, I do not know whether the minister was briefed by the senior minister. He had highlighted to me that there are some vehicles, which are not pre-designed for tourism work but when they reach here, they are remodelled for that purpose.

If we pass this the way it is we are going to restrict such, which are remodelled here. Therefore, he would like to add even those, which are redesigned here to be catered for. 

Ms kabatsi: Mr Chairman, I was briefed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What were you briefed about?

MR KAFEERO: Mr Chairman, the actual legislative drafting can be done by our legal team but if we carried a principal, we can – I do not know how to approach it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I can hear the Member of Parliament for Dokolo behind me.

Ms Cecilia ogwal: Mr Chairman, on this specific amendment the chairperson of the committee is moving, we need to give detailed clarity.

When you talk of motor vehicles modelled for tourism, you have to be specific. What is it that is so special with the motor vehicle for tourism as compared to others?

Can you make those key highlights, which distinguish other vehicles from that designed for tourism? I thought that, that needed a bit of clarification.  Thank you.

Mr kafeero: Mr Chairman, we may not be able to achieve that in the Act. Just like for ambulances, there are some vehicles, which are designed for that. However, bear with me that on so many occasions, we buy minibuses, which are meant for other duties and we write on them the word “Ambulance” and begin doing that work.

In the same vein, there are some people in the tourism industry who have land cruisers or other vehicles, which they modify by fixing bull bars when you pass in the national parks so that you are protected. They put sunroof and other things so that they can use such vehicles for this work.

Therefore, if we insist that it must be pre-designed in the factory, we may not get so many of such vehicles. If we do, they will be very expensive. This is the kind of balance the minister, Gen. Katumba, was trying to bring in. I do accept if we could legislate for that.

ms kabatsi: There are very specific vehicles. They are not many. It is the Land Rovers that are made to support tourists to see far. At times, some of them are smaller but their capacity is increased so that you can have eight seaters. I think you have seen them.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the issue is that there are those that are manufactured and imported into the country as such. There is that category of vehicles that are already in this country but remodelled for that purpose of tourism also.

There are also those ordinary vehicles that are doing tourism work without any modelling. Therefore, how do we use terms that encompass all of them?

Can my vehicle become a tourist vehicle? I have a very big car so can I say, “This is a vehicle for transporting tourists?” Or do you want to restrict it to vehicles customised for purposes of carrying tourists?

MR KAFEERO: Mr Chairman, we do not want your automatic cars to automatically become a tourist vehicle. If you want it to, you re-customise it to suit that purpose. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think if I would like to use my car as it is for tourism, all I need is to go and get a licence. 

Mr niwagaba: Mr Chairman, I have a sense of feeling that we are looking at tourists as only the international ones. You are discouraging local tourism.

Local tourists use all sorts of vehicles including bicycles and buses. I occasionally travel to the Murchison using the bus with the family. When we reach Masindi, we hire ordinary vehicles.

Therefore, why are we importing a definition of a tourist vehicle in this particular law? If you are talking about a tourist vehicle for purposes of privileges, taxes and the like, handle that under the income tax and other laws for taxation but not this very one.

The kind of discrimination you are bringing in this particular Bill for tourist vehicles literally discriminates against local tourism and will be detrimental to the tourism industry –(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is information that has been allowed by him.

Mr anywarach:  Thank you, my Attorney-General. Mr Chairman, the information is that under the Road and Safety Act, you may have a three-door Land Cruiser like the ambulance we have. You may sit opposite each other behind. It is juxtaposing. You may remodel it for tourist purpose and have all the seats face forward; behind the driver. 

Then, you may create two more doors. Instead of having the driver and the co-driver’s doors, you will also have the high end doors. Behind the driver and the co-driver’s doors, there will be more doors.

In the event that, that is done, then, we are saying they must be treated for that purpose and not be so strictly considered that, that vehicle was meant to be used for this other purpose. That is why we are saying, “remodelled for tourism.” It should not be strictly considered, under this Act, as a penalty but should be excused. 

These vehicles are very many, honourable members. Some of them are made for a longer time for comfort. Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, maybe, if the chairperson or the minister could help us find where this term is used in the Bill, then, we would know the background or the context in which it is being defined. Have we used it in the Bill; the word “tourist vehicle?” If we have not used it in the Bill, why are we defining things that are not there? Which clause talks about tourist vehicles? Have you seen the clause? 

MR KAFEERO: It is clause 35.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us look at clause 35, which we have already passed. Okay, clearly, that is the context. It reads, “Licenses issued by the competent authority under this part shall be categorised into the following classes:

(h) Tourist vehicle license….” 
It is for licensing purpose. If it is for licensing purposes, does the definition fit what it intends to achieve? If it does not, how can we improve it? 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Mr Chairman, the definition fits, except that under that definition we had proposed, it was restricting it to imported vehicles. This means that if you modify it from here, you will be denied the license.

Therefore, what the minister proposed is that since there are vehicles that we modify locally here, we should remove that aspect of imported and include “even locally modified....” That is the only thing that has come up under the definition. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It would read something like this, “…means a vehicle that is specifically designed and built for transportation of tourists and license as such.” 

Therefore, we should leave out the aspect of imported. When you leave out the aspect of imported, then, it takes care of the whole situation. Can the honourable member from Kasilo purify the draft for us? 

MR OKUPA: Before I do the refining, I think we need to know that this issue of the tourist vehicles is very important for tax purposes. Then, when it comes to the licensing, the modelling does not necessarily apply.  This is because once a vehicle is already here - and you have a registered company for tourists - it does not matter. 

The tourists may go to Namugongo and may not necessarily need to use that modelled vehicle for the parks. It can even be a bus or a motorcycle. If you a registered tourist company, you can decide to use that salon car to take tourists to Namugongo. However, if it is going to the park, then, you need those modelled vehicles. It was purposely meant for those vehicles being imported because they are exempted from taxes. That is where the specification of a “tourist vehicle” was very important. 

People are also smart when they are importing cars. That is why some decide to import vehicles and model them here because – let me use an example of a minibus. What the transporters of vehicles do is that – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you are taking us away. 

MR OKUPA: Just a moment, Sir. They bring a vehicle with only two seats; these minibuses. Due to the fact that the tax is lower for vehicles that are imported without the seats, they do the modelling from here in order to evade taxes. They then decide to model it and put more chairs, when they are in Uganda here. 

Mr Speaker, in my opinion, we do not even need this amendment. The way it is put here - given its nature, depending on where you are going for tourism – whether you are going to the park, coming to Parliament or are going to Namugongo – definitely, if you are going to the park, you need a car, like those land cruisers with those barricades, to protect you. I thought I would be able to give that information before we define.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the draft that the committee came up with is that we should not only restrict it to imported vehicles. This is for purposes of licensing; to license a tourist vehicle – it should not just be for imported vehicles which have already been designed for that purpose. It should also be for those vehicles that were brought as a category of vehicles but now have been remodelled for tourism purposes. I think that is what it says. 

To achieve that, you just need to take out the word “imported into the country” and then remodel it to read, “…means a motor vehicle that is specifically designed” - because the one modified locally is also now specifically designed - “and built for transportation of tourists”. It stops there. When it stops there, it takes care of everything. Can we adopt that amendment, chairperson? 

MR KAFEERO: Mr Chairman, I do accept that we adopt that amendment and we drop the words, “imported” and others.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

The Title 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The Title to the Bill was by error named clause 1, which is actually the Title of the Bill. I now put the question that the Title to this Bill stands as Title to this Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Traffic and Road Safety (Amendment) Bill, 2019” and passed it with amendments. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please read the full title of the Bill properly. 

MS KABATSI: “The Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1998 (Amendment) Bill, 2019” and passed with amendments.
 
MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE TRAFFIC AND ROAD SAFETY ACT, 1998 (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Traffic and Road Safety Act 1998 (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “Traffic and Road Safety Act 1998 (Amendment) Bill, 2019”, be read for the third time and do pass. I put the question to that motion.
(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE TRAFFIC AND ROAD SAFETY ACT 1998 (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations honourable minister. Congratulations chair, you have done a good job. (Applause) Congratulations honourable members, you have done a good job; one Bill down. Let us move on. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I stand on a point of procedure, while at the same time I would like to congratulate the House for the Bill we have just passed. 

By way of this point of procedure, I would like to bring it to your attention that this House passed the KCCA (Amendment) Act some time back and I have had opportunity to read the law that was gazetted and compare it with our Hansard. I found out that the gazetted law is quite different from what we passed here in Parliament. 

In particular, I would like to point out two issues; one is that never at any one time when we were debating the amendment of the KCCA Act did this House consider anything to do with the Metropolitan Police. However, in the gazetted law, there is a clause that talks about the Metropolitan Police and the same was brought into the amendment as one of the matters we handled in this House. 

The second issue is about the inclusion of the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority. It shall be recalled, Mr Speaker, that when this House sat to consider the KCCA (Amendment) Act, the House unanimously rejected the idea of the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority and recommended for a deletion of section 21 that talks about the same. 

When you look at the law that was assented to by the President and gazetted, it provides for the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority that is to be coordinated by the Kampala Minister. This is a great misrepresentation of this House and kills the spirit of this House when we are making the law. 

I have also noted that the law has a number of inconsistencies resulting from failure to amend some sections consequent to what we had done first. 

In particular, section 6(a) under the new law provides that the budget of Kampala and the divisions shall be made by the Lord Mayor and the division mayors and their executives and presented before the council. However, the same law retained section 14(b) that gives the same powers to the executive director. This is a contradiction and the provisions appear under the same law. 

Mr Speaker, I also need your guidance on the issue of implementation of the law. Under the old law, we had several offices for councillors representing professional bodies. The new law abolishes those offices. I would like to be guided on what this House intended to do with those elected leaders who, under the new law, must lose their offices yet they were elected some years back to represent professional bodies for five years at KCCA.

The certificate of financial implication that was presented here before this House prior to the presentation of the amendment Bill showed that we were not to incur any expense even when we introduced the new law. However, I am privy to the fact that the Minister of Kampala is moving to present a supplementary budget here requesting for money to pay the new office bearers totalling four billion shillings. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could you please leave that out? That is anticipation and I will not respond to that particular aspect. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, it is before the Committee of Presidential Affairs. It has already been presented there. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The way you presented it is as if you were suspecting. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, this matter is already before Parliament and I am not merely suspecting. The taxpayer in Kampala is set to pay four billion shillings for these changes yet we were told when we were working on the law that it would not cost us anything. 

Worse still, it is now being suggested that we pay the councillors who are going to lose office Shs 90 million each so that they go away.

Mr Speaker, paying elected leaders money as compensation for allowances lost, in my opinion, does not do away with the fact that the voters have been denied representation. So what are we planning to pay the voters who had expected to be represented by those councillors for five years? (Laughter)

There is also the issue of the election of the City Speaker and Division Speakers. The current office bearers ran for these offices well knowing that one of their duties was to chair council meetings. I wonder what is going to happen now that they are to lose some of those responsibilities to the new speakers. 

More so, I would like to draw the attention of this House to a letter dated 27 August 2019, from the Attorney-General to the Chairman of the Electoral Commission of Uganda. In this letter, the Attorney-General advised the Chairman of the Electoral Commission that the term of office of Mr Rwakoojo Sam cannot be affected by a law that was made after him getting into office; and that Mr Sam Rwakoojo would serve that term fully and then the new law would apply to him after his term. 

Now, I would like to know, if we are going to go by this advice, doesn’t this also apply to the councillors, Lord Mayor and division mayors who campaigned and were elected to their offices while at the same time that office holds the powers of a speaker?

Mr Speaker, according to instruction from the Minister for Kampala Capital City Authority, KCCA has been ordered to implement the new law. However, I think we need guidance on the matter I have raised here as a way of procedure before the same can be effectively implemented and I humbly seek your guidance, Mr Speaker. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Nambooze, for the issues you have raised. Let me start this way. Honourable members, as Speaker, I am bound by the wisdom of the House. When the House has taken a decision when I am presiding, it is its wisdom and I am bound to honour it. I cannot, as Speaker, depart from the decision of Parliament, which I preside over. 

The only authority which can review the decision of Parliament, which I am part of, would be the courts of law. If a person is aggrieved by a decision or law that has been enacted by this Parliament, the recourse would be from the courts of judicature. 

The first issue that was raised was that the provision that was enacted by this Parliament seems to be at variance with the text that was assented to by the President and has now become law. We always handle that under the Acts of Parliament Act, which makes provisions on how we do corrections. I am, therefore, instructing the Office of the General Counsel to review this; look at the Hansard and look at the text that the President assented to and if there are variances, we will then see how to handle them in a formal way. There are mechanisms for dealing with this.

On the issue of contradictions with provisions within the law itself, it will be another authority to review and highlight the contradictions and correct them from there because as Parliament, we passed the law and we did not see any contradiction. In our wisdom, that was perfect and so, it remains so until the court says, “No, this cannot be proper.” 

If that issue is on abolition of office, it is a known act in Government that an office can be abolished. We all know that offices can be abolished. We all know the case of the former East African Community – we had employees in Kenya and Tanzania and when those Presidents dissolved the East African Community, those offices stood abolished, yet they had occupants. The recourse to abolished offices is compensations. Once an office is abolished, the person occupying that office has a right to be given compensation. I guess that is why a figure of Shs 90 million is being suggested. It is procedurally correct to do so. 

If by an Act of Parliament or any other action the office stands abolished, the occupant of that office is entitled to compensation. 

The third issue is about the speakers. Those are new amendments that can be handled. If there are difficulties and people feel aggrieved by the implementation of the law, they go to court but they do not come here because, for us, we are done with that provision.

On the issue of the letter from the Attorney-General confirming that Mr Sam Rwakoojo continues as so, that case is distinguishable because Sam Rwakoojo’s office has not been abolished. That office is there and it has an occupant. They are only saying that since he was occupying that office, which remained operational but a law has been enacted that now makes certain restrictions on how long you can serve, the Attorney-General is simply saying it cannot affect him because he was already engaged for a particular term. It starts applying ahead. Therefore, that office has not been abolished. 

If that office had been abolished, the advice of the Attorney-General would have been different. Therefore, the issue of Mr Sam Rwakoojo cannot be compared or seen the same way as the offices that have been abolished. That is my guidance on this matter. 

On the issue of variance of the enactment by Parliament and the text that went to the President, that is what we are going to adopt to solve the problem and have it sorted out. On the issue of abolished offices, the rule is that you compensate the people who occupied those offices. Any other matter will be addressed as we go along.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I have listened to my neighbour, hon. Betty, the Shadow Minister for Kampala Capital City Authority, and I think the issue she has raised concerns all of us. My issue is, while we wait for all the work which is going to be done and we get official position on how we are going to deal with the matter, what happens at the moment? Can we agree that we stay any programme that was in place to stabilise the arrangement until we get the clarification on the issue? I am just seeking a clarification on the way forward.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The way forward is that as I leave this House this evening, we will call the director in charge of the legal department – they will pull out the Hansard, pull out the provision the President assented to, harmonise them and by tomorrow an action will be taken by letter or otherwise. Therefore, there is no interim measure that I can announce at the moment.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, mine is about the integrity of the House that you chair. We must guard the integrity. I agree with your statement of last time when a similar thing happened regarding the pension law. We should not allow the integrity of this House to be affected.

The officers that are responsible for scrutinising these things before they are sent to the President should follow what has been passed in this House. Mr Speaker, I was even reading on social media – this issues of the COSASE report over Bank of Uganda and dfcu bank – that there are attempts to get into Parliament to change the record, which I know is very difficult. The shareholders of dfcu raised some issues regarding the issue of no minutes.

Mr Speaker, you are a Member of the Commission and the Commissioners are in this House. I think we should dig into this. Where is this issue which affects the integrity of this House coming from? It is going to dent our integrity and people will not have trust in what we pass in this House. They will think people change things which we pass here.

If you are aggrieved with what we have passed here, there are remedies like you have said, Mr Speaker. Let them go to court to sort it out, not using underhand methods to change things before they reach the President. I don’t think these things are changed in State House. They are changed from here. The people who are responsible in this House should be put to task. This is not the first time – it is the second or the third time. The Commission should take a decision on this. We want to protect the integrity of this House. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, under the Acts of Parliament Act, State House or Office of the President have no authority to even change anything because it is the text that is sent from Parliament that the President signs and returns to Parliament. It is not a new text; it is the text in the format sent by the Clerk that comes back to Parliament.

If I had an assented copy of a Bill, I would show you. It is a very clear print and all the provisions of the law. The Clerk’s signature is there; everybody’s signature is there. Therefore, it cannot be a mistake from transmission. It cannot be a transmission problem.

Two; sometimes, the way we process laws here confuses the people extracting the records. That is why I am very strict. That is why I am very skeptical about these amendments that keep blowing up any moment and we have not processed them. Sometimes, you read the Hansard but you do not know what Parliament said because of that confusion. 

In the middle of Committee Stage, we start a fresh debate and sometimes, you do not even take a decision. When it comes to extracting them, even if you were an angel, you would make that mistake. We create some difficulties ourselves in the way we process these matters. 

We can pass blame to the technical people who extract these records but sometimes, we might have to blame ourselves. I have seen areas where there are challenges and I have had to come back to see how we can correct them, so that they do not come out bad.

It is not a blame matter; it is simply a matter of saying that where they have occurred, they should be corrected because it does not paint Parliament well. If it keeps repeating, then it becomes a habit that “they changed things” but I do not think we have reached that stage where we can be accused of altering our own decisions or that.

Therefore, let us keep it that errors can come at any time but once they have come, it can be corrected. That is the point I have made. Can it be corrected? Yes, it can be corrected. We should take that line. Is that okay?

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week, the Leader of the Opposition raised a matter on this Floor regarding the attempted assassination of hon. Atkins Katusabe and the theft of his money.

The presiding Speaker ruled that the Minister of Internal Affairs would update Parliament regarding one of the issues where there was a contestation as to whether the honourable member had made a statement to police or not. The honourable member indicated that he had made a statement at the police headquarters.

Unfortunately, the day when the minister was supposed to update this Parliament was Thursday last week. Yesterday, it did not happen. Last Thursday, it did not happen. I would like to seek your indulgence regarding that because the honourable member is under threat.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Internal Affairs in the House? Have you seen him?

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, that is for you to determine. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you know the Minister of Internal Affairs? (Laughter) Honourable member, since the minister is here, we will give him an opportunity to help me with this procedural matter - I am still ruling on this matter. The minister is giving me information. We are proceeding very well now. I had finished this one.

4.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true, as my colleague has stated that I was supposed to make a statement on Thursday and yesterday but I was not on the Order Paper. My honourable colleague, the Minister of State for Energy and Mineral Development, has been reminding me about that matter and we had a very extensive discussion as of yesterday. (Laughter)

The facts are that there are three files which were opened -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, how does the Minister of State for Energy and Mineral Development become involved in these matters? (Laughter) Why are you involving the Minister of State for Energy and Mineral Development in a security matter that involved a member of this House?

MR KANIA OBIGA: I do not know, Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Moreover, he even comes from Kasese.

MR KANIA OBIGA: Mr Speaker, I do not know but as an honourable member of this Parliament – just like my colleague who has raised it now – they are all interested in the matter and I believe correctly it is a national matter. So, I have no problem not finding out why she is but she is an honourable member; she has a right. That is my judgement, Mr Speaker.

The facts of the matter are that the issue was whether files had been opened by the police regarding this matter and whether our colleague, hon. Katusabe had made statements on those files. I can confirm that three files have been opened. On 14th, there was a file opened in Kasese by the police, following the alleged illegal rally.

By yesterday, as I stated previously –(Interruption)

MS BETTY AOL: Mr Speaker, this issue is about life and death and aggravated robbery. It looks like the honourable minister simply wants to undermine the issue by saying that the files were opened for illegal rallies. Is he in order when this issue was brought up here clearly?

The minister also stands to apologise when he said that no file was opened in the whole nation and that there is nowhere in the whole of Uganda where this case was opened; yet the case was opened. Why would he really trivialise this issue?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was actually looking forward to hearing what he was going to say. He said three files have been opened. The first one was in Kasese in relation to some illegal rallies or something. I was waiting for the second and third. I wish you had waited also with me, so that if he did not touch on anything, then we would have all descended on him. However, now I do not know how to rule on this matter.

Honourable minister, please finish what you were saying? 

MR KANIA OBIGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your ruling. I am sure the honourable Leader of the Opposition knows that in all criminal matters until it is proved, it is always put as an allegation. That is why I have used the word “alleged”. That is how the file reads. The easier file – it is police language of investigation, so that nobody is presumed guilty until proved so. There was a file – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let us first listen to the minister. 

MR KANIA OBIGA: There was a file opened at a sub-county where the alleged illegal rally happened; there is a police station and a file was opened by the police to investigate that illegal rally. Our colleague, hon. Katusabe, has made no statement on the matter of that file. Then the second file was opened in Bwera by the CID of Kasese District. Again, our honourable colleague has not made a statement on that matter. 

However, on 20th, hon. Katusabe made a statement at the CID Headquarters, Kibuli. It is the duty of the police to carry out investigations along those files, combine them and send them to DPP for legal advice as to how to proceed. 

The matters being investigated on those files are three: The first one is the issue of the alleged illegal rally. The second one that took place in Bwera is the alleged loss of over $ 90,000 dollars. The last one is the combination of those two. 

As I talk today, the CID has proceeded to Kasese to combine the three files so that they can seek the advice of the DPP. That is the status. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not like repeating myself very often. I said earlier that you do not access the microphones before you have been allowed to speak because when you talk on the microphones, you confuse the people who are recording and transcribing the records. One person is speaking on the Floor and then you are also speaking on your own. It is not correct.

Please, do not access the microphone before you have been allowed so that the people taking the records are not confused by what they are hearing. Microphones can only be held by the Speaker and a member holding the Floor and no one else. If you have to raise a point of order, we have ears. We can hear even off the microphone. You had a point of procedure and I could hear. I have not yet been certified deaf. (Laughter)

Madam Leader of the Opposition, on what point do you stand because you have to stand on an issue? So, what is the matter? I was still going to rule on the information that he has given me. You had earlier also raised a procedure and a point of order, which I have not yet ruled on. 

The point of order that you raised was to find out whether the minister was in order to minimise this matter by using certain words. I think without co-operation, we can achieve very little. Hon. Katusabe has certainly been shaken by certain things and we are concerned as Members of Parliament. 

We addressed the concerns, as Parliament, to the Minister of Internal Affairs who is also our own. What has he been able to do to show that he cares about the security and wellbeing of Members of Parliament? He has stated that so far, three files have been opened in Bwera, another file in a place which name he could not remember and the last one at the CID Headquarters where hon. Katusabe had also made a statement. 

Therefore, is the minister taking this matter seriously? In my opinion, I think so because he is not the investigator. He has, in his statement, said other people are doing the investigations. 

What I would like to suggest is, honourable minister, to remove the anxiety from the House, compile everything on those things, see their stages and come and brief the House on how far you have gone with the matter. It would help us calm down. This matter gets a lot of members’ concerns when it happens like this. 

MS KANIA OBIGA: Mr Speaker, you are absolutely right. I have said that as I talk now, the CID officials at the highest possible levels from the headquarters in Kibuli are on their way to Kasese to combine the three files and bring this matter to the attention of the DPP for his legal opinion and to advise on how to proceed. 

It is not the police in Kasese or Bwera or the sub-county where our colleague was attacked who are investigating. The CID headquarters is the best investigative organ Government can take matters to. I would ask for confidence in this institution. It is true that individuals have made mistakes but the institution remains and they are carrying out the best investigations they can.

I promise you that when we get the opinion from the DPP, we will advise Parliament on how the DPP thinks we should proceed. As for the substances which are found in the investigations, since this is a criminal investigation matter, I am not at liberty to say anything. Thank you. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on two issues: The first one is that the minister has not updated this House on actions and all steps that have been taken on the officers who were mentioned in the Leader of the Opposition’s statement. Secondly, the minister has also not withdrawn his earlier statement where he had insinuated that hon. Katusabe had not made any statement in any of the police stations and yet today, he alluded to the fact that hon. Katusabe had made a statement. 

Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the minister to withdraw the statement where he said hon. Katusabe had not made a statement in any of the police stations?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on clarification and it is the minister to give that clarification.

MR KANIA OBIGA: It is absolutely correct that when I made my last statement on that matter, I said that to the best of my knowledge at the time, hon. Katusabe had not made any statement on that matter. I got briefed on Tuesday morning before I came to Parliament by none other than the IGP that hon. Katusabe had not made a statement. As a result, I could not say anything else. However, at his instructions which he had earlier given, hon. Katusabe had actually reported at Kibuli the day before and the whole day, he had actually made a statement.

Therefore, it is only logical that I said what I knew at that time; and it is correct that as of that time the statement factual was wrong but to my knowledge it was correct because that is what I knew. Thank you. (Laughter) 

MS NANTABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In that same line where a minister comes to the Floor of Parliament and denies that the honourable Member of Parliament had not made a statement and yet he had made it - I rise on this matter because it happened to me. When I had made a statement and Ms Akullo the CID boss had picked it, police continued insisting that I had not made a statement.

Mr Speaker, I, therefore, seek to be guided on how we should proceed in such a matter where police, the investigative arm is involved in the very crimes they are supposed to investigate. How do we proceed when a police officer who pointed a gun at the member of Parliament and up to not has not even been arrested - even when the Member of Parliament came on the Floor of Parliament and read the names of these polices officers and to date, they have not been arrested, made statements and they are the ones supposed to investigate the very same crimes they are involved in?

The same thing applies to my case and I still have to appeal to the same police to investigate where it killed a suspect. Therefore, how do we proceed with cases where police is involved in crimes they are supposed to investigate when the law provides that they will still remain the investigative arm of Government?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have mechanism within the police to handle errant officers in the police? Or are they also subject to criminal or other procedures?

MR KANIA OBIGA: We do. Mr Speaker, there was an allegation as I said by hon. Katusabe - I am informed but I have not read the file in Kasese and I am not the one to read it - that the policemen who were involved have made a counter statement which is totally different from what hon. Katusabe said here.

Therefore, it means that there are now two statements; one by hon. Katusabe alleging what happened and there is another by the police officers who were involved totally denying. The next course of action will arise out of the investigations that have been carried by the CID from Kibuli.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First and foremost, I would like to help the minister, I am an interested party in this matter -(Applause) – and you all know why -(Laughter.)

Mr Speaker, this incident took place at Karukumiza in Karambi Sub County –(Interruption)

MS KANIA OBIGA: The procedural matter I am raising is, the honourable minister has declared her interest half way. I think it should be on record to say what that interest is so that we can judge the statements she makes here in accordance with that statement. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the honourable minister stated that “I am interested in this matter and you know the reason why.” Therefore, she was operating under the presumption that it is common knowledge.

However, if you are not aware, then you can ask her privately -(Laughter)

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. It beats anyone’s understanding that a Member of Parliament undergoes what he underwent. And the police officers whom he said were numbering to about 15 are all still at the venue at that station or scene where this incident took place.

Mr Speaker, allow me to inform the House that some of the people, the next day, police went to look for them in this particular place. They had to run for their life because they were already scared that if that can happen to their Member of Parliament what about them? Therefore, they took off. 

Mr Speaker, the issue I would like to put here is that I have seen even in my village when even a cow is stolen, and the owner of the cow goes to complain –(Interjection)- I come from Amagoro village. However, somebody goes and complains to the police and the suspect is known, the next day, the police comes for that suspect. However, in this case, how can you investigate the people when they are still around the same place? 

Why can’t these people be withdrawn from this place? It has happened before; therefore, why can’t this process take place so that the people there are free to give their side of the story; those who witnessed this incident? You cannot expect a Member of Parliament to come to the Floor of this House to peddle lies especially on such a life threatening matter.

Mr Speaker, allow me to state as the honourable member said here; was traumatised and he wanted to take actions that very night when that incident happened because I was with him on phone while out of the country. He called to inform me that he had concluded the burial that was at around 5.00p.m. then I told him not to travel because I normally discourage people from travelling long distance at night.

He told me, “Let me pass by my aunt’s place.” He did not mention anything like he had a rally because he normally tells me his programmes and I am surprised now when somebody says he had a rally. Really, Mr Speaker, we all know that as Members of Parliament- I personally, my vehicle is known by my constituents. The moment they see my car from a distance, they jump on the road and say, “Minister stop”.

And when I stop, they come and surround it. Do you call that a rally? “Come out and greet us”, this is exactly what happened. He got out of the car, greeted them and they told him, “You have seen our roads. We are happy that you have passed on our bad road. Secondly, see the darkness we are in.” And he told them, “I have heard but it is late. Let me move I will address those issues.” He entered the vehicle and shortly, a few metres, people surrounded his car and told him to get out of the vehicle. Can you imagine?

He then got out his identity card and said, “I am a Member of Parliament” and they said, “We do not want to know; sit down”. He refused to sit down and said, “Can you identify yourselves?” The other side said, “We can’t identify ourselves. Sit down or else we shoot you.” 

They cocked the gun and the other people – because he was with three other people in the vehicle – they pleaded with him because they had sat on the ground. He squatted. They told him, “We said you should sit. Don’t squat.”

When he sat down, they asked him to remove his shoes. They threw the shoes a distance away.  (Interjections) Yes, this was the incident. The member of Parliament is traumatised up to now.

Mr Speaker, I would like to state that police has taken action against other suspects by arresting them. Why can’t these people - police are supposed to keep law and order. If a matter like this is raised, why can’t they also be arrested and the investigations go on? Alternatively, should they be removed from stations where they are until investigations are completed?  Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable minister, I am talking about the Minister for Internal Affairs. This matter as you can see now involves both Members of the back and the front bench. We do not want to say too much.

Can you take steps that can make us see that real action is being taken? Can you do that for us to take out this tension?

Mr obiga: Mr Speaker, I will ask the police to speed up the actions they are taking. At the same time, I will ask people, like my honourable colleague, who have such evidence to give it to police. 

I cannot do much with that evidence on the Floor of Parliament. (Interjections) This is part of the evidence, which the police will need in their investigations. I cannot do beyond that.  Thank you.

Mr okupa:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The guidance you have given the minister is the same as what was given to him last week. We said to him, “Can you go and reconcile these contradictions with the honourable colleague?”

Today, I expected the minister to come with a written statement on what he had reconciled because there were contradictions. I am surprised that when he came, there was no statement. The issues that have been re-echoed by hon. Opendi were stated by hon. Katusabe.

Is the minister procedurally right to come and state on the Floor that what hon. Opendi has said should have been reported and recorded as statements and yet, hon. Katusabe did it in a statement as well as in this House? Is he right to proceed that way when all these facts were laid bare in this House? 

We must take this matter seriously. You have heard how passionately the honourable colleague has spoken about this issue. You are together on the front bench. If it were you, how would you feel where you have vested interest but truth is not said?

She said that the honourable member is traumatised. She could equally be. I do not say much. You know what trauma can cause among people. Therefore, the minister should be very serious regarding these matters. 

Is here procedurally right to state the obvious, which had already been stated? We had expected the minister to come with a statement indicating that he has reconciled with hon. Katusabe. 

They should name the officer in charge of Bwera, they talked of the District Police Commander (DPC) and the Regional Police Commander (RPC). These are the officers that were named in the statement. We would like to know what action has been taken. Are they on suspension?

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, I think we are strong enough to be self-critical. At the same time, by our words and actions, we can make a very important issue turning to something like a joke. This is not a joke. This matter cannot be solved by procedure.
 
Events have happened. They tend towards a criminal nature. There are procedures for dealing with that. Statements made in Parliament are not pieces of evidence within the meaning of the evidence law.

All the minister is saying is that whoever has information, the correct address for giving the exact evidence that will help police investigation is to give it to the police. We are not going to extract the Hansard and say, “Here is what was said in Parliament.”

Hon. Katusabe made a statement. I was not here but I am told he gave quite an eloquent speech complete with how he felt about the whole situation. What he said here cannot help anybody in court on a criminal matter.

All that the minister is saying is that if we have any evidence that can help facilitate this inquiry, let us give it to the right authorities so that they can conclude this matter quickly and come back.

He is a political supervisor of the institutions that are in charge of investigations. What he extracts from that and is of relevance to Parliament, he will come back and brief Parliament. As of now, he does not have the information.

If he does not have the information, are we going to squeeze it out of him? I think this matter is serious and we should show that it is. I would like to know whether the Member who raised this matter is satisfied with what has been stated and how we can help police further with this investigation.

4.54
Mr William nzoghu (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I must clearly say that I am satisfied with your guidance but not with the statement that the honourable minister has made. It is lacking in content and in what the Speaker guided that he comes and presents that information.


He is here today. The honourable member gained momentum when he visited the Speaker and narrated what had happened to him but he was almost collapsing. I thought that the honourable minister, considering his experience, age and the portfolio that he holds, should be honest and come and tell this Parliament the right thing. 

Mr Speaker, I confirm to you that I am not satisfied with what he has said. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you pick whatever is available today and come back tomorrow to advise us? 

MR OBIGA: Yes, Mr Speaker. I made a promise here that as soon as I get useful information, I will brief Parliament. It must be useful information from the source. I cannot manufacture information.

In fact, I do not know why colleagues think we have not paid maximum attention to this matter. Let me put it clearly that soon after the debate the other day, we interacted with hon. Katusabe. The following day, we interacted with him. Again, on Monday in Cabinet and yesterday, we interacted with some of the people who are interested in this matter. We are giving it all the due attention.

Therefore, I do not see why those who are not bereaved are mourning louder. Hon. Katusabe’s attitude in this matter is patience and his advice to me and to us all was that these CID officers should go and investigate the matter as soon as possible. This is it. (Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, when matters of police criminality are raised, some of us tend to just sit and watch because we seem to think and believe that there are specific individuals across the House who are being targeted because of their political beliefs and ideology. This brutality that is criminal in nature affects a wide spectrum of individuals, not only those who are connected to the victims but Ugandans at large. 

Therefore, is it in order for the minister to say that members raising these matters are not aggrieved when it does not only involve a colleague in the House but also the lives and the people associated by blood relationship or otherwise? Is the minister in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think what he said was that those who are not aggrieved are now acting with more anger than those who are aggrieved. In summary, that is what he said. 

I listened to hon. Opendi. She is aggrieved and she did not act as if she was okay. Honourable minister, that statement may not have come out well because the honourable member seated next to you was here and did not sound very satisfied. Probably, you need further negotiations with us so that, that statement can stand. However, for the moment, that statement was not correct. 

MR OBIGA: I withdraw that statement, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MR OBIGA: Maybe, I overshot but all that I was trying to say is that Members were saying we should have already reconciled the contradictions. I was merely trying to demonstrate that we have been in the process and involving my colleague, hon. Katusabe. That is all I was saying. If I overshot it, definitely I withdraw it with a big apology. I am sorry. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Ordinarily, criminal cases are not reported in this House. By the time we come here and plead to you in plenary, it means we are turning to you as our parent because there is a problem somewhere. Your office, therefore, remains the point of last hope.

When a member of Parliament turns up here and talks about his security - we all know that when you report a case - for example, this case can be a suspected case of robbery – the first thing the police will do is to arrest the suspects. However, in this particular matter, you hear that – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on a point of procedure, just to remind you. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Yes, Mr Speaker, I am reminded. What I am asking is, should there be a time when your Members come here and petition this House in vain? Isn’t it procedurally right for us to use the systems of this House and the powers of your honourable office to see that this matter, as well as that concerning hon. Nantaba, is resolved? Isn’t it okay for us to see that our colleagues access justice through this Parliament? 

Mr Speaker, is Parliament so incapacitated that it has no provision where colleagues, who are facing life threatening situations, can be referred for redress? I think these people came to you after knowing that they could not get justice through the police and as you can see, the minister is trying, as much as possible, to turn a criminal matter into something political. When we continuously demand for an answer from a politician about fellow politicians, we might fail to get the right remedy for this matter. 

I, therefore, wish to request that your office looks at the provisions that govern this House to see how our colleagues can be assisted. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Nambooze. You said by the time a member of Parliament comes here and complains or raises concerns, he does that because that person is a Member of Parliament. If that person was not a Member of Parliament, he would not come here. The reason a member of Parliament comes here to raise matters that affect him is because he is a member of Parliament. There is no other reason. Even if it was being handled well outside there, if he felt like he should inform the House, he would still do so because that person is a member of Parliament. 

Parliament does not have any other procedure for handling criminal matters. I have not come across that law yet but now that you have informed me, I am going to look for it. I am going to look for a law that empowers Parliament to handle criminal matters and probably give a ruling in future. 

If I am to handle this matter strictly by parliamentary Rules and Procedure, I would have referred the matter to a committee or I would open up a debate and have a decision taken; I would put a question to it.

The issue is, as a Speaker, do I have any authority, under the Constitution or any other law to use to do certain things like cause arrest, use force or something? I do not have it. 

The protection I accord to Members is within what I accord Members. You cannot arrest my Member without notification to me. If a Member is engaged in a civil matter and you are going to arrest him, you notify me and we assign them. If you want my Member to come and make a statement, you do not just get a Member to go and make a statement. You write to us as the leaders of this House and we sanction the warrants. 

What we always do is to call the Member and say, “we have this matter; please, report and record a statement and keep us in the loop of what is going on.” 

The other excessive acts that happened, that is what they are. Actions outside the law will always remain actions outside the law and we cannot all act outside the law. We want to see, as much as possible, that we restrict ourselves to the powers that the law accords us and we proceed by that.

Is it proper, for example, for a police officer to walk in here and arrest a Member? Or walk into the precincts of Parliament to arrest a Member? If that happened, that police officer would be in trouble. That police officer, with a warrant or no warrant, would be in deep trouble. 

Of course, there are violations, sometimes aided by us and sometimes we are not part of it. All I am saying is that for all the times that we act, let us act within the law. Like that, the law will always protect us, if we act outside the law, it is very difficult for the law to come and cover us. 

The case of hon. Katusabe has been reported and is being handled. What else can Parliament do? Can we now appoint a committee to go and do the investigations ourselves? Can we? 

We can only rely on the political supervisor of that institution that is doing the investigation to come back to us to say, “this is what is going on.” A Member was mistreated, what is happening with the officers who mistreated him? That is all we can do. 

I cannot sit in my car and drive to wherever they are to ask what they have done. That would not be my role and even if you gave me that role, I do not think I would have favours executing it because personally, I still think that not all police officers in this country are bad. Many of them still respect the law and we can count on those who still respect the law to do the right thing because the right thing will always help us. 

Let us leave this matter here. Tomorrow, the minister is going to consult, look at where it is and just give us a two minute statement of what has happened so far because it came from a concern raised by the Member for Busongora North and he responded to it off cuff but tomorrow, he will come with a one or two pager to brief us on how far these matters have gone and then, we can take note and proceed. 

5.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, I am responding to a Member from Kasilo who was wondering what Ministry of Health is doing in as far as the Coronavirus outbreak in China is concerned. I have come up with a statement. 

This is not the only statement I have, Mr Speaker. I have three and I would like – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed 

MS NABBANJA: The Ministry of Health has noted the declaration of a confirmed outbreak of novel Coronavirus by the National Health Commission of the People’s Republic of China and the World Health Organisation in the city of Wahun, in the Hubei Province. 

As of 28 January 2020, a total of 4,593 confirmed cases with 106 deaths bad been reported in China and another 56 confirmed cases reported in 14 countries outside China including Japan (six), Republic of Korea (four) Vietnam (two), Singapore (seven), Australia (five), Malaysia (four), Cambodia (one), Thailand (14), Nepal (one), Sri Lanka (one), USA (five), Canada (two), France (three) Germany (one).

Mr Speaker, currently, there is no confirmed or suspected case of 2019 Coronavirus in Uganda.

However, it is important to note that there is a substantial number of passengers who travel between Uganda and China as well as the other affected countries for various reasons. Therefore, it is important that health workers and the general public are keen and more vigilant in quickly identifying suspected cases of 2019 Coronairus by enhancing surveillance and reporting. This is aimed at preventing entry and spread of the deadly virus into the country.

The Ministry of Health, working with partners has already undertaken the following measures;

    1. The national taskforce has been activated to coordinate the preparedness and response activity
    2. Intensified surveillance for suspected cases at the points of entry into the country starting with Entebbe International Airport. Gradually, we shall move to other border points. 
    3. The team at Entebbe International Airport are conducting screening for Corona Virus
    4. The ministry is working with civil aviation and has already undertaken sensitisation of all airport staff on the risk of the spread of the new Corona Virus 2019 to Uganda, the signs and symptoms and how to prevent the disease.
    5. We have ensured there is heightened infection prevention and practices. We have increased the number of hand washing points at the airport. 
    6. We have developed a response plan for preparedness. Here, I mean the surveillance and laboratory, coordination and we are also looking for logistics and case management. We are sensitising the public about the same.
    7. We have provided basic information to the public and health workers on the prevention of transmission of the new scourge. 
    8. We have designated Entebbe and Naguru hospitals as centres for case management.
    9. The Chinese Ambassador organised a meeting at the embassy where leadership groups were formed to monitor their people in the country. The Ministry of Health met the Chinese medical team in Uganda, which team conveyed their plans to the ministry’s team. The interventions so far on their side include:

    i) Notice is given to their community to delay their return to Uganda until the situation is under control and for those in Uganda not to travel to China.
    ii) Those who come to stay, are put in self-isolation for at least two weeks.
    iii) No mass gatherings.
    iv) Personal hygiene encouraged.

In the interim, health workers at all health facilities across the country and points of entry have been guided on how to:

    i) Identify, isolate, investigate and care for the suspected persons early.
    ii) Notify the next reporting level in line with national disease notification guidelines or the public health emergency operation centres.
    iii) Employ the standard infection, prevention and control measures to avoid contracting the disease.

About the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV)

Mr Speaker, allow me to give a synopsis of the Coronavirus. The Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that cause illness, ranging from the common cold to more severe diseases such as Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS-CoV) and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS-CoV).

A novel coronavirus is a new strain that has not been previously identified in humans. This new virus was temporarily named “2019-nCoV”.

Coronaviruses are zoonotic, meaning they are transmitted between animals and people. Detailed investigations found that SARS was transmitted from Civet cats to humans and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome from dromedary camels to humans. Several known Coronavirus are circulating in animals that have not yet infected humans. It is presently not clear which animal transmitted the virus and how.

Common signs of infection include respiratory symptoms, fever, cough, shortness of breath and breathing difficulties. In more severe cases, infection can cause pneumonia, severe acute respiratory syndrome, kidney failure and even death.

Allow me present an important message to the general public. The standard recommendations to prevent infection spread include:

    i) Frequently clean hands by using alcohol-based hand rub or soap and water.
    ii) When coughing and sneezing, cover your mouth and nose with a flexed elbow or tissue. Throw tissue safely away immediately into a bin and wash hands.
    iii) Thoroughly cook the meat and eggs before consumption.
    iv) Avoid crowded areas and hand-shaking.
    v) Avoid close contact with anyone showing symptoms of respiratory illness, such as coughing and sneezing.
    vi) If you have fever, cough and difficulty in breathing, seek medical care early and share previous travel history with your healthcare provider.
    vii) When visiting live markets in the countries currently experiencing cases of novel coronavirus, avoid direct unprotected contact with live animals and surfaces in contact with animals. 
    viii) Those in affected cities should delay their return to Uganda until the situation is under control and for those planning to travel to those affected cities should delay their travel. The People’s Republic of China has since closed public transport in affected cities.

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, an inter-ministerial committee on Coronavirus that is chaired by the Minister of Health has been constituted by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to coordinate all preparedness activities aimed at preventing the spread of the infection into the country.

The Ministry of Health further appeals to the general public to remain calm and report any suspicious cases to the nearest health facility or call our toll free lines: 0800-203-033 and 0800-100-066.

I beg to submit, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. This matter was raised by the Member for Bubulo East yesterday and you have a made a quick response to it, which is the spirit of how we should handle these urgent matters. This is truly an urgent matter and I am delighted to hear the mechanisms you have put in place to deal with it. 

Honourable members, would you like to have brief comments, which would take about 10 minutes? Let us start from the Member for Busia District.

5.23
MS JANE NABULINDO (Independent, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. Honourable minister, this is my request: I come from the border and we have many Chinese who are constructing the Mayuge-Namayingo-Busia Border Road. We also have the Wagagai constructing a gold factory in Busia. Their bosses travel almost on a weekly basis through Kenya to China. 

I did not hear you mention about equipping the hospitals of border areas like Busia. Maybe, even that alcohol ointment or liquid for cleaning hands could be placed at the border. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Tororo? I am only having border people for now. If you are in-country, please, forget for now. (Laughter)

5.24
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the minister for the statement. However, like my colleague has said, border areas are very sensitive. For Tororo and Malaba to be specific, we receive about 2,000 trucks crossing into the country on a daily basis. These trucks have many occupants who move in them as they come.

Whereas we are targeting China, we have also heard that many people who have come from China have gone to different countries. How I wish the minister would also take precaution, not only in Entebbe but also take measures immediately to take care of our borders, even if we start with washing of hands.

Borders are very busy places, especially Malaba with movement of different people in and out. Therefore, let these measures be rolled out even to those places. In addition; with the influx of many people who pass through Malaba, I have time and again requested that let us have Malaba Health Centre IV upgraded to hospital status.

Mr Speaker, this is a very busy place that needs to be prepared for any eventuality at any one single point in time. They should take this opportunity to prepare for other eventualities in the near future. Thank you.

5.25
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda County North, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you may be aware, the Chinese holiday started before this Coronavirus spread. Very many Chinese contractors in Uganda had already left this country to go to China for their holiday, which lasts around one month and extends up to around 6 February.

This means most of the members of the Chinese community who were supposed to be in Uganda are coming back for their jobs. This means we have to be very serious and on the lookout at our borders and also put in place measures to ensure that these contracts going on and jobs, which they are doing are not hampered because of this. (Interruption)

MR SEMATIMBA: Thank you very much for giving way. Mr Speaker, the way every other country is dealing with the Coronavirus right now is that lately, this particular one does not seem to have symptoms that easily tell you that someone is suffering from it or is carrying it.

What every country is doing right now is they are putting together quarantine areas. Anyone who is coming in from an area suspected, especially Wuhan, is put into quarantine for 14 days. In fact, what America, Britain, France and other countries are doing is they are picking up their own citizens in advance, for the very purpose of quarantining them first, before they are led out.

It is not just washing hands but we really need to make sure that for those people that are coming in like the Chinese that had gone for holiday, we need to put them under quarantine. I thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

5.27
MR DENIS OGUZU LEE (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I come from a constituency that borders Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). I know our border with DRC is very porous and I am indeed concerned. The minister said they have reactivated the emergency response systems across the country and all border posts are already proactively engaging in screening.

Yesterday, I passed through one of the border posts and there was no such activity taking place at that border post. I would like to know how accurate the information you are giving us is. Have you been able to triangulate these facts or you have simply brought them here as reported to you?

3.29
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her statement. Among the measures the minister read out, I did not hear what measures Government is taking to rescue Ugandans who are in China. We have students, business people and even kyeeyo people in China. Other countries are trying to see how they can be protected and evacuated. I did not hear her mention about that.

Secondly, on the measure to quarantine all those who are arriving, especially from China, for two weeks, I would rather they are stopped from travelling to come back at the moment. Let them wait there and remain there -(Laughter)– until such a time when this disease is controlled. At whose expense are you going to keep them here for two weeks? Not on Uganda tax payers’ money. Let them remain there before they come.

Lastly, honourable minister, the measures you said are at the borders should be really reinforced and the people manning those borders visibly facilitated, so that they know we are living in eminent present danger with this terrible virus. I thank you very much.

MS SEKINDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to also thank the minister for the good report. However, when she mentioned the countries, which are being affected by the virus, I did not hear the minister mentioning our neighbour Kenya. 

On one of the radio stations, they mentioned and in fact, indicated that one person has tested positive in Kenya. I do not know whether the minister is aware of that.

5.31
MR JOHN BAPTIST LOKII (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think it is in order for us as Ugandans to put all the measures in place to ensure that Ugandans are protected. When the minister was highlighting the various measures that should be instituted to try and prevent the disease, I did not hear measures that are geared towards handling the cargo or goods that are being brought from China.

We are aware that China is a big trade partner with Uganda. Therefore, there is a lot of cargo coming by water and even by road through the ports of Mombasa in the Indian Ocean. You are only highlighting other measures but you have forgotten that the Corona virus can be transmitted directly and indirectly through contaminated goods and equipment. 

Therefore, I would like the minister to clarify on that because there are goods coming from China into East Africa.

5.33
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement and for the screening efforts that the ministry has stepped up, in screening at the airports and other entry points like borders.

However, from the report of the World Health Organisation, it is clear that this Corona virus originated from animals, including birds. I hail from a region, which has Mt Elgon National Park. It is possible that birds flying from China could easily come and interact with birds here in Uganda and cause the spread of this virus because it is contracted by human beings, animals and birds. 

Therefore, I would like to know the measures, which the ministry has put in place or if they have forgotten because in this statement, they have not mentioned  this and yet, it could be a potential source of the virus finding its way into Uganda. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In that case, we have to also quarantine the birds. (Laughter)

5.34
MR FRED TUMUHEIRWE (FDC, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rujumbura County borders DRC at Lake Edward and when DRC is attacked by diseases like Cholera and Ebola, the diseases can also come into Uganda through the lake. There is no border post to Congo from that point but there are interactions. What measures will be put in places without official border posts where people of the two countries interact?

5.35
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the minister for bringing this statement. 

I am also a border person because Ayivu County borders DRC. We also have Chinese who have been doing some construction works in the district and many times, they send locals to bring some wild animals and birds for their consumption.

Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the House that our people are fond of eating some of these wild animals including birds. It is at this point that I would like to implore the minister - as she has said that they have established an inter-ministerial committee to manage this situation –it would be important for them to also come out with a clear message to warn the public about consuming wild birds and reptiles. 

If the virus is associated with some of these – because from social media, some of the pictures that have been shown are of these common animals. Therefore, if the virus has been associated with wild animals, I am sure that even here, the virus could be harboured by the wild birds and reptiles. 

Therefore, it is important that the inter-ministerial committee takes into account some of these issues so that the public is forewarned to avoid falling victims. We might be thinking of China when –(Member timed out.)

5.37
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for this report. It is good that somebody mentioned that there is a case in Kenya and it seems that the minister’s focus was at the airport. That needs to be emphasised.

Other than that, adequate preparation calls for resources. It is important for us, at this point, to know what resources are available for this kind of preparation. If we do not have the resources, we will be lamenting without the means to deal with the problem.

Otherwise, Coronavirus, as far as I know, is indicated to be a very deadly virus. If a big country like China is failing to fight it, with the lack of water in this country and the poor hygiene, if this virus comes here, it will be a real disaster. We need to prepare enough. If we need to put in money, we need to do it in time. Thank you. 

5.39
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to join in thanking the minister for being prompt. This is what we normally like. 

Honourable minister, you made mention of some two hospitals that are to cater for this problem in case it comes. What about the border places in case this problem is identified there? We should have hospitals identified at the border points to deal with these cases.

Mr Speaker, I am not a border Member of Parliament but Karuma Dam is in my district where many Chinese are working. I am wondering whether you are also sensitising our people in case some of them come into contact with them. Moreover, we have children who are half Chinese. I would like you to consider places like that.  

Lastly, honourable minister, you talked about the inter-ministerial committee but you heard that even in Kenya, which is next door here, one person has been identified to be positive. I do not know whether you also have some interaction with your fellow ministers from Kenya so that you share information about something of this nature. Thank you.

5.40
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the minister for the timely report and to also congratulate her upon the elevation to that office of higher responsibility. 

My concern is about the way Uganda warns her citizens about things like this. You see, Ugandans have not been told if it is okay for one to go to Rwanda or not despite the fact that the Rwandese have been told not to come here. The great America has issued a warning to all its citizens within and without America not to travel to China unless the journey is very essential. 

I would like to know for sure what message the Ugandan Government has for our people.  Mr Speaker, our traders who associate with KACITA regularly travel to China. I would like to know from the minister if there is any plan to work with KACITA to make sure that we get to know those people who are going and if it is very necessary that these people should travel for trade or they should wait for some time. 

When you read on the news channels, you would find that China has so far locked –(Member timed out.)

5.42
MS ROSE AYAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I equally would like to thank the minister for the statement in relation to the coronavirus infection. I would like to bring to the attention of this House that usually, Uganda is a reactionary country. When there is an issue of this nature, we react very fast but when the challenges or threats are gone, we go back to business as usual.

A case in point is our border especially Busia. There is no office for checking for health related issues while on the Kenyan side, there is a check point for health related issues. We do not have any doctor there and there is no equipment. This is a serious issue because Busia and other related towns are entry points from Mombasa through Nairobi to Uganda.

Now that we have a threat in Kenya, we should take it as a serious problem; we should not be reactionary. We should have a fully-fledged office at all these border points so that when people are crossing into Uganda, they are always checked. We should not only do it when we have a threat. Thank you.

5.44
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for her statement. When I heard her talking about crowded areas, I was shocked because when you look at the level at which Ugandans socialise, if the virus comes, it will wipe away very many.

Even when you look at our House here in Parliament, when it is well composed, I do not know how we are going to be assisted as members of Parliament. I would like to know from the minister whether there is any tentative plan for Ugandans to be vaccinated as we wait for other occurrences to come. Do you have that programme, honourable minister? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the emergency statement has been made and information has been passed. It is our responsibility to pass on this message to our people over the radios and by whatever means, we have to alert the public about the dangers of these things and ways of keeping ourselves safe from them.

I will now go to the Leader of the Opposition and then come back to the minister, before we close. 

5.45
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement. For us who experienced the first Ebola outbreak in Uganda, we know how difficult it is. At that material time, we were not welcomed in any place.

I remember even when our people went for kacoke madit (big meeting), they tried UK and it was difficult. They tried Nairobi, Kenya but they were chased and not allowed in and so they came back.

Therefore, it is not a joking matter. I see on social media that there is already a breakthrough for HIV/AIDS; an ARV that can cure the virus. I do not know but it needs to be checked. We cannot yet confirm that it is a breakthrough. However, when such information reaches our people, they begin to be careless.

I would like to say that this statement should not stop as a statement. You should now translate it to education, information and communication (EIC) materials that should be disseminated far and wide from all Government and private facilities. 

We should rely on technical people; health workers should educate the people more and sensitise them. However, let us be strict. Our citizens who are in China should remain there for the time being until the incidences have gone down. The Chinese who are there should not come here and we should not travel to China. Thank you.

5.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to summarise in one minute. I have taken note of all the concerns of our members; the porous border points we have in the country and birds that are being eaten by our people. 

I want to inform you that I will take this message directly to the ministry in our inter-ministerial committee and discuss them because they are very many that I cannot reply each and every body, in the interest of time. I will just take the message to the concerned people.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I know you can be a bulldozer but can we go to the Order Paper? I had altered the Order Paper to accommodate her. Let us deal with the petition and then see if we can handle item no. six. I intend to close at 6.00 p.m. 

PRESENTATION OF THE PETITION BY PERSONS AFFECTED BY THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE KARUMA-LIRA 132KV AND THE TORORO OPUYO-LIRA 132KV POWER PROJECTS

5.49
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I bring this petition under rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I present this humble petition of the affected people by the Tororo Opuyo-Lira 132KV and Karuma-Lira 132KV power projects.

The subject matter of the petition regards the failure by the Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited (UETCL) to pay compensation and meet other obligations to the project affected persons for the Karuma-Lira 132KV power projects and Tororo Opuyo-Lira 132KV in the villages of Angwet Angwet, Irweda West, Obuto Welo B, Kakoge A and B, Anai and Ojwina Division in Lira Municipality, Lira district.

Mr Speaker, your petitioners aver that sometime in 2010 and 2016, UETCL commenced the construction of two power projects namely the Tororo Opuyo-Lira 132KV and Karuma-Lira 132KV power projects.

On the Tororo Opuyo-Lira project, your petitioners aver that in June 2016, UETCL engaged landlords and property owners in the villages of Obuto Welo B and Kakoge and Central park and Irweda Chamber to rent their properties for a period of six months and stopped them from occupying their properties.

Whereas UETCL paid some property owners for the initial period of six months while other landlords were not paid to date, it has refused or neglected to meet its rental obligations from December 2016 to date in spite of repeated and numerous reminders and engagements on the matter.

Mr Speaker, the affected persons now fear that since the project is coming to an end, UETCL will not meet its rental obligations to the affected persons leaving them in financial ruin.

On the Karuma-Lira 132KV power project, the project affected persons aver that in 2010, UETCL commenced the construction of Karuma 132 KV project. UETCL acquired land in the villages of Amucha and Anai in Lira sub-county, Obuto Welo B and Kakonge B in Ojwina Division, Lira Municipality, Lira District for construction of the power project.

Also in 2010, UETCL conducted an evaluation exercise for the affected properties in the above mentioned villages and stopped them from accessing their property. 

Since the valuation, UETCL refused and neglected to pay all the project-affected persons. Even where UETCL paid some, the property was undervalued. The compensation was less than that agreed upon in the valuation.

The compensation did not take into account the current value of the property, considering that the property was valued way back in 2010.

The delay in the payment of the petitioners has affected their livelihood. Their way of life is affected and there are already increased poverty levels in the area; it has caused stress and destitution since the property the UETCL took over is what used to provide livelihood to project-affected persons.

Therefore, by this petition, the petitioners pray that:

    1. Parliament takes keen interest in the affairs of the project-affected persons for the Karuma-Lira 132KV power project and Tororo-Opuyo-Lira 132KV power project.
    2. The relevant committee of Parliament investigates the conduct of Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited in the compensation of persons affected by the construction of Karuma-Lira 132KV power project and Tororo-Opuyo-Lira 132KV power project in the villages of: Angwetangwet, Ireda West, Obutowelo B, Kakoge A and Kakooge B; Anai, Central Division and Ojwina Division in Lira Municipality, Lira District and make a recommendations to the House.
    3. Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited urgently compensates and meets all its obligations to the people affected by the construction of Karuma-Lira 132KV power project and Tororo-Opuyo-Lira 132KV power projects.

Your humble petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

I have the petitioners’ signatures that I will lay on Table.

Mr Speaker, allow me to brief you on this. There are areas where UETCL valued property of members –

The Deputy Speaker: That is for the committee. You cannot again begin doing its work. Please, lay them on Table. You have presented the petition.

Ms joy atim: I lay on Table a lady, Ms Molly Kia whose property was valued at Shs 40 million but she was only paid Shs 4 million.

I also lay on Table Mr Eling Bosco, a resident in Kakoge in Ojwina whose land and house were affected. They decided that they break only the garage and pay him Shs 800,000. I lay this on Table. The land is titled.

I also lay on Table a one Dorcus Acio whose property was affected but she was given a document that is just bare. It does not have any figure but she is already affected.

There is Jenty Amolo whose property and two-roomed house were affected. They said they were going to buy for her another piece of land. To-date, she has not been compensated and she has nowhere to go.
There were people whose property was paid for but the same property is being claimed in other people’s names. I lay them on Table.

I have a copy of the compensation assessment report by a consultant that gave the property claim and they need their property duly paid for.  Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker:  Thank you, honourable member for Lira. That is a petition as your prayers state. Parliament should take keen interest and also the responsible committee should take a good look at it and report to advise Parliament on what should be done.

Let the records receive a copy of that petition and the documents attached and they stand forwarded to the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources to handle quickly. This is a petition that should not take the 45 days that we normally give.

If you can finish it quickly, the times are getting tighter. Please, help the citizens of this country. Do this quickly so that they can get their action – the results of their request – at least handled by Parliament if recommendations come out in time.

Honourable members, on item No.5, we will handle that Bill tomorrow as the first item like we have dealt with this other matter. Let us try and see if we can do item No.6.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT AUTHORISING GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO € 162,445,694.1 ($178,276,661.7) FROM THE INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL BANK OF CHINA TO FINANCE THE POWER SUPPLY TO INDUSTRIAL PARKS AND GRID UPGRADE AND POWER TRANSMISSION EXTENSION PROJECT

6.00
The minister of state for finance, planning and economic development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to request for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to € 162,445,694.1 from the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China to finance the power supply to industrial parks and grid upgrade and power transmission extension project. I beg to move.

The Deputy Speaker: Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) It is seconded by the Member for Kajara County, members of Parliament for Koboko County and Koboko District; Member of Parliament for Mitooma and the National Woman Representative for People with Disabilities, who is also now a Commissioner of Parliament.

There are many secondments from Kapchorwa, Kaberamaido and Butaleja. Honourable minister, would you like to briefly speak to your motion?

Mr Bahati: Mr Speaker, we have been generating power, which must be utilised and most importantly, to industrialise our country.

This project is aimed at having sub-stations, which are key for industrialisation for the following industrial parks. The first is Kapeeka Industrial Park, Sukuru Industrial Park and Mbale Industrial Park; Wobulenzi sub-station, Kapeeka sub-station, Nakasongola sub-station and Kaweweta sub-station; Wobulenzi-Kapeka transmission line; Nakasongola-Kaweweta-Kapeeka transmission line.

This is in line to support the private sector to be able to put up industries and at the same time, utilise the power that we have generated from Isimba-Karuma and other areas. I beg to move.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable minister, before the chairperson reports, we have a report that we are generating more power than we can utilise; this statement has been circulating. Why is it that in Gulu – I now come from Omoro and so, I have no vested interests in Gulu – why is it that in Gulu, people are living without power for months? They have small factories that they are now running on diesel but here you are talking about about excess power. 

The people of Gulu do not have power and this has led to demonstrations. The police has intervened because UMEME cuts off power from there. That is the information I have. How can you reconcile this? This is the same with West Nile. The whole belt there or this power is only for – 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, that is exactly what we are trying to solve. One of the problems we are experiencing, that the Ministry for Energy will explain, is that while we have power, it does not have enough capacity to be transmitted and so, we need transmitters. We need substations and in the case of West Nile, they are working on it - and also part of Gulu. Therefore, once these substations are completed, that will solve the problem that we are experiencing.

MS BETTY AOL: Those substations you have highlighted are not in the North.  Indeed, Gulu is suffering. How do you convince us that the excess power will solve this problem of power outage in Gulu? This is because it is a big problem and it is worse for people who are in business and use power for their businesses. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this is a serious matter. We have had demonstrations in Gulu that have caused problems and do not paint a good image. They stay without power for months and yet, the rest of the country has power. It does not look good. This is the same with West Nile. We have these problems. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we shall give the Parliament of Uganda the details in a short while. We approved a loan to sort out the problem of power in west Nile and Gulu. A loan was also approved in this House to build the substations and work is on-going through the procurements and on station. Nonetheless, the money to do that work was approved by this House and I will get details in a minute from the ministry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us be clear about these things because they affect people. We have a main transmission line that terminates at Lira. Lira, itself does not have the power. There is a big metallic pylon but there is no power in Lira itself. How do you explain it? You wanted a procedural matter but now, there is information to – 

MR KIZIGE: Mr Speaker, two weeks ago, this matter was on the Floor of Parliament. The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development explained at length exactly what is happening and talked about the projects that are going to take place. The problem right now is that there is a 33 KB line from Soroti to Lira, which also supplies Gulu and west Nile but has overstayed and basically collapses every day. 

However, efforts are already being done. The minister explained and gave the details of exactly what is happening and so, we are discussing a matter that is already on the Hansard. I think if you want another explanation, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development can come back – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, you are not proceeding properly if you are saying we are discussing a matter that is already on the Hansard. Those people are still without power, despite this matter being on the Hansard. We are not talking about matters being on the Hansard. We are talking about people having power in the communities. Please, let us stop it here. We have a matter on the Floor. 

Honourable chairperson, please, report on this matter.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT AUTHORISING GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO €162,445,694.1 ($178,276,661.7) FROM THE INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL BANK OF CHINA TO FINANCE THE POWER SUPPLY TO INDUSTRIAL PARKS AND GRID UPGRADE AND POWER TRANSMISSION EXTENSION PROJECT
6.08
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Mr Speaker, before I proceed with presenting the report, I would like to give a testimony here that I presented a report on this Floor for approving a loan for constructing a substation, which is supposed to connect with the north.
However, as I have always said on this Floor, Government is quite slow in implementing projects. One of the reasons they have been giving us for the delay of infrastructure projects is counterpart funding for Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and also land acquisition. 

There are also problems in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. The capacity to evaluate the compensations is very low and we have made recommendations on this issue every time we come here to present infrastructure projects.

Without pre-empting the report, again, we have got recommendations on that same issue in the report. 
Mr Speaker, I am going to present a report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to € 162,445,694.1, which is equivalent to $178,276,661.7 from the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China to finance the Power Supply Project to Industrial Parks and Grid Upgrade and Power Transmission Extension Projects. 

Before I go further, allow me to thank my colleagues, the members of the committee, for the effort they put in evaluating this land, which was submitted to us at the beginning of December and we have been able to carry out the due diligence within one month.

I have a number of documents relating to this loan, which I would like to lay on Table: 

    1. The brief to Parliament by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development 
    2. The proposal to borrow the subject amount
    3. A report, which I am going to present and it is fully signed by the members 
    4. The minutes of the meeting, which we held in December 
    5. A document on the minutes we held on 15 December; 
    6. Clearance by H.E the President for this loan to be acquired
    7. A document on proposed funding of substations and transmission lines 
    8. A certificate from NEMA 
    9. The indicative terms on borrowing
    10. A contract for the electrification of the industrial park 
    11. Technical proposal by the UETCL
    12. Terms of reference for the loan 
    13. A Project Management Plan document 
    14. The Electricity Development Project by the World Bank and
    15. Implementation of a transmission line infrastructure project. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay all these documents on Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those documents. 

MS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, by way of introduction, the Committee on National Economy considered the request by Government to borrow the aforesaid amount from the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China to finance the Power Supply to Industrial Parks and Grid Upgrade and Power Transmission Extension Projects, in accordance with Rule 175 (2)(b) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

The request was forwarded to the committee on 4 December 2019. 

We used two methods in evaluating this loan. One was by meeting between the ministries of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; Energy and Mineral Development; UETCL. 

We also reviewed 11 documents, which are referred to in paragraph 22.

We also made a field visit to Kapeeka Industrial. 

Transformation of Uganda's economy through the industrialisation strategy is one of the fundamental goals and commitment of Uganda's National Development Plan (NDP). Uganda's NDP puts emphasis on sustainable economic growth while aiming at poverty reduction.

The pace of economic activity in Uganda for the last decade has averaged 5.7 per cent per annum comparing favourably with two of East Africa's biggest economies; Kenya and Tanzania

For Uganda to change its GDP trajectory, value addition through industrialisation or light manufacturing and the potential demographic dividend will be the key drivers, linked to trade, tourism, agriculture and natural resource exploitation. This is also what is going to help us to address the high unemployment in the country.

Industrialisation plays a vital role in the economic transformation of countries.

Establishment of light manufacturing/ agro-processing industries in Uganda would create good paying jobs that are resilient to economic fluctuations in the developed world.

This project aims to finance the power supply to industrial parks and upgrade the grids and power transmission at Kapeeka, Sukulu, Mbale, Wobulenzi, Nakasongola, Kaweweta industrial parks and Wobulenzi-Kapeeka and Kapeeka-Kaweweta-Nakasongola transmission lines to support Uganda's vision of industrialisation and job creation.

The project is in line with the NDP. The NDP II lists the development and value addition to industrial parks and free trade zones among the areas of focus for their role as a key input in industrialisation of the country, which in turn requires electricity as a production input. 

Mr Speaker, on the performance of electricity transmission projects and that is where your question comes in. The disbursements of the existing loan projects under UETCL as at 30 June 2019 was on average 55 per cent. Many of these loans, which stand at that percentage are quite old and so, there is a problem with the disbursement though this average is higher than many sectors. 

The project development objective is to provide adequate power capacity to supply the industrial developments in the gazetted industrial parks of Wobulenzi, Kaweweta, Luwero, Kapeka, Mbale and Sukulu areas in the medium to long term. The project components are listed under paragraph seven.

The total budgeted cost exclusive of taxes for the power supply is € 191,112,581.26 (equivalent to $ 2O9,212,905.9). Out of this, Government intends to borrow €162,445,694.1 and the balance between the project cost and what is being borrowed of € 28,666,887.16 will be covered using Government of Uganda counterpart funding. 

Table 3 gives the project component by cost.

Project Implementation

The power supply to industrial parks and grid upgrade and power transmission extension project will be implemented by the UETCL through China Engineering Co. Ltd which is going to be the EPC plus finance contractor.

Social Economic Impact of the Project
The project will provide adequate transmission infrastructure to meet the energy needs for the Uganda population for social economic development in the areas where it is going to be implemented.

The project will improve the standard of living for the population.

The project will improve the national grid system reliability, efficiency and economic operation through reduction of losses in the existing distribution grid supplying power to the areas. 

The project will contribute to growth of tax revenue base due to tax revenue and will also create employment opportunities.

The project will contribute to absorption of excess hydro-electric power generated from the Isimba and Karuma hydroelectric power stations. Mr Speaker, this is the area of your concern. Power is being generated and the contract for generation of power are for capacity, what they call pay or take. Whether you use the electricity or not, you have to pay for it. Partly, this loan is going to address this. To pick up that expensive power, which we are paying for and is not being utilised. 

The terms of the loan are covered under table 11.1. I have already stated the amount. The maturity period is 15 years, repayment period is 11 years and the interest is at six months Euribor plus 2.6 per annum. There is a management fee of one per cent on the total loan and a commitment fee of 0.5 per cent on unutilised amounts.

As indicated under table 11.2, it is not a concessional loan but a low commercial loan.


The conditions for loan effectiveness are the standard requirements, which are listed under paragraph 11.3

The Budgetary Implication

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has committed to provide the 15 per cent counterpart funding required for this project in the budget of 2020/2021.

As at end June 2019, the external debt exposure stood at $ 13.48 billion. This will certainly increase the exposure but it will not be anywhere close to the threshold of 50 per cent. So, we are not yet in the danger zone. 

Compliance with Parliamentary Approval Guidelines

The Committee on National Economy developed guidelines to be considered when scrutinising all loans that require approval of Parliament. This particular project scores 50 per cent of the requirements and being an infrastructure project, we think that score is reasonable. 

Observations and Recommendations

The committee made the following observations and recommendations;

The slow realisation of electricity infrastructure projects, particularly in the transmission segments. 

Inability to evacuate power presents financial loss to the Government from deemed energy clauses in Power Purchase Agreements, which I have already referred to. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and UETCL should accelerate the development process of projects in the electricity transmission segment in order to save the country from financial loss due to deemed energy clauses in power purchase agreements. This is partly responsible for the high tariffs. If you can evacuate all the power, distribute it and get it to the consumers through economies of scale, certainly the tariffs will come down.

The second observation was that the committee noted the low disbursements of some of the loans, which were contracted a long time ago. For example, the Entebbe-Mutundwe transmission line is at zero utilisation and this is because of the challenges of compensation.

The committee recommends that Government ensures that all proposed electricity infrastructure projects presented before Cabinet be scrutinised to ensure that preparatory phases such as feasibility studies and compensation of project-affected persons have been carried out before they are further submitted to Parliament for approval.

On the Government counterpart funding, we have observed that Government has not been fully religious in providing counterpart funding, which has also caused further delays. Therefore, the committee recommends that Government ensures that counterpart funds for this project are integrated into the national budget during the budget implementation period.

The committee further recommends that the parliamentary sectoral committees critically examine the budgets of Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) that are beneficiaries of externally-borrowed funds to ensure that the budgets of the MDAs explicitly provide for all the required counterpart funds during that financial year for the projects that are under implementation.

We also made an observation of high dependence on consultancies. We have implemented quite a number of projects and we feel there should be sufficient capacity in the country to take up many of these consultancies coming up. The committee, therefore, recommends that UETCL scales up plans for building the capacity of UETCL staff or enhancing it, especially in conducting feasibility studies and designing electricity projects in order to cut down on the exorbitant amounts of project funds spent on consultancies. That is money which should stay here but because we are hiring foreign consultants, that money goes away.

On procurement, the committee recommends that Government strictly undertakes the procurement process for the debt-financed projects ahead of time prior to parliamentary approval. In addition, the ongoing process of amending the PPDA Act 2003 should be fast-tracked by Government in order to further address existing inefficiencies in the procurement cycle and promote value of debt-finance projects.

On environmental issues, the committee recommends that UETCL strictly ensures that the ecological and social issues that would be outlined in the NEMA evaluation document are mitigated in time.

On the RAP implementation and supervision, the committee recommends that, in accordance with Uganda’s compensation and resettlement requirements, the project-affected persons should be compensated in a timely and adequate manner in order to guard against implementation delays of this project. This one has been ably addressed in the petition which the Member for Lira District presented. 

Mr Speaker, on the plan for using local contractors, equipment and materials, whereas we get the final values from these projects, we do not tap into some of the inputs, which would increase our benefits. The committee, therefore, recommends that Government develops technical skills transfer programme in all projects contracted to foreign companies to facilitate development of a critical mass of local skilled labour to be used to maintain the established infrastructure. Where local capacity exists in the production of input to any public project, Government should support them and buy whatever they can buy locally.

We also observed that there are poor roads connecting some industrial parks and free zones, which have delayed investments in these areas. The committee, therefore, recommends that the UNRA and local governments upgrade roads leading to gazetted free zones and prioritise the access roads to Arua Economic Zone. We are told that this development has not taken place because the area is inaccessible. 

The committee further recommends that Parliament should in future reconsider the Land (Amendment) Bill to mitigate compensations that hinder public infrastructure projects through delays as land wrangles are resolved. In addition, Government should further strengthen the land evaluation office to match the enormous amount of work.

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, the committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow € 162,445,691.1 ($178,276,661.7) from the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China to finance the power supply to industrial parks and grid upgrade and power transmission extension project be approved, subject to the above recommendations. I beg to present.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I also thank the committee for this work and all the great work they have been doing to help us with these processes. 

Honourable members, the question that I propose for your debate is that Parliament adopts this resolution, authorising Government to borrow up to € 162,445,691.1 ($178,276,661.7) from the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China to finance the power supply to industrial parks and grid upgrade and power transmission extension project. That is the motion for your debate.

Going by what the committee has reported, there are no complications. If there is going to be debate, I think it might not be very long so that this matter is concluded quickly and we proceed with other matters -

MS JOY ATIM: Procedure. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are not going to debate by procedure. We are going to start by debating a debate. (Laughter) 

Honourable members –(Members rose_) – going by the number of the Members who want to speak, I am going to give you one minute each. Only those who can speak in one minute should remain standing. If you cannot manage one minute, please, sit down. (Laughter) 

MR JOY ATIM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate this loan request and I am not in any way objecting to it. However, I feel for the purpose of equity. On your seat, you have just been complaining about issues of power. It is only on one side and other people are not accessing it. 

In addition, with the statement from the minister that this is the second loan and Members have not acquainted themselves with the other loan in terms of which regions and areas benefitted from it, wouldn’t it be procedurally right, for us to go to our records and see which areas have benefited from the first loan and which ones are going to benefit from the second one so that when we debate this, we debate it meaningfully, taking into account that all the regions are catered for but the loan is not one-sided. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I note your concern. I have just had a preliminary discussion with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Urban Development. We are going to have a discussion tomorrow early morning with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development on that specific issue of what is happening in the North. I think it should not affect the debate on what is before us now.

We will handle that one separately because the monies have been approved and Government has been giving money to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to make sure that those lines are functional. However, there have been some implementation problems that we are going to deal with tomorrow. Therefore, let it not affect this debate. I am now going to ask only people opposed to this loan to speak. If you support it, let us save time and adopt it.

Who is opposing the loan? If you say you are opposing and then, you stand up and support, I will throw you out of the House. (Laughter) It is only for those opposed to the loan. Let us save time. If the loan is okay and is going for a good purpose, let us simply support it and move on.

6.34
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You will judge whether mine is opposing or not. However, the chairperson of the committee stated very clearly here – before she presented the report – that she has always had a problem and always stated here that there are issues of land acquisition. There are a number of issues that have delayed the different projects that they have been forced to recommend for approval of this House.

I would like to get it from her – and maybe from also the minister – whether in this particular case, all the other preliminaries have been done and the issues cleared, so that when it is approved, you know that work will start straight away. If all the preliminaries are not done, then I can say I oppose it. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are we ready to receive this money and implement?

MS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, from the documents we got here and the irrevocable commitment from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I think we are ready to move – (Interjections) – Yes, we are ready to move. The difference with these industrial parks is that some of them have already constructed the factories; they are there and the investors are demanding.

What Government has done – according to the commitment which, I have received from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – is to put aside the money required for this. Some of the delays are caused because of lack of preparedness from the technical side. However, from the documents I have submitted here, there is evidence that this time, the technical sides are also prepared.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: [Mr Baba: “Clarification, Madam Chairperson.”] Clarification can only be accepted by a Member holding the Floor. It is not accepted like this nature.

MR BABA: The clarification I am seeking is, You said the loan is ready to be disbursed, yet a while ago, we got a petition from the Woman Member of Parliament from Lira about Project-Affected Persons whose issues have not been dealt with. How can we be ready when there are a number of Project-Affected Persons still not catered for through counterpart funding?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us not mix up issues. That is a separate matter.

MR BABA: It is not a separate matter; it is connected to counterpart funding. We are not sure whether that counterpart funding is there. Is it indicated in the budget? That is what we want to be sure about.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I still insist that we need to be relevant to the debate. The debate is not about some other project. The debate is about this project. They have stated that they are in a state of preparedness – ready to implement. There are very many loans that have not performed. If we are to bring them all now here, I do not know how we will proceed with this.

MS ALUM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. By my judgement of what is going on in the House, colleagues support this loan. However, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the honourable minister to assure those colleagues who are still doubting – or do not support the loan – about the readiness of the Government, in terms of compensation, land and counterpart funding? 

To me and maybe to some of my colleagues, this is the issue that we need to resolve and then we support the motion of the committee. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the minister to clarify on this?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I heard the chairperson. She has just spoken exactly about those matters. Honourable minister, would you like to deal with it as well?

6.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to thank colleagues for raising these important issues because when we borrow money, we want it to be applicable to the purpose for which we borrowed it.

We would also like to thank the Committee on National Economy. For the last one and a half years, they put in place – on their own volition – strict guidelines to avoid delays of implementation of these projects.

One of the things they did was that for any project, we bring to this House, we must confirm and satisfy the committee that counterpart funding is available. If it is not available, they do not accept. Therefore, we would like to congratulate them and because of that, some of the projects which you approved in the last one and a half years are moving.

For example, if you go to Kabaale International Airport in Hoima, it is five months ahead of time because of the procedure the committee put in place. 

The Speaker has ruled that we do not go into each and every project. You have said we should be relevant to this debate. For this particular debate, we are ready to go. If you go to, for example, Kapeeka Industrial Park – many of you have visited Kapeeka Industrial Park and those factories need power. It is ready but they need power. If you go to Mbale, it needs power; Sukulu in Tororo also needs power.

Therefore, on these sub-stations and issues to do with compensation and all that, if this House approves, we will be ready to go and implement the projects to industrialise our country.

Yesterday, we hammered a point of supporting to develop our country and the private sector. The private sector needs power to do manufacturing and this is the project that will help them through industrial parks.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister.

6.40
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to be on record that I will not support this loan for the purpose of Ugandans, especially the people I represent.

Whenever we pass loans, I think there is a term they usually use – that the “mafias hijack it”. By the time it is approved, almost 75 per cent is gone. Even now, before we commit the country, look at the numbers in the House. I believe you will guide us, Mr Speaker. The few people who are here cannot commit this country. We are too few to make the commitment.

There are some aligned issues you guided on well. For some of us in our districts, people are killing us. We passed the sub-county loan here but there is nothing like a single pole. We are going into elections and NRM primaries are in May. There is no answer. We cannot continue adding people money. When we gave money for power supply, instead of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development taking power to West Nile and North, they are again bringing the power to Kampala. I think some parts of the country are simply working for a few.

For this case, honourable members, I believe if you are to suffer, you suffer rather than work for just a few people. I am not supporting this loan today. 

6.43
MR CHARLES ABACACON(FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am opposing this motion for one reason. I heard the chairperson complaining about the Government valuation and how it should be improved in future. I do not know if the lands in these industrial parks have already been valued.

I have realised that even when we took the loan for the Rural Electrification Project, in our places, we gave land freely while in others, people were compensated. I do not understand that difference. May I know if the list of those who have been affected in the rural electrification is there and if their lands have been valued for compensation? I also would like to know if the list has been incorporated into this loan. Thank you.

MS BBUMBA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. There is a difference with regards to compensation for rural electrification and transmission. Because rural electrification is demand driven, since this project was started 20 years ago, there is no compensation. Government only compensates for transmission because of high voltage power, which the locals do not tap into.

However, the power voltage that goes to their houses, according to the policy, there is no compensation. When they start the sub-county project, there will be no compensation but wherever there are high voltage lines, there is compensation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is coming to 7 p.m. We stay the proceedings. House adjourned to tomorrow at 10 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 6.45 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 30 January 2020 at 10 a.m.) 

