6731Friday, 6 January 2023around midnight. It was a very unfortunate incident. And I have seen in several media outlets that Government - and even the President - have instituted an investigation on this matter. I hope they will come to the real conclusion of what happened. I have also seen some people being charged in court already. So, we shall offer any support on our side in terms of assessment and oversight as the institution of Parliament.We also lost very many people in road accidents. Before Christmas, I lost my very own in an accident; I know how it feels being with someone and then in around five minutes, you receive sad news that they are dead in a car accident. Very many people died. Specifically, I send condolences to the family of Justice Mugamba who lost three children in one accident. The sight of the family placing coffins in front of mourners was unbearable. But we believe in the Lord. We are a believing religious country; not only Christians, but Muslims and other religions. So, we keep them in prayer.However, road carnage has continued to claim people. This morning at Kamdini, 15 people died. Preliminary investigations show that the bus rammed into a trailer which was parked by the roadside without any warning signs. You know! So, it is very painful. We also lost a priest in an accident. So, colleagues, we have lost very many people. I IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 1ST SITTING - THIRD MEETINGParliament met at 12.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I welcome you to the first sitting of 2023. We thank the Lord who has blessed us to be here; not everyone could be here. So, we really appreciate the Lord as a country whose motto is very clear: “For God and my Country.”It has been a difficult beginning of the year with the sad news we have been getting. To begin with, the passing on of his Holiness Pope Benedict; where I saw many of you, colleagues, joining in mourning with the Holy See and the Christian and Catholic community in the country and all over the world. We continue to extend our condolences to the Holy See and His Holiness, Pope Francis. However, we also lost very many people, including in the stampede that happened at Freedom City when we were celebrating New Year’s Eve. I have a strong belief that the authorities are doing everything possible to understand the cause and ensure that it should not happen again, especially with such young children who were allowed in such places PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6732STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [The Deputy Speaker]believe it would be prudent for us to stand up and observe a minute of silence.(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That includes the soul of the departed international football king, the legend Pele.Once we resume the sessions, the Minister of Works and Transport will be required to come here and give us a statement, which will be subject to a thorough debate. And we also have a forum, I don’t know - Is that Hon. Alex Ruhunda or- yes, we have a forum on road safety. We shall need a comprehensive statement showing the measures being put in place by the government. Because, for instance yesterday on Twitter , I saw on the Twitter  page of one of the former Members of Parliament, Hon. Perez, a driver of a bus with over 50 people eating Kalo (Millet bread) and boiled chicken when he was driving the bus at a high speed. Therefore, the video shows he could remove both hands and concentrate on another important duty on his side, which he considered more important than taking people safely. So, you wonder why. Also, someone told me that Uganda is very interesting: it is the only country where you first get a driving permit, and then you go to the driving school. So, you get a driving permit and after, you go and learn how to drive and then you are on the road. Therefore, we have to look into this deeply because if we do not give it the attention that is necessary, it is going to fall on all of us. So, the Minister for Works will need to come here and make a statement. And, because we ended the budgeting process, if there are measures that have a financial implication, this would be the best time to look at them and see how best we can find the ministry to curb these fatal accidents. Still on roads, I also have observed on social media, a lot to do with the Kampala Capital City Authority and the potholes everywhere. Colleagues, I remember in the 10th Parliament, we passed here a loan of over $200 million by the African Development Bank that was supposed to work on around 27 roads within Kampala. Most of these roads, you know, and we handled it expeditiously; I remember because we were being told we want to make Kampala look beautiful. And we did our part as Parliament in the 10th Parliament. Now it is over two years since we passed that loan, but more potholes are coming. And the solution I am seeing is patching and patching. But the loan we passed wasn’t for patching; it was for reconstructing the roads. So, we need the Minister for Kampala Capital City Authority also to come here and update this House on the implementation of that loan. However, sectoral committees, when you see these issues, be proactive; take on the matters. You do not need to wait for plenary; you have your powers as sectoral committees. So, the leadership of sectoral committees, please be proactive when you see these matters and take them on. Call the ministers responsible and engage so that we can be able to work on solutions together as a country. So, the minister will also be required to come back and report to this House. Honourable colleagues, if you remember very well, on the 23rd of December, we came here and Hon. Amos Okot presented a motion for censure of Hon. Persis Namuganza, as per rule 109 of our Rules of Procedure and Article 118 of the Constitution. We received the motion, as it had garnered the required signatures that are provided for under our Rules of Procedure.On that same day, I transmitted that same motion to the President because the rules under rule 109(8) required me to transmit the motion to the President within 72 hours. You could see the working days – on Saturday, Sunday and Monday, we were entering the Christmas season. That is why when we finished the 6733THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 6 JANUARY 2023session early; I immediately transmitted the same to the President, whereby the rules require that the President ensures that it reaches Hon. Persis Namuganza. Therefore, on our side, we did our part, as per the rules. In this process, where we have reached, we are being commanded by the law. It is not being commanded by someone talking to me; by someone whispering. It is implementing the law the way it is. I will follow the law and the rules, as they are. This is because rule 109(9) is very clear that after 14 days of transmitting it to the President, I must cause Parliament to sit and appoint a select committee that will investigate the minister with the aim of establishing a prima facie  case. A prima facie  case is the case on the surface; evidently visible.  That will be the role of the committee. Therefore, I am commanded by rule 109 of our Rules of Procedure to cause the House to appoint that committee. That committee is supposed to process the motion within 15 days, as provided for under rule 109(10) of our Rules of Procedure. That committee, in the process, under the same rule:1. It to co-opt any Member to support it in its duty. 2. Any Member accused to appear before the committee either directly or through their representative and defend themselves. It would ensure that indeed the rules of natural justice are followed. I have proposed the names clearly and I have avoided names of people who already debated this matter on the Floor. I want the people who have not debated this matter to be part of this matter. People like Hon. Macho –(Laughter)- we have to protect the integrity of this House. We do not want anyone to claim that they are being victimised. The moment something is done, we want to give you a fair chance of defending yourself.We want you to appear before people who are fair and have not yet pronounced themselves. The process has to be thoroughly done. We do not want anyone to claim that they are being victimised. No. This is within the rules; whatever is being done is being done because the rules and the law provides for that. I, therefore, propose the following Members:1. Hon Mwine Mpaka Rwamirama - Member of Parliament for Mbarara City South, as the chairperson of the committee. 2. Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba - Member of Parliament for Ndorwa East, as one of the senior legislators and custodians of the rules, to ensure that the rules are well followed. 3. Hon. Mpindi Bumali - Member of Parliament representing Persons with Disabilities. 4. Hon. Charles Bakkabulindi - Workers Representative. 5. Hon. Nancy Acora - Woman Member of Parliament for Lamwo District. 6. Hon. Betty Ethel Naluyima - Woman Member of Parliament for Wakiso District. 7. Hon. Geofrey Ekanya - Member of Parliament for Tororo County North.    Members, I now put the question that the committee be approved.  (Question put and agreed to.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The committee is hereby approved and all documents related to the motion are hereby referred to the committee. You have to report back to the House in not more than 15 days so that we can be able to process the motion and complete it the way it is provided for.Honourable colleagues, this is a matter which, as per Article 118 of the Constitution, cannot be debated at all because it gives us 30 days 6734STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT [The Deputy Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRfrom the date of transmitting the motion to the President. Now, the 30 days include 14 days for which we have waited - someone asked, “Has the President written back?” The law does not require the President to write back. The law is very clear. The moment we transmit it to the President, we have served the minister. The President is not required to write back. That is what the law says. Therefore, we did our part. We hope the President has done his part, but also, the committee is required to ensure that they invite Hon. Persis Namuganza to come and appear before them so that she can be listened to and gives her side of the story.After this has been done, the committee will present the report on the Floor, which we shall also handle, as per rule 109(11) of our Rules of Procedure and ensure that indeed, we give it a fair debate and vote on it. Honourable colleagues, tentatively, I can say on 23 January, we shall have a sitting whereby we shall receive the report of the committee and vote on it. That will be the final stage of processing this petition. (Applause) Finally, honourable colleagues, I received our Muslim colleagues who were not happy with the timing of the session. I want to extend our apologies, as the leadership. This was a very clear oversight on our side. It is the day for Juma Prayers, which we shall have at 1.00 p.m. Due to that and the requests I got from the Muslims, we shall, after receiving only one matter, straightaway receive the report from the Chairperson of the Committee on Local Government and the response from the minister. Then, debate will be deferred to another day so that our Muslim brothers and sisters can go for Juma Prayers. (Applause) I now invite Hon. Rwemulikya to raise his issue, but I want us to use our time seriously so that by around 12.50 p.m., we allow our Muslim brothers to go for Juma Prayers. 12.25MR IBANDA RWEMULIKYA (Independent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would also like to congratulate you and the honourable members for having finished the old year and beginning this New Year, 2023. I wish you all the best.Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, you know what happened in Ntoroko. Many of our residents of Bwelamule and Kibuku Town Council fled their areas for safety. Others were critically injured. First, I would like to thank our mighty force, the UPDF, for a job well done. I think Ntoroko is now safe and the people are beginning to return to their homes. I want, in particular, to thank our Division Commander, Gen. Dick Olumu and our Commander of the Ninth Battalion, Col. Saul Nimbimanya, for the work well done with our Wanainchi . Mr Speaker, I would also like to thank you, and the Rt Hon. Speaker together with the Prime Minister, for the efforts in getting food relief to our displaced people.My prayers are that:We urgently need food relief for the displaced people because some of them fear going back to their places. Secondly, we need medical support for the two citizens who were critically injured - some of them are receiving treatment at the Mulago National Referral Hospital. They are from peasant families who really need support from the Government. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. This is the only matter of national importance I am allowing today. Government Chief Whip, do you want to say something?6735THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 6 JANUARY 202312.27THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua): Mr Speaker and honourable members, permit me to also salute Parliament, on behalf of the Executive arm of Government, for the works executed in the year 2022 and for crossing over to the year 2023. We wish all of you a prosperous New Year.On the subject matter raised by the honourable member from Ntoroko, I undertake to have a discussion with him to see how best the team that he talked about, which is currently receiving medical attention, can be helped. I beg to undertake. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Point of procedure, from the Chief Opposition Whip.  THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (MR John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This House works well because you are the custodian of the rules and you work under the customs, tradition and practices of the Commonwealth.Mr Speaker, I have keenly observed us veering off at a tangent. If you get back to our rule 190, you will notice that you have all the discretionary powers, and nobody can challenge you in constituting a select committee.Mr Speaker, it has become a practice that we ignore sub rule 2, which requires of course, that you do this in close consultation with the Government Chief Whip and the Chief Opposition Whip. Mr Speaker, you have not done that, and it is not the first time. So, I am raising it so that it becomes the last time. Mr Speaker, are we proceeding in total compliance to our rules? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. You had raised a very good point- take your seat - but the problem is that you gave an ultimatum to the Speaker, which is against the rules. So, you are out of order. Yes, Hon. Ssewungu.12.29MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you Mr Speaker. I am responding to your communication where you talked about something to do with the Ministry of Works and Transport. Mine is about the accident that occurred at Freedom City recently. We have information that the people who organise these functions pay the Police for ambulance and security - over 40 policemen plus fireworks lorries. However, the Police have the power to arrest and detain at will without questions from anyone.  Therefore, we want to know whether you could give guidance that the Minister of Internal Affairs comes to this House and explains to us how this accident occurred and what their role was. Lastly, you saw what happened at Makerere University - I think you just forgot this one - I know you are one of the leaders who have managed the University before. During the elections for the Chairman of the Makerere University Convocation, we saw the military police - Gen. Kavuma could attest to this because he knows where the military police should be deployed. Anyhow, they went and started beating students thoroughly - we need the Minister of Defence and Veterans Affairs to come and explain who gave powers or directed the Military Police - I am making emphasis on that - to go and beat students who were voting a new leadership. They should explain to this House, but most especially the issue of police eating money from people who organise events, but later on, just arrest them, without police being mentioned anywhere - the Minister of Internal Affairs has been saying this on the radio. Mr Speaker, we need very good information on that. Otherwise, how do you expect Ssewungu, the organiser of the event who is collecting money – or maybe I am called Abitex - do you think I would be at every gate yet I have paid the police to provide security? 6736STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister of Internal Affairs, in two weeks’ time, bring a statement. Finally, Hon. Macho. 12.32MR GEOFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Mr Speaker, I want to wish the august House a Happy New Year. Thank you for the communication.Mr Speaker, you spoke about potholes in Kampala – they are now worse because the leaders in Kampala have stopped doing their work of oversight and are now in bed with the ruling Government. That is why you saw some letters coming from Gen. Salim Saleh to the Lord Mayor, Erias Lukwago. Mr Speaker, it is my prayer today that the LOP –(Interruption) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order from Hon. Asumani Basalirwa.MR BASALIRWA: Mr Speaker - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, let us listen to the Member holding the Floor. MR BASALIRWA: Is it in order for my neighbour from Busia, the Hon. Geofrey Macho, a cross-border trader, otherwise known as a smuggler, to insinuate that the leadership of Kampala, which is evidently in the hands of the Opposition, is now in bed with the Government yet the matter he is referring to is already in court? Is he in order? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Now you have made my life difficult as far as the ruling is concerned, because you have referred to Hon. Macho in two aspects - him being a cross-border trader is allowed, but being a smuggler is illegal. Therefore, I think, as neighbours, you need to go out and sort those issues. Next item. Yes, point of procedure from the Hon. Ssekikubo, as we wait for Hon. Mapenduzi.MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You gave a mouthful of communication arising, out of which I wanted to make some small addition from this side, to seek your guidance. When Hon. Ssewungu raised the question of the red-beret military policemen caning students at Makerere, you realise there has been a deteriorating conduct of the UPDF. Just in the papers today, you saw how the UPDF raided a police station and freed armed robbers from police custody. And many other incidents of the UPDF raiding the police and taking it over. Fortunately, Mr Speaker, the UPDF is fully represented in this House, and it should be the reason for them not to hide or to put their heads under the sand.The continued deteriorating conduct of the UPDF cannot go unchallenged. I will pray, therefore, Mr Speaker, that you cause the Minister of Defence and Veterans Affairs to issue a statement about what is happening in the country. Otherwise, people are being raided and arrested by people putting on civilian clothes and torn attires, who can be mistaken for rebels. They are toting guns and using those guns that belong to Ugandans against Ugandans. This is well below the expected conduct of the UPDF. Therefore, can the UPDF and the Minister of Defence and Veterans Affairs, for that matter, clarify to this country, first of all, the deteriorating conduct, which is even abetting insecurity in this country? Are they part of the problem that we need to clean? They seem to be going out of hand, Mr Speaker, and I seek your guidance on that matter. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleague. I have seen a statement this morning – (Laughter)– Hon. Namugga?MS NAMUGGA: Mr Speaker, we have a minister here who has taken off shoes and is barefooted. (Laughter) I doubt whether Minister Ngobi is in order to sit the way he 6737THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 6 JANUARY 2023wants. His legs are spread apart and he is seated as if he is – I do not know how to describe him.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, it seems this is the only place where ministers get comfort. (Laughter) Unfortunately, I have not seen him - I see all the ministers have their shoes on, so, we do not have any issue. (Laughter)  Honourable colleagues, Hon. Ssekikubo had raised a very important issue. However, not every issue should be handled in the plenary. That is why we have sectoral committees working at any time and have powers to call anyone at any time. This morning, I saw a statement in the media from the UPDF saying they have apprehended the officers who raided a police station and freed some of their colleagues and they have promised that they will be arraigned before the court martial. They appreciated the vigilance of the people who raised the issue together with the police officers. On that one, I really want to appreciate - That was quick and it was very important to inform the country on the steps taken. However, Hon. Ssekikubo has raised many issues which require serious interrogation and he is a Member of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs; he is a permanent and pensionable member of the committee. (Laughter) Please, chairperson of the committee, take up those issues seriously. As you process the National Budget Framework Paper, these are some of the issues.Colleagues, I have not come here to handle such matters only; we have serious business to handle. Hon. Ojara Mapenduzi on the Floor -MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (LOCAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021 ON 49 DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, SIX CITIES AND FIVE MUNICIPAL COUNCILS12.39THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (LOCAL GOVERNMENT) (Mr Ojara Mapenduzi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for allowing our committee to present its report. Permit me to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee meetings. Secondly, permit me to lay on the Table  the report of the committee. I beg to lay.Mr Speaker, as you can see the size of this report, which is close to 800 pages, I will request you to permit me to go through the executive summary for purposes of saving time. This report has been uploaded for over a month and I am sure Members have had time to read through. In addition, the executive summary has been online. Permit me to present this report giving the executive summary of the report of the Committee on Public Accounts on audited reports of 49 district local governments, six cities and five municipal councils for the Financial Year 2020/2021. In accordance with Article 163(5)(a) of the Constitution and rule 182(5) of our Rules of Procedure, the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) considered the report of the Auditor-General for the Financial Year 2020/2021 and wishes to report its findings to this House. The committee met and interacted with 137 districts and municipalities out of 139 as per the Auditor-General’s report, out of which 21 local governments were reported on in the previous committee reports. 6738STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT [Mr Mapenduzi]COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRThis report, therefore, covers 49 district local governments, six cities and five municipal councils. The report covers key issues, which are categorised into two sections namely: key issues under local governments with qualified opinions and secondly, key issues on local government findings under general and crosscutting queries in the different entities. This report, Mr Speaker, has been compiled based on the findings of the Auditor-General and observations of the committee mainly to show the current state of local governments and to aid policy makers in improving the performance of the local governments, as highlighted below. Permit me, Mr Speaker, to start with key issues under qualified opinion. Under that, I will start with the first one:1. V ote 607: Kole District Local Government, which has a qualified opinion and the basis for this qualified opinion is as follows:(1) Unsupported adjustments The audit report revealed that the entity had financial statements  with a balance sheet adjustment of Shs 192,477,798 and an adjustment and cash equivalent of Shs 4,053,659 that were not supported with approved journal vouchers. The audit considered the financial statement and the committee has provided the following observation: that the accounting officer failed to compile and reconcile his books of accounts within the mandatory period as required by the Financial and Accounting Regulations, 2007. As a result, the committee recommended that:i) The accounting officer should institute disciplinary measures against officers like the CFO and the finance team for failure to perform their duties as required by the regulation.ii) The accounting officer should reconcile and balance the books of accounts and/or recover the monies in question from the CFO within three months from the time of adoption of this report. (2) Unaccounted for funds totalling to Shs 349,542,400 The audit report noted that a total of Shs 349 million in respect of staff advances and fuel deposits was not accounted for. Consequently, audit  was unable to confirm that the funds were utilised for the intended purpose. Delayed submission of accountability may also lead to falsification of documents resulting into loss of public funds. The committee observed that:i)  The entity had failed to submit supporting accountability documents amounting to the said amount in respect of the advances to the said officers. ii)  There is laxity on the side of the accounting officer in ensuring strict adherence to the provision of the Financial and Accounting Regulation, 2007, hence, causing financial loss to the Government. With that, the committee recommends that:i) The PS/ST should hold the accounting officer, CFO and the respective heads of department who authorised these advances personally liable and reprimand them for contravening the provisions of the law.ii) Full recovery be made from the officers who received the cash advances or the accounting officer, CFO and the respective heads of department make good the losses within three months from the time of adoption of this report. iii) The accounting officer must desist from practices of giving advances to officers who fail to account for funds disbursed to them. (2) Misclassification of expenditure amount -ing to Shs 639,863,720 6739THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 6 JANUARY 2023The audit report noted that the said amount was charged on items, which did not reflect the nature of the expenditure. Misclassification of expenditure impacts on the credibility of the financial statements since the figures reported therein do not reflect the true amount expended on the respective items. It also impairs appropriateness of the future budget since the reported actual figures are misstated. To save time, I will go straight to the recommendations:i) The committee recommends that the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury holds the accounting officer personally liable for using wrong codes and contravening the Local Government Financial and Accounting Regulations. ii) The accounting officer should always respect the budget allocations and ceiling under the respective account codes.(4) Wrong recognition of deposit received during the financial year, amounting to Shs 269,970,000 I will take you straight to committee recommendations. Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury should, at all times, notify accounting officers of any cash transfers or disbursements to enable them to update their respective financial statements. 2.0 V ote 774: Masindi Municipal Council (Qualified Opinion) Mr Speaker, I will take you to V ote No. 2, which is the second local government, which is qualified opinion, that is vote 774 and it is Masindi Municipal Council.Query 1.0 Unsupported advances recovered during the financial yearThe cash flow statement on page 13 reported Shs 120,400,000 as advances recovered during the financial year relating to the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP), and the Youth Livelihood Programme (YLP), which were not supported by detailed schedules and bank statements to confirm the authenticity of the figures reported in accounts. Mr Speaker, just to save time, I will take you straight to recommendations. We made observations there - Members can read through. The committee recommends that the accounting officer should ensure that reconciliation is carried out and up-to-date records of the schedules are made available to ease tracking of cash flows and recoveries.Mr Speaker, allow me now to take you, very quickly, to key findings in local governments, and that is, under general and crosscutting issues that falls under.3.1 Budget performance for Financial Year 2020/2021.The committee has considered the audit reports for 60 local governments for the financial year as mentioned. For these entities, Parliament appropriated a total sum of Shs 2,096 billion, which is equivalent to about 50.5 per cent of the total allocation of Shs 4,148,58 billion of the total funds appropriated for all local governments in that year. These local governments were released a total sum of Shs 1,731,743 billion, representing 83 per cent of the budget approved. Further, the entities were able to expend a total of Shs 1,502,472 billion, which is 87 per cent of the funds that were released to them. In this regard, Shs 229,271 billion was returned to the Consolidated Fund.(i)  Local government absorption capacityBased on the above, local governments were denied or not released a total of Shs 351 billion, and they failed to utilise a total of Shs 29.8 billion, which was returned to the Consolidated Fund. 6740STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTThe worst performing entities in this regard in terms of absorption capacity were Hoima City at 30 per cent, Kitgum Municipal Council at 36 per cent, Gulu City at 36 per cent and Masaka City at 37 per cent while those that absorbed 100 per cent of their releases were Arua City, Kitagwenda District Local Government, Terego District Local Government and Madi-Okollo District Local Government.(i) Cost of service in local governments The Auditor-General’s report highlighted the amount of resources spent on non-core service delivery activities such as employee costs and transfers to other units like subcounties, schools and health facilities. These amounted to Shs 1,101.75 billion, equivalent to 74 per cent of the expenditure made by the entities. In other words, on average, the Government spent three shillings on each shilling for outputs that directly affect service delivery.The entities with the highest cost of administration of over six and above, include Masaka at eight, Nakasongola at seven, Gulu City at seven, Bundibugyo at six, Mbale City at six, Kiboga at six, Mpigi at six and Arua City at six, while the most efficient local government was Kalangala and Obongi District Local Governments at 0.4 per shilling for output service delivery.(ii) Local revenue performance of Financial Year 2020/2021The audit reports for the 60 entities reported on indicated that some local governments’ local revenue was not reported on, well aware that this is a core source of revenue for the functioning of the district councils. This denied the councils facilitation to supervise and monitor the works of local governments. These local governments included Mitooma District, Nakasongola District, Kyankwanzi District and Lamwo District. Mr Speaker, details of these are provided in Annex one. Overall, the local governments underperformed on local revenue, registering revenue underperformance of Shs 30.4 billion of the target of Shs 68.248 billion, translating into local revenue performance of only 56 per cent. The local governments that performed dismally were Kole District, Soroti City, Zombo District, Kitgum Municipal Council and Moroto District Local Government. (iv)  The performance of salaries, gratuity and pensionsThe report of the Auditor-General highlights the planned salaries, gratuity and pensions by the entities for the financial year. The reports overall indicated that Shs 632.75 billion was approved for salaries, gratuities and pensions at the close of the financial year. And at the close of the financial year, Shs 610.543 billion was availed to pay salaries, gratuities and pensions. However, only Shs 571.3 billion was actually absorbed by the entities, causing a return of Shs 38.6 billion to the Treasury, indicating underperformance of 6.3 per cent in the budget item. Mr Speaker, the committee made observations and request Members to look through those observations. I will take you directly to recommendations: The committee recommends that –i. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development accounts for the under-release for funds to the local governments.ii. Accounting officers under whose supervision local governments fail to utilise funds released to them be held personally liable.iii. entities whose cost of administration was above six times the cost of output service delivery be subjected to further investigations to ascertain the source of the abnormality in the operation cost of the local government.[Mr Mapenduzi]6741THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 6 JANUARY 2023iv. On the local revenue performance, most district local governments can hardly meet their target thus misleading in the planning and budgeting for services to be provided to the population. Accordingly, accounting officers should ensure that local revenue enhancement committees are strengthened.v. The local governments devise effective measures to address the leakages and hold accountable revenue officers who abuse their powers. vi. The accounting officers should ensure that an updated revenue register is in place to track and enhance the revenue performance of the respective entities. vii. Accounting officers should ensure that an effective revenue mobilisation and tax education plan is in place to help local governments perform better.3.2 Payroll management in local governments. (i) Management of payroll deductionsThe audit report noted that accounting officers effected payroll deductions from employees’ salaries to be remitted to Uganda Revenue Authority (URA), Uganda Consumer Lenders Association (UCLA), United Bank for Africa (UBA) and other beneficiaries. It was done contrary to Paragraph B-a (17) of the Uganda Public Service Standing Orders 2010 as there were vivid cases of over and under remittances and non- remittances in some cases.Overall, as per the audit report, whereas 84 local governments deducted Shs 259.65 billion to be remitted to the different beneficiaries, there were over-remittances of Shs 2.16 billion and under-remittances of Shs 7.33 billion. Additionally, there were delays in remitting funds for over 55 days as reported in Obongi District Local Government. Mr Speaker, for purposes of saving time, I will take you through the committee observations.The committee observed that accounting officers do not conduct verification of staff lists to ascertain the right amounts of money to be deducted in favour of various beneficiaries. Also, the committee observed delayed and non-remittances of deduction to UCLA and UBA as a breach of paragraph 4.1.6 of the Establishment Notice No.2 of 2019. Local Government staff risk being subjected to penalties associated with failure to settle or meet their contractual obligations to credit lending institutions. We have provided recommendations as indicated and I will request Members that for purposes of time, we also provided a report on unauthorised loan deductions, where the committee observed that the audit report noted that 48 local governments made unauthorised loan deductions totalling to Shs 11.1 billion and deductions were from 6835 employees that lack letters of consent or undertaking. You can look through, Mr Speaker and Members; you will see the irregularities as indicated. The committee made additional observations, but for purposes of saving time, I will request you to look through the observations and I will take you directly to recommendations. Recommendations The accounting officers or entities should play a central role in the initiation, processing and approval of all loan deductions. All loan deductions should be backed by adequate documentation.The responsibility of loan recovery cases, to be a duty of local governments and that the Minister of Public Service should terminate the requirements for undertaking with lending institutions as a policy measure.Finally, the Government should institute more protective measures to cap multiple and over-borrowing by employees.Mr Speaker, we also detected delayed deletion of staff from payroll as reported by the Auditor-6742STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTGeneral. The audit revealed that on the account of delayed deletion of staff from payroll, some accounting officers authorised payment for salaries to staff who are either retired, transferred their services, absconded or died. I will give you an example of Gulu city where there was a delayed deletion of 20 staff who had left services leading to payment of Shs 64,323,558. Mr Speaker, such anomalies lead to loss of funds, and we have provided recommendations to that effect. We would also like to report on non-deduction of PAYE from political leaders. We have indicated details of our findings as a committee, where political leaders were not subjected to deductions of PAYE. We have also provided recommendations and to be specific.The committee recommends that accounting officers recover all the monies that were not deducted from these political leaders or the accounting officers will have to be held liable and they will have to make good the losses. Mr Speaker, we would also like to report on payment of salaries, pension and gratuity of IPPS. We noted for example, in Bulambuli District, where nine pensioners were paid a total of Shs 170 million off IPPS. The committee observed that payment of salary pension and gratuity off IPPS contravenes paragraph 4.5 of the Establishment Notice No.2 of 2019 and could lead to abuse and manipulation for private gains. As a result, we recommend the following:The accounting officers should ensure to reconcile their respective entity staff lists together with the Ministry of Public Service IPPS, in order to avoid payment of salaries and pension and gratuity off IPPS. The accounting officers should desist from the practice and can only take such actions with the approval of the line ministries. Mr Speaker, under 3.3, we have off-budget receipts. We have provided those details and I request Members to look through. The committee has also provided observations, and I will take you straight to recommendations. The recommendations as follows: The accounting officers should adhere to paragraph 29 of the Budget Execution Circular for the said financial year.The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should mainstream the disbursement of funds through the normal planning and budgeting cycles to avoid off-budget receipts. Mr Speaker, we would like to report on the operationalisation of the new cities. The audit report noted that during the Financial Year 2019/2020, Government made a pronouncement upgrading 10 municipal councils to city status, effective 1st July 2020. These include: Arua, Mbarara, Gulu, Jinja, Fort Portal, Mbale, Masaka, Soroti and Hoima. The audit report noted the following:The Government did not provide funding in the budgets of the newly created entities to enable them to operate as cities. They continue to operate using the budget of the municipal councils.The cities lacked establishment structures against which the recruitment of the required human resources could be undertaken.There was no guidance on the allocation and sharing of assets. This has become a contentious matter between the councils of the newly created cities and the district entities from where the cities were created. Mr Speaker, we would like to report on the capitation grant for printing. This is a matter that has been concluded and we will request Members to read through, but we have also provided recommendations that, for all the money sent to districts, there should be clear [Mr Mapenduzi]6743THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 6 JANUARY 2023guidelines on how this money is supposed to be used, and the initial intended purpose should not be lost. Mr Speaker, we will now take you to service delivery matters and projects under UgIFT. The audit report noted the following:Delayed disbursement and failure to absorb project fundsA sample of 36 projects failed to absorb funds availed to them for implementation activities and as a result, a total of Shs 431 billion and $30.2 million remain on the project accounts. Mr Speaker, failure to observe to absorb project funds was mainly attributed to the fact that disbursement of any project funds depends on the utilisation and full accountability of prior disbursement, which was still a challenge for most projects. In addition, absorption of funds was affected by COVID-19. Failure to absorb project funds affects subsequent disbursement, which affects the implementation and as a result, service delivery gets affected. Mr Speaker, under that, we also have delayed procurement processes. Audit noted delays in completing the procurement processes. In some cases, the time taken between procurement initiation and contract signing were more than five months. Delays in procurement were majorly caused by numerous administrative reviews, inefficiencies within the PDUs and COVID-19, which resulted in entities operating at only 30 per cent. Delayed procurements result in delayed commencement of works and loss of implementation time ends affecting service delivery.The committee made observations, Mr Speaker - and to be specific - we would like to report the following:The committee observed that these projects mainly related to UgIFT, had cases where the district made full payment - and I would like to emphasise this; there are cases where districts made full payment ahead of project implementation, contrary to the provision of the laws. For instance, in Kole district, the district expended Shs 1,717,875,500 for construction of Okwerodot Seed Secondary School - leaving only a balance of Shs 94,974,500 as retention money. Now, this was done when the project had not been fully executed. The committee recommends that the PPDA should review the whole hybrid procurement modality with a view of saving Government from losing funds to contractors who lack capacity. Mr Speaker, we would also like to report on long outstanding receivables. For purposes of time, I will request that Members peruse it. It is provided for and you have them. We have also provided recommendations and just to run through:1)  The revolving funds for future programmes to be covered or guided by a legal framework to provide for sanctions and detailed programme management structures.2)  The accounting officers should institute measures and mechanisms possible to recover outstanding balances including developing clear recovery plans and accountability mechanisms. 3)  Government should adhere to timeliness in the provision of grants to different programmes to realign it with the reporting framework, so as not to cause distortion in the financial reporting. Mr Speaker, we found out that in most cases, releases are sent late and so, it affects the entire process of reporting for local governments. Query 8 is under outstanding payables; we have provided details, you can look through. There are also observations we have made as a committee and their recommendations were provided. And these recommendations, if taken, are very important in improving that particular aspect. 6744STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTWe have also made details on non-quantifiable contingency liabilities and for purposes of saving time, I request members to look through and please permit me to take you directly to recommendations under that, which is on the next page. i)  The accounting officers should adhere to the Auditor-General’s advice of seeking to engage the Attorney-General for legal support. ii)  The local governments and the Attorney-General’s Office should adequately budget for legal representation and the Office of the Attorney-General should update staff recruitment to improve on the effectiveness of legal representation at the regional level.We are putting this in because we found out so many court cases at local government entities and we have provided those details. No.10 is on payment of administrative advances into staff personal bank accounts. We have also made observations; I will request you to look through them; and there are recommendations and for purposes of clarity, let me read them:(i)  The accounting officers in question should ensure full recovery of the unaccounted-for funds within three months from the adoption of this report or make good the losses.(ii)  We recommend that the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to Treasury should hold accounting officers personally liable and reprimand them for contravening the provisions of the financial and accounting regulations. This is particularly where advances are sent to individual staff accounts, and they fail to account for.No.11 is on the award of V AT-inclusive contracts to non-V AT registered persons. The audit report revealed that some local governments awarded several contracts and made payments amounting to them without proof of active V AT registration and as a result, V AT was paid to non-registered companies or those deregistered due to non-compliance. The accounting officers gave their part of the story and the committee made observations and we have the following recommendations: The Permanent Secretary and Secretary to Treasury should hold the accounting officers personally liable and reprimand them for contravening section 35(3)E and section 45(3)D of the Local Government PPDA regulations, 2006. The amounts in question be recovered or the accounting officers make good the loss within three months from the time of adoption of this report. No.12 is on lack of land titles; Section 9 of the local government financial accounting regulations 2(7) requires the accounting officers to ensure safe custody of all assets of council. A review of the lease of land pieces owned by various local governments revealed that the district lands were not titled. We would like to give an example; in Kumi District, 58 pieces of land owned by the district local government lacked titles. We recommend that the accounting officers should expedite the titling processes for the affected lands that have been highlighted by the committee to avoid encroachment and loss of property. On No.13, implementation of the Uganda Road Fund; we have provided details and the committee has also provided observations and would like to recommend the following:The committee recommends that accounting officers should take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to ensure that the required funds to complete the projects are obtained. And this is coming from cases where resources were meant to be provided and the releases never came. So, we recommend that the accounting [Mr Mapenduzi]6745THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 6 JANUARY 2023officers should take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance.The accounting officers should take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to ensure that the required funds to complete projects are also obtained. For clarity, in most of the local governments we went to, we realised that many local governments receive far less than the amount meant to be provided for road works and this is a challenge.Fortunately, not so long ago, the matter was raised here and it is sad that local governments are failing to maintain the roads and the citizens are not getting the services they need. And this is a matter that needs to be taken very seriously. On recovery, based on the interactions that we have made with committees from the 60 district local governments, the committee has since made a total recovery of Shs 37,864,984 as indicated in the appendix. This is different from what we previously reported. In conclusion, for districts and municipalities that we have attached and we have it in the report document in annex 3, we would like to recommend that the observations and recommendations as contained in the cross-cutting issues be taken to cover all those district local government entities. Finally, I would like to, very sincerely, thank members of this committee for the dedication and commitment they have demonstrated for the period we have been engaged in these activities. I would also like to thank you for providing all the support to this committee for all the work we have so far done. With that, I wish you a prosperous 2023 and it is not late to say, Happy New Year to all of you. Thank you, very much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable colleague. I think we are on the right course because they say when the Auditor-General finishes doing his work as provided for under Article 163(4) of the Constitution, which is reporting to the House, under that same Article (5), we are required to process, debate and take action on the report, which would then also be taken action upon under the Public Finance Management Act. The minister is supposed to bring a treasury memorandum of which we would handle as per rule 221 of our Rules of Procedure. So, this makes our work much easier. I know these are accountability issues, but I was requested by the minister to give us a few highlights, which would guide us in the debate because accountability issues are to do with the accounting officers, the Chief Administrative Officers and the permanent secretaries. So, the minister should not be answering on their behalf. But there are issues I felt after he had consulted me, which I felt are very important for us to know so that they even guide us when we are processing the budget framework paper. Let me allow the minister to quickly give a few highlights and then we proceed on to the matter. 1.15THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi):  Thank you. Happy New Year to you, Mr Speaker, and honourable colleagues.  I would like to thank the committee for a job well done. I have looked at their report, and it is quite heavy, but I noticed that this report on the 60 local governments presents a fair representation of what is happening in the rest of the local governments. So, it will help us as local governments to improve in terms of management and accountability of funds. So, the government will implement the recommendations of the report and give Parliament feedback on the actions taken at each entity as given in the report. Nonetheless, indeed it is true, Mr Speaker, that this report raises certain key policy issues with regard to the financing of local governments 6746STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTand services at that level. So, I have prepared a little comment, for information of Parliament, so that as we go to debate, we have some extra information on some of these issues. Just to highlight them, the issue of inadequate funding of local governments is a very critical matter, as you heard in the report; only 83 per cent of the money appropriated is actually disbursed to the local governments. And indeed, the local governments are complaining that they are not getting even 15 per cent of the national budget. So, we have made our proposal on what is possible for the way forward, in particular, to the Local Government Finance Commission, to guide/study this matter, present a proposal to the government and we shall bring it here. And also, there is need to really protect local government budgets, from media budget cuts. The issue of return fund(s) to the Treasury - you have heard that Shs 229 billion was returned to Treasury. This is a serious matter; it means people cannot get the services, which are supposed to be provided by the local governments. However, there are challenges. And I thank the Chairperson and the committee; they have highlighted them quite well. The hybrid system of procurement, the late release of funds and the service commission issues - we shall continue to reflect on these. And I have made my proposals in that statement on how we can debate this, as Parliament, in terms of a good way forward. The cost of services in the local governments - I like the committee’s analysis, which shows that only 26 per cent of the budget in local governments is for development expenditure, the rest goes to employee costs and other transfers to other units. Now this is a serious matter, as far as decentralisation is concerned.  So, as stakeholders, we need to look at the position we have taken, as a government, by putting a ban on the creation of new administrative units, so as to check the multiplication of these structures, which increase operational costs at the expense of service delivery, and other measures, which I will call on the Members to bring up forward –(Interruption)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of procedure from Hon. Sarah Opendi. Hon. Magyezi, you can take your seat.MS OPENDI: Thank you, Speaker. I have keenly listened to what the minister said and noticed that he is instead responding to the report, which you said is not for debate. So, would it not be procedurally right that the minister waits for us to debate and responds at the end with a wider view, next Tuesday? Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I really debated this issue in my mind. But when I read through what the minister was giving, I felt this information can guide you in the debate. Now colleagues, information aimed at guiding can either be used for guidance or dismissed.So, to me, it will depend on how you receive the information at individual level and how it will guide you to form your presentation as far as the debate is concerned. So, honourable minister, please conclude because as you can see, some Members are already saying that you are not helping them; you better move quickly.MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, when the Members read my information paper, they will find that it is quite helpful. Anyhow, let me just conclude by saying that there is some information for you on the issues of local revenue performance, payroll management, court cases against local governments, titling of district lands,  and issues of paying administrative advances into staff personal bank accounts. Now where we are with the operationalisation of the new cities, I have given you that information. Look at it so that as we debate, we also look at the issue of road maintenance. We all have challenges with road maintenance and [Mr Magyezi]6747THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 6 JANUARY 2023the problem is really inadequate funding for the road sector at the local government level. I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. Certainly, as a government, once the report is approved, we shall implement its recommendations. And we shall present a memorandum to the Parliament. Thank you so much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Colleagues, like I said, the debate is deferred for two weeks. Take your time and read through the report. It is a report, which we should give a thorough time for debate. I want to give you more time, not two minutes. So, go and research - Hon. Kabanda, you can only seek clarification when there is a Member on the Floor. Otherwise, what you are doing is not allowed under our rules, unfortunately. Anyway, honourable colleagues – yes, point of procedure, honourable member.MS KAAYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Climate Change Act that was passed last year in August -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Colleagues, can we have order in the House?MS KAAYA: Mr Speaker, the Climate Change Act that was passed last year in August amended the Public Finance Management Act, to compel the minister to avail us with the certificate certifying that the Budget Framework Paper (BFP) is climate-change responsive. However, on the 23rd when we received it, we all only received the gender certificate and not the climate-change certifying paper. Therefore, the procedural matter I am raising is to request you, Mr Speaker, to guide us on the way forward regarding whether the minister, in consultation with the National Planning Authority, can avail us with the climate-Change responsive certificate. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Minister of Finance, would you want to comment? 1.23THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Planning) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Mr Speaker, let me thank the honourable member, for raising this matter. During the presentation or the laying of the National Budget Framework Paper on the Table in Parliament, we focused on the PFMA as has been, and complied with the requirements as we have been traditionally doing. So, this being a new law, there was an oversight on the issue of climate. However, it is quite clear in the NBFP that climate change issues have been heavily addressed. In fact, when you look at the priorities, issues relating to climate change are number one on the agenda -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable minister, that is not what the law requires you to do. You are going into uncharted territory. MR LOGOLOOBI:  Mr Speaker, we undertake to lay, on the Table, the certificate as required under the Climate Change Act, on Tuesday, next week.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister, and thank you, honourable member. Yes, LOP - colleagues, we are entering into the time for our Muslim brothers.THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Speaker. I want to thank the honourable Shadow Minister for Environment, for raising the matter. There was an oversight when the Climate Change Act was being considered because it never cross-referenced the PFMA. And when you do not cross-reference, you cannot amend the PFMA by necessary implications. The minister needs to move and we cause an immediate amendment to the PFMA; what we are dealing with now is a conflict of laws. I do not know whether the minister is alive to these issues because we need to move very fast. There was no cross-referencing the Act to the PFMA and, therefore, it needs a direct amendment. Otherwise what we are dealing with is vagueness, Mr Speaker.6748STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT [Mr Mpuuga]Therefore, the minister needs to move or we shall move him and the House to cause the amendment.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The good thing is that in conflict of laws - a subject, which I think all of us studied in law school - the moment you have a conflict of laws and they are all very clear statutes, the one which came last takes precedence because they are all in equal measure. It is only the Constitution which - What he is saying is that it needs to be expressly stated, but as of now, you must comply. That is what the law clearly states. I am glad, honourable minister, that you have admitted that it was an oversight, but it was an oversight from all of us. I would like to appreciate the honourable colleague from Kiboga for raising this matter. When she consulted me, I told her that I would give her space to raise it so that the minister can take the necessary action.Honourable colleagues, you know that we are considering the budget – Hon. Kabanda, you had an issue. Is it a procedural matter? If it is clarification, it is not provided for.MR DA VID KABANDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. We come here to guide the country. I heard the Chairperson of the Committee on Local Government say that the local governments seek legal advice from the Attorney-General. Is that procedurally right? Is it true that these local governments are supposed to seek legal advice from the Attorney-General? This is because to my understanding, the local governments seek legal advice from the Solicitor-General. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleague, to make it very simple, the Office of the Solicitor-General is under the Attorney-General. Secondly, we are discussing and debating and yet I have deferred the debate and discussion. However, it is very important for a colleague to get clarification on such matters. Honourable colleagues, as you know, we are handling the National Budget Framework Paper and the timelines are very clear. Rule 145(2) of our Rules of Procedure require sectoral committees to have presented to the Budget Committee by 20 January. Therefore, Chairman of the Budget Committee, I hope the sectoral committees have started or are about to start reporting. By the 20th, all sectoral committees should have reported. Under the same rule 145(3), we are required, as a House, to have finished processing the budget framework paper by 1 February. I have seen, many times while in this House, us stampeding in urgency and we end up not debating these very important documents. Therefore, I hereby direct the Committee on Budget to process and finish their report by 25 January so that we can have an extensive debate on the National Budget Framework Paper. (Applause) Even if it means having five sittings before 1 February, so be it. We want Members to have a detailed debate on the National Budget Framework Paper where I will not limit you to two or three minutes, but to the research you would have made. Chairperson of the Committee on Budget, please ensure that you relay this. MS OPENDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is very unfortunate that we continue to lose people on our roads. You asked the Ministers of Internal Affairs, and Works and Transport to prepare and give a statement over the matter to this House. Mr Speaker, two days ago, I was watching TV and one of the doctors was on TV talking about the challenge of blood. Before we broke off, I wanted to raise this matter as a matter of national importance because the Uganda Blood Transfusion Service, due to lack of funding, cannot process blood that has actually been collected. We have seen children dying in hospitals because of lack of blood. Now, with the road accidents, blood is critical in clinical care. SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT6749THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 6 JANUARY 2023Would it not be right that the Minister of Health also be asked to come and give us a report on Uganda Blood Transfusion Service and whether they have the necessary funds for them to get the reagents to process blood for clinical care? Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, these are issues which have a budget implication. Since we are in the budgeting process, these are issues that we should allow to be highlighted so that the minister - Information is for a Member on the Floor and unfortunately, we do not have anyone on the Floor. Points of clarification are also for Members on the Floor, especially the ministers. Honourable colleagues, I am applying your rules; these are the rules of the House and not mine. Hon. Sarah Opendi, you are right. The Minister of Health should come and give us a statement on Uganda’s readiness regarding blood transfusion services across the country.MS NAJJUMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In the previous sitting where the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development laid the budget framework paper, he assured this august House that he is going to clear salaries for civil servants for the month of December. However, up to now, in Nakaseke, there are civil servants who have not yet been paid for the month of December –(Interjections) - Allow me to talk because it is my time.Honourable Minister of Finance – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you are protected. Please go ahead. MS NAJJUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Up to now, they have not been paid their December salary, especially the scientists. Mr Speaker, most of these civil servants have salary loans and are being fined by the banking institutions. Therefore, I need clarification from the Minister of Finance, since he is around, on the same matter. Thank you so much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, usually when we conclude a session, I go back to revise my performance and I read through the Hansard. Sometimes our Hansard is very cluttered reason being, like I have warned on several occasions, you bring side talk into the Hansard. People are just talking to you and you respond. Then someone asks: where was this coming from? Any person who has no access to the microphone is not recorded on the Hansard. So, I request that you do not respond to them. You can seek the protection of the Speaker and I will prevail. I will protect you as you submit, but do not respond to an honourable colleague who is trying to get you off track. Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, please, you have heard from Hon. Najjuma. 1.34THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Whereas we released all the wage components for the quarter we just closed, we continue getting factual complaints that some of our civil servants still go unpaid.I would like to propose that you allow us to undertake an investigation to find out what is going on; why people remain unpaid when, from our side, we have released the entire wage for the period.1.35MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have made it clear that the budgeting process is very critical in this country and indeed, it translates our vision and mission into action. The minister for general duties said they have loaded all the money - I do not know whether he is speaking as the finance minister or a Ugandan, who comes from Rubanda District, and whether his district has already received all the money. 6750STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT [Mr Kaberuka]Mr Speaker, the budgeting process is very critical. On Thursday, we were supposed to meet the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, but they did not show up. They delay the process so that you do not hit the target. In addition, they do not respect the Budget that this Parliament appropriates. In fact, they have turned themselves into a Parliament and do their own things. This is why they ensure that they delay the process; they come here and make statements like they have just mentioned that they have loaded money for science teachers and everything, which is not true at all. Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance: would you, please, help this Parliament. Our cardinal role as Parliament is appropriation and it is a preserve. It is incorrect for Hon. Musasizi and his colleagues to take Parliament’s power. Therefore, can we have the finance ministry tamed so that they are able to align themselves towards the Constitution and respect this Parliament? Otherwise, Parliament is one of the arms of the Government that should be allowed to do its work.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister of state for finance for general duties, since you have been referred to, would you like to respond?MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, when we are speaking in this House, the whole country is listening. I have not made any decision as Hon. Musasizi. It is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I want that clarified so that people out there do not think I am the one denying them -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Musasizi, I wanted you to respond to only one point [Mr Musasizi rose_] Hon. Musasizi, the Speaker, is speaking. Hon. Musasizi, I wanted you to respond to the issue of refusing to appear. I have received three MPs telling me they waited for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to appear before the committee, but they did not. The other issue is that we are expecting a report from the Committee on Budget on the performance of the Budget. Then, we shall have a wide debate on whether the finance ministry has taken over our powers or not. Those are issues we shall handle. For now, respond on the issue of not appearing before the committee.MR MUSASIZI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true we were scheduled to appear before the Committee on Budget yesterday morning at 10.00 a.m. However, due to unavoidable circumstances, we requested the chairperson and the leadership of the committee to allow us to appear on Monday at 9.00 a.m., and the chairperson agreed. I wish the Chairperson of the Budget Committee was here because he would agree with me on this. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. House adjourned sine die.(The House rose at 1.39 p.m. and adjourned sine die.)