PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTTHIRD SESSION - THIRD MEETINGTUESDAY , 30 JANUARY 2024PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA11465Tuesday, 30 January 2024very good. I wish we could continue standing by each other that same way. I will go straight away to matters of national importance. (Ms Opendi rose_)  Do you want to react to my communication, Hon. Sarah?2.24MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): (Expunged)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please. MS OPENDI: (Text expunged)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, these are simple matters. What has surprised me is that Hon. Sarah Opendi was with me today morning. She never indicated such an issue to me – (Members rose_) -  no. She had her issue, which I signed to be on the Order Paper tomorrow. However, honourable colleagues, if you can remember, I brought a guest - the Deputy Speaker of Kenya and her husband. I am the one who gave them transport. She had a programme. She requested me – she said: “By 4.00 p.m., I have to be back this side; will you help me?” I agreed. Number two, honourable colleagues – it was around midday – I wrote a chit to the Vice-President, informing her of the issues I had and seeking her indulgence. Okay? I was born in a way that I respect people. If she took it that way, I am really sorry because I never thought IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentTHIRD SESSION - 3RD SITTING - THIRD MEETINGParliament met at 2.21 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable colleagues. I welcome you to today’s sitting. I will start from where I started last time. I need the front benches to be occupied by the people who are supposed to be there. That is number one.Number two, if there is any shadow minister seated behind, please – now they were promoted; they got new seats. (Laughter) I need them to occupy the front bench. I know it is difficult to change; there are positions or seats that we are comfortable with, but - because someone usually says, “I am a shadow minister; I am your colleague”. So, we want colleagues to face each other and then they leave us, the commoners – the ordinary MPs. (Laughter)  I think it would be really good.Honourable colleagues, I would like to welcome you from Alito, where most of you went to pay last respects to our fallen colleague, Atat Cecilia Ogwal. I really thank you for the solidarity. You came in huge numbers, from across the political divide. (Applause)  That was 11466THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029 [The Deputy Speaker]– and I did not even know. That is why I was really shocked when Hon. Sarah was bringing it to me. However, honourable colleagues, we buried our colleague in peace. I thank those of you who came. I do not want the burial of our colleague, who taught us how to be humble, to be overridden by whatever individual who has issues. Please, I request that we stop it at this. I will personally look for the Vice-President and explain to her and we shall handle the matter. I am sorry about this. Hon. Macho?2.31MR GEOFFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia):  At this juncture, I would like to congratulate, my brother, Joel Ssenyonyi for being the Leader of the Opposition (LOP), Hon. Ssewungu for having come into the Opposition Cabinet, Hon. Nakimuli for having joined Cabinet, Hon. Dr Abed Bwanika for chairing what was once a dormant committee ; Hon. Lutaaya for coming in, Hon. Luttamaguzi, my very good friend, for taking the docket of lands and Hon. Namugga, for taking over information –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable, what is your issue?MR MACHO:  (Text expunged)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Point of order from Hon. Ssewungu.MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable member with whom we have been on the Committee on Education and Sports for a long time. He is praising and attacking me at the same time. Mr Speaker, I was the Vice Chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation and it is on record.  Minister Musasizi can attest to that because when he came to our committee, he said he never knew the committee was in existence, yet we handled a number of matters. We even tabled reports to Parliament. Mr Speaker, the honourable member is accusing committee members with whom we are working together and saying, it was a dormant committee  and this has been going around on several occasions. Therefore, is it in order for the honourable member to attack someone on the Floor of Parliament who served diligently and was elevated to the level of a minister - (Laughter) - by stating that we had a dormant committee  before the Members of Parliament with whom we worked together in the same committee? Is he in order?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, the language we use matters. To accuse a committee of Parliament of being dormant - Honourable member, please. MR MACHO:  Mr Speaker, with your wise guidance, I want to withdraw that statement of dormant committee . (Text expunged)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Macho, what are you up to, today?MR MACHO:  (Text expunged)As I summarise, my colleagues on the side of National Resistance Movement (NRM) have warmed enough. I think it is high time NRM changes guards so that we have new people on the Front Bench.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, Parliament does not have any role to play in the appointment of the shadow Cabinet. They do not come here for approval so they do not need to justify to us whom they have appointed and why. Please spare us that. Hon. Ssemujju.2.35MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso):  Mr Speaker, thank you very much. During the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution, there were soldiers in Parliament representing the UPDF. Three of them; Gen. David Tinyefuza, late Lt Col Serwanga  Lwanga, Col Dr Kizza Besigye gave their opinion on the return of parties. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR11467THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 30 JANUARY 2023The Commander-in-Chief wrote - and I still have a copy - guiding that military people should actually be listening posts. They should not say anything because they can cause the country problem. Mr Speaker, there is a case in the High Court against Gen. Muhoozi Kainerugaba (MK) getting involved in partisan politics yet his father guided clearly that military people can only - so Lt Gen. Elwelu should never say anything here. Just listen and go home. (Laughter)Mr Speaker, I seek guidance from you. The matter of Gen. Muhoozi Kainerugaba and supporters also addressing rallies is a matter before court now. Also, there is – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, let us finish and we go.MR SSEMUJJU:  I do not know why Hon. Nandutu is boiling. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, the guidance I seek from you is: I have seen reports, mainly on social media of you, our leader, canvassing support and even thanking people for being there for a military officer, MK, who is before a court for violating the Constitution and the guidance given by the Commander-in-Chief. In fact, if you recall, when the former army commander Gen. J.J. Odongo was appointed a minister, this Parliament refused to approve him for more than two months. Eventually, that changed. If it did not, Gen. Katumba Wamala would never have been a minister. The Constitution was thrown just like that.The point is whether, Mr Speaker, you are aware that this case is in court because I fear - I do not want to see my Speaker being dragged to court as a witness that he is part of the MKs who are violating the Constitution as it is being saturated on social media that the Speaker not only is a member of MK, but is canvassing support for a serving military officer. I thought, Mr Speaker, as our leader, that we have a duty to defend you. That is why I was offended when Hon. Opendi was attacking you. (Text expunged)  I was offended.  (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, when you occupy our offices, you must have a thick skin. All these things come and you laugh them off and go on. That is how we survive. Otherwise, you will start swallowing Panadol over comments for nothing. These are things we are used to; they come and go. On a very serious issue which Hon. Ssemujju, my brother, has raised: number one, I never attended any event where my brother, Muhoozi Kainerugaba attended and addressed a gathering. Number two, the youth from my district, who are my voters, had what they call a baraza  and part of that baraza  was to also appreciate their friend. There was no declaration of anyone stating that the youth of Mitooma have resolved he is going into politics. There was no declaration on anything. It was a baraza . People had football, bicycle competitions; people were happy and excited over one of their fellow young people and they see a bright future in him. Now, who am I, to start judging them? These are my voters. (Applause) This is very honest. I believe that in case I am accused, Hon.  Ssemujju will be the first person to defend me for attending because I never committed any crime. Colleagues, if you could allow - today, we have a substantial debate on the Budget Framework Paper. If you could really allow, we will just pick - let me first pick Hon. Okupa, then I will pick a lady - Do not mind. Let us do it quickly.2.41MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. We approved the Budget for this running financial year and that Budget included grant-in-aid for primary and secondary schools. The list of schools was published but up to date, no teacher has been recruited and parents have given up paying school fees and whatever they were paying in order to take care of the teachers. 11468THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029 [Mr Okupa]It is now seven months down the road, we have not seen the recruitment of the teachers and coding of the schools. Can the Ministry of Education and Sports tell us why they have taken this long to the detriment of the pupils and the students since the parents have refused to pay because they knew that the Government has taken over?Mr Speaker, this was not in this financial year. Remember it was last financial year that we had approved the schools, but the Ministry came in and said that finance had not released money. We brought them to this financial year, now it is seven months down the road. Can the Ministry of Education and Sports tell us what is happening?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable minister, are you here? Is it related? Hon. Ssewungu, if it is related -2.42MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter is related to the same. This Parliament has pronounced itself on the rising school fees in schools on several occasions. Hon. Brenda Nabukenya’s report said it here. As we talk, parents are charged Shs 3 million for a nursery child and the Government is watching. I cannot mention schools for their safety but the Minister should come out clearly and explain why parents are overcharged. They are charging them a lot of money from nursery, primary and even those Government-Aided secondary schools are charging above as well as others that are private.Secondly, as I conclude, during the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) Kampala faced a lot of clearance of the roads and signposts for a number of schools were removed. However, one of the minimum requirements for schools is a signpost. How will an inspector or anybody know where the school is without reading the signpost of the school? Could we know what is exactly happening? Are schools going to be running without signposts, yet it is a requirement under the Education Act?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Silwany, you said it is related to the same because - honourable colleagues, if it is issues to do with the Budget, I would propose that once we are debating the Budget Framework Paper you raise all these issues and then the Ministers will capture and respond. Okay. 2.44MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. What I would like to add is related to Hon. Ssewungu’s point. The honourable minister came to this House and committed himself on the issue of rising school fees and said he would come back in a fortnight with a conclusion and final position of the Government on the issue of school fees. It is good that he is here today and that is what I expect as part of his response to the House to tell us how they concluded because children are already going back to school and the parents are getting stuck on the issue of rising school fees. I expect the honourable minister to give us a final response this afternoon.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes. Honourable colleagues, on Liberation Day celebrations in Jinja, for those who listened to the President, he talked about the issue of charges in Universal Education institutions both primary and secondary. He said this is an issue where he is mobilising Parliament to support him to ensure that those institutions provide free education. I hope one of the things, as we process the Budget Framework Paper, the Minister will go with as an assignment is how much money is needed. These schools charge because they have insufficient numbers of teachers, issues of infrastructure and other issues. Therefore, we shall need to know - maybe it can come after because it might not have been planned for - but it is one of the issues and I do not want the President to go on record saying that Parliament should support me and then the vice continues and he says that Parliament did not support me. Okay.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR11469THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 30 JANUARY 2023Therefore, we agree that in this Budget, we have to look for money and we bridge the gap so that the charges in primary and secondary schools are stopped.The issue of nursery – honourable minister, I had allowed you. Hon. Paska Menya – Hon. Katusabe, is it on the same? Let me first allow Hon. Paska Menya and then Hon. Katusabe - On the same, of education? Let us first finish this.MS ACIRO:  Mr Speaker, I would like to raise a procedural matter concerning the requirements that some schools are asking from our pupils. You find that some schools are asking for too much. For example, they ask for hoes, pangas, and slashers from the students yearly. We ask ourselves what they are using the hoes and the pangas for, yearly. Some of them sometimes may be using them for their businesses and getting from parents, so as we look at this, let us also put into consideration the requirements that they ask from our pupils. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Atkins – 2.47MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, we have one Primary Teachers’ College (PTC) called Bwera Teachers’ College in the entire country. Kasese does not have a Government University resource. We still continue to urge the Government to consider Kasese. Mr Speaker, the reason why I am rising on this particular matter is that the Government closed the only Primary Teachers’ College in the district; a district with over 1.4 million people. I would like to urge the Minister to reconsider reversing, on affirmative action and dimension, the closure of the Bwera Teachers’ College given the fact that other places like Tooro, Ankole, and greater Bushenyi have PTCs and at the same time Government universities. Honourable minister, I kindly request that you wrap that in when you are making your submission because that is the cry of the entire population of Kasese as it relates to Bwera Teachers’ College. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, if I do not conclude this, it is going to degenerate into something else. No, we shall go off-track in terms of what we are supposed to do. We have an agenda. This even came under procedure, not under matters of national importance, so you can see. I request honourable colleagues – I can see all of you have very substantial matters, let the Minister first respond to this and I see how I can guide further. Honourable minister - 2.49THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do appreciate the concerns that colleagues have raised. When you talk about grant-aiding and coding of schools, yes, it is true that is our plan. As the Government, we have planned to have at least a primary school in each parish, a secondary school in each sub-county, and a university in each of the old regions of Uganda. We plan and budget but if the money is not available, what I do is to provide the services using the money that has been provided. The issue has been presented to the Cabinet and I think the Cabinet has addressed itself. We have been directed to look for money to ensure that each Ugandan child of school-going age is enabled to go to school and stay there until they complete the cycle. Mr Speaker, we do not have the money - when we discussed it here, it was as if we were going to get the money but if the money is not available, what do I do? This is coming at a time when we are all busy with the budget-making process. This is the time to address all these issues and we have presented them. We have presented the amount of money needed in the next financial year so that we have compulsory universal- 11470THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, let this debate continue in the Budget Framework Paper. Hon. Aisha - 2.54 MS AISHA KABANDA (NUP, Woman Representative, Butambala):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Just before Hon. Aisha, Hon. Musasizi, have we released the money which was provided for government-aiding? 2.54THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Whereas I cannot reliably confirm that money was provided, I wish to also respond as follows: Whenever we budget, that is the statement of intent. Sometimes we budget and do not realise the resources. If the resources are not realised, some priorities of the Government are deferred until such a time when the Government realises resources to implement them and probably this is the case and the issue at hand, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER : Honourable minister, have you received money for grant aiding?DR MUYINGO : Mr Speaker, what we receive is what we spend. We have not received that money which would be used to recruit teachers, grant-aiding and coding of the schools that are concerned. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, we have an Order Paper we are following today. This is a very important issue- I understand, but today was dedicated to the Budget Framework Paper. I will accommodate all these views when debating the Budget Framework Paper and for issues for which we want the minister to explain further, we can give him up to tomorrow to come back and respond because, sometimes, he also needs to consult with the technical people in the ministry. Hon. Aisha MS AISHA KABANDA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Macho just made a statement here that is extremely malicious, malevolent, and ill-intentioned. I am the Deputy Secretary-General of the NUP, and I find it extremely unfitting for me to continue speaking when someone speaks very maliciously and walks out as though he simply came to make a tribal statement and walk away. Mr Speaker, when you look at our front bench, it is well balanced. I request you to find it befitting to expunge Hon. Macho’s statement as it is very malicious and only playing a tribal card to malign the Opposition. I pray, sir. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I tend to agree with Hon. Aisha because these are not issues for Parliament; Parliament should be for issues to do with Parliament. How a political party or a political grouping chooses its people, is its issue. So please, Clerk, expunge that from our records. Hon. Richard Gafabusa, matters of national importance. 2.56MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding- THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  First sort yourselves out and choose one; I will pick one of you. Let him raise his issue. Is it about him? If it is not about him, we can pick his issue. Please - MR GAFABUSA:  Mr Speaker, I have seen a letter written by the Executive Director of Uganda Road Fund to the accounting officers of the districts, municipalities and cities to the effect that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has given Uganda Road Fund a zero-expenditure limit for our roads for this quarter. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR11471THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 30 JANUARY 2023Mr Speaker, I am concerned that the rains we had between September and December destroyed almost all our roads in the districts and to hear that the Ministry of Finance has not released money for roads for all the districts of Uganda when our roads are in bad state - My prayers are that:1. The Ministers of Works and Finance should come here and tell us exactly what is happening and what we are going to do.2. I kindly request the Minister of Finance to reconsider this and at least release some money. The Shs 1 billion you released was for a different matter, but we need money for the Uganda Road Fund to help our districts and all of us. Our roads are in a bad state. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable Minister for Works and Transport, before I ask the finance minister, how is the situation and what has been realised to you- for confirmation purposes before I call on Finance?2.58 THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Katumba Wamala):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the issue of zero release for quarter three is not only to the Road Fund but has affected us across the board. It is not only my ministry; I have been discussing with other ministers and they are facing the same. I think it is a general problem and not specific to the Ministry of Works and Transport. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No. Honourable minister, my issue was very simple; it was not to ask for a justification for failure to release. I wanted to confirm whether what Hon. Gafabusa said is true. GEN. KATUMBA:  It is true, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay. Thank you, General. Honourable Minister of Finance- let the chairperson of the committee- 2.59MR DAN ATWIJUKIRE (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. To put it graphically, if you look at UNRA, for example, they have given wage and there are some internal memos informing staff to restrict themselves on desk work. What does that mean? That the Government of Uganda is paying money for salaries for no work done across all the institutions.However, I will limit myself to infrastructure. Mr Speaker, if that is not poor planning, what do you want to call it? That you can pay for no work done and you can get that money and fail at least to put a face and give some money to be seen not actually to work but to be seen to do some work. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of district leaders from Iganga represented by Hon. Fred Bwino Kyakulaga and Hon. Sauda Kauma . They have come to observe the proceedings of this House; please join me in welcoming them. Thank you. Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development?3.01THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I share the same concerns. At the Ministry of Finance – (Interjection)  – I wish my friend, Hon. Ssewungu, would allow me to respond.  The concerns are genuine. However, the situation is occasioned by lack of adequate resources in time. Roads are a sensitive area. When this matter came to us, we did resolve in our top management that we shall be issuing additional cash limits in the month of February, when we realise more resources. These additional cash limits will mainly target the roads and other sensitive votes, which we run as Government.  Thank you.  11472THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Yes, Hon. Gilbert Olanya. Oh, I had allowed Hon. Kivumbi first. He had a matter – 3.02MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala):  Mr Speaker, in the same spirit with the Woman MP, Hon. Aisha Kabanda, who mentioned the issue about NUP, I also find the statement by my good friend, Hon. Opendi malicious. My humble appeal to you Chair, as much as politics is the game of the beast, we must give it a level of decency. (Expunged)   Now, for one to come on this Floor of Parliament and use this platform and impute a wrong motive is a statement that should be expunged from our records. Mr Speaker, I appeal to you that we expunge that malicious statement.  (Applause)3.03MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I understand the difficulties and the situation you find yourself in, but a precedent was set in this House.  First of all, as the presiding officer who is offended, you would not be the right person to make a decision. I remember in the last Parliament, we had a similar situation. Some remarks were made about the presiding officer and the other presiding officer came upon a motion by a Member that if he wishes, he would move and then that record would be expunged. Otherwise, the question cannot be asked by the presiding officer. (Interjection)  That is the point I am making. Mr Speaker, I think my honourable colleagues have not understood me. The point I am raising is, as a presiding officer, if we allow that precedent that the presiding officer who has been offended also becomes the judge to decide in the House –(Interjection) -  Next time, we might – I was just giving guidance that we can prepare a motion afterwards and have it resolved.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Wait a bit. I have not taken offense from what Hon. Sarah Opendi said. Maybe because she had not heard my side, I even went to Mzee to ask for permission and he granted it. Maybe I should first give Hon. Opendi a chance. [Members: “No.”]3.05MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo):  (Expunged)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Once it is withdrawn, it is expunged from the records. Hon. Ssemujju?3.06MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso):  Mr Speaker, the rules are very clear. Withdrawing and expunging are different things. The moment the Hon. Sarah Opendi made that statement, she lost the right to be the one – we are very angry.  I, therefore, want to move that her entire statement is expunged from our record. That is the motion. The rules are very clear that you just put the matter to vote.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let me make it very easy. Is the motion seconded? [Members: “Yes.”]  Seconded by Hon Sarah, Hon. Silwany, Hon. Ssewungu, Hon. Rose Obiga, Hon. Nyeko, Hon. Pamela and Hon. Kimosho. Thank you.  I now put the question that the whole statement made by Hon. Sarah Opendi, including the withdrawal part, be expunged.  (Question put and agreed to.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, you know the rules. You cannot access a microphone without the permission of the presiding officer. I encourage you that when you have such issues, please consult. It helps a lot and we avoid such situations. Let us continue, the elders have guided very well. Hon. Gilbert Olanya.  COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR11473THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 30 JANUARY 20233.08MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since this is my first time to speak this year, I would like to say, Happy New Year, to you and my honourable colleagues.  I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the killing of Dr Samuel Ochora, District Veterinary Officer, Amuru District Local Government.  The killing of Dr Ochora took place on 25 January 2024 at 2.00 a.m. Dr Ochora was in the company of the DPC of Amuru, the Deputy DISO of Amuru, and the RDC of Amuru District Local Government. They were moving late at night on claims that they were implementing the presidential directives of evicting the Balaalo  from Amuru District. At that time, the DPC of Amuru, the deputy DISO and RDC informed the community that Dr Ochora was shot dead at that late hour by a one Lieutenant Corporal Francis Ekiu.  The death of our DVO shocked everyone in Acholi Subregion. Right now, we do not know exactly what happened to him at that late hour of 2.00 a.m. yet Dr Ochora was called right from his home. He was picked from his home by the DPC and the deputy DISO of Amuru.  The issues of Balaalo  in our area are quite serious. Our prayers are:1. First, an investigation should be thoroughly done on the District Police Commander (DPC) of Amuru, the Deputy District Internal Security Officer (D/DISO) of Amuru and the Resident District Commissioner of Amuru, on the circumstances surrounding the death of Dr Samuel Ochora, the District Veterinary Officer (DVO) of Amuru.2. Secondly, L/Cpl Francis Ekiu, who is believed to have caused the death of Dr Ochora, should also be properly investigated. Further, Mr Speaker, the father of Dr Ochora said the postmortem report indicated that there were no bullets shot at Dr Ochora. The doctor told the father that there was a big wound on the body, but no bullet was seen. Therefore, something might have happened to the DVO of Amuru. Mr Speaker, I pray that the minister concerned takes serious steps on this matter. We request for a report as fast as possible to console the family. I beg to move. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Sorry about that, Hon. Gilbert. Right Honourable Prime Minister – although we must take caution that this is a criminal matter. Like he has said, investigations should be done thoroughly, but the issue of linking up with the community so that it does not spread out is very important. Beyond the criminal investigations and all that, there is community engagement needed on such issues. Otherwise, some people might think it is because of Balaalo  and that they have started killing. 3.12THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Mr Speaker, we are indeed sorry about what happened to the DVO. We got information that as they were moving in the car where he was seated, in front, the corporal had left the bullets in the gun chamber. A bullet got out of the chamber, into the leg of the corporal, who was the owner of the gun, and went into the cabin where the DVO was seated – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we not go there? MS NAKADAMA: No. I have said that because we are very sorry. I just wanted to say something –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Hansard is an official public record, so, we have to be cautious.11474THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029MS NAKADAMA: We are very sorry about that and that is the story that we had. However, the investigations have to be thoroughly done to know exactly what happened. A report will be given to this Parliament. I thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Parliament does not receive such reports; they are not ours. These are reports for the Directorate of Public Prosecutions (DPP) and all. What is very important, from what I got, is engaging the community. For example, with preliminary information, to cool tensions, you could engage leaders from the area – the area MP and all that – and manage the community on such a matter. I request that you arrange with the Minister of Internal Affairs and meet with these MPs tomorrow. This is because they need to tell their people on the ground something. Okay? MS NAKADAMA:  Honourable colleagues, we shall have a meeting in my office, that is, on the third floor, with the Minister of Internal Affairs. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Time? MS NAKADAMA: At 10.00 a.m. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Linos Ngompek. 3.15MR LINOS NGOMPEK (NRM, Kibanda North County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. In a letter addressed to the Executive Director of Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) on 17 December 2023, African Development Bank (ADB) threatened to suspend disbursement of $288 million to KCCA for the reconstruction of the dilapidated road network or infrastructural system in Kampala. The bank said Uganda had failed to provide counterpart funding and that there was noncompliance with environmental and social safeguards. The bank said that they would suspend the funding to KCCA under the project, effective 1 February 2024. My prayer is that the minister should explain to us the steps taken so far because we do not want our roads to be affected. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, did you want to say anything about that? 3.16THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, regarding this matter, I chaired a meeting in December, involving the two ministers for Kampala, the executive director and the bank. We made a decision to provide the counterpart funding amounting to Shs 15 billion. If you check properly, in the quarterly release for quarter three, we have actually provided Shs 20 billion for this purpose. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Now, beyond counterpart funding, there were other critical issues in that letter, which I saw. There were issues to do with the project-affected persons (PAPs) and the environment, which were not under your docket. With such issues, the best way - because the minister coming here to read a statement from the technical people is, sometimes, not enough. Let the committee summon the minister responsible for KCCA and then report back to this House on Thursday with a brief. This is because the deadline is Friday and we do not have much time. We want to get a very clear update on what has been taken as serious steps to address this matter. Hon. Nkunyingi Muwada? 3.18MR MUWADA NKUNYINGI (NUP, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance regarding 450 Ugandan nationals who are currently held hostage in Myanmar, popularly known as Burma. I received correspondences, COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR11475THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 30 JANUARY 2023of course, as a shadow minister, because the line Minister of Foreign Affairs is regularly absent. I have received correspondence from a number of victims, suggesting that about 450 Ugandans are being held as hostages in Myanmar by rebel groups. I have also received equally disturbing information from a number of Ugandans in Cairo, saying they have been denied exit, with a requirement to pay over $500,000 in immigration fines as a new policy in Cairo. Mr Speaker, my prayers are that the Government of Uganda briefs this House on the actual number of Ugandans being held in Myanmar by rebel groups, and which efforts are being taken to rescue these Ugandans. Equally, what measures are being initiated to rescue the Ugandan nationals who are currently stuck, with the majority detained in Egypt and in other countries of the Middle East? I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, come on Tuesday next week with a statement regarding this matter. It is a very critical matter, which needs urgency.MR OTIMGIW: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You earlier guided that in order for some of our new Members to be known, especially on the Opposition bench, the shadow ministers should occupy the front bench. At the moment, I am seeing some senior shadow members sitting at the back yet we have a lot of space at the front unoccupied. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They have refused to listen to the Speaker so I have forgiven them . (Laughter) They will find a way.Leader of the Opposition, you should mobilise your people to always be on the Front Bench. Honourable colleagues, it is a sweet bench. I think the Whip should do that. Hon. Kimosho -Honourable colleagues, some of you raised issues – (Member rose_) No, there is no one on the Floor so your point of clarification does not fall anywhere.3.21MR DAN ATWIJUKIRE KIMOSHO (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance - and you had guided on this matter –I am requesting that when I highlight it, I will give the reason I am bringing it back.Mr Speaker, there is Foot and Mouth Disease outbreak in the cattle corridors. It is not only in Western Uganda, but I have also heard that it is even in Bukedea. And this has been happening every time, now and again.The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has been on record that they cannot afford to vaccinate animals as it is required from the government coffers. Now, they have issued a circular for total quarantine on animals and animal products.Mr Speaker, we are talking about children going back to school, people with bank loans that they need to clear. We are talking about people going to hospitals for treatment yet you are telling them, you are issuing total quarantine on animals and animal products!My constituency of Kazo and Kiruhura entirely depend on animals for survival. Mr Speaker, what hurts me most is that the commissioner issuing this quarantine is seated in Entebbe. From the time of the outbreak, she has not stepped there and none of her technical team has come to assess, behaving as if we are still in the protectorate, getting directives from the United Kingdom to Uganda on what should happen without even any assessment on the ground.Mr Speaker, when you talk about total quarantine, you are talking about people losing money. It is the responsibility of the Government to vaccinate these animals. If it fails, one of my prayers is that they should consider compensating people for the lost business because it is the responsibility of the Government. (Interjections)11476THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029 [Mr Kimosho]Two, I knew,  (text expunged)Mr Speaker, the law we are operating with is a 19- THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Point of order?MRSSEMUJJU:  Mr Speaker, I have not said anything . (Laughter) (Text expunged)Mr Speaker, you know that I have not said anything. (Laughter) Is he in order to impute bad motive from an innocent legislator who has said nothing?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Kimosho, why are you entering into Hon. Ssemujju’s heart to pick out whatever he is -MR ATWIJUKIRE:  Mr Speaker, I love Hon. Ssemujju. It was out of excitement that I mentioned his name. Thank you very much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Kindly, withdraw that. Remember, we passed a Bill here so, this business of men loving men - (Laughter)MR ATWIJUKIRE:  Mr Speaker, with your guidance, I withdraw the statement.MR ATWIJUKIRE:  The important issue here is that we are operating within the law of 1918. The Animal Diseases Act was put in place in 1918 and that is the law that we are moving with. We are not looking at the considerations of the economy and the changing trends yet we are still using the same law to address the 2023/2024.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Prayers, honourable member?MR ATWIJUKIRE:  My first prayer is that the ministry should consider immediate amendment of this law.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  On matters of national importance, I do not allow information.MR ATWIJUKIRE : My second prayer is that there should be a consideration by this Government to compensate people for what they lose out of its failure to carry out its responsibility.My last prayer is that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should go on the ground immediately to carry out an assessment and address issues from the technical point of knowledge, and not sit in Entebbe to address issues of Kazo, Kiruhura, Kotido and Bukedea where animals are being affected. Thank you very much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I saw the letter from the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and I  saw the districts of Budaka, Bukedea, Bukomansimbi, Butaleja, Fort Portal City, Gomba, Isingiro, Kabarole, Kassanda, Kayunga, Kazo, Kiruhura, Kumi, Kyankwanzi, Kyegegwa, Kyotera, Luuka, Lwengo, Lyantonde, Mbarara, Mityana, Mpigi, Mubende, Nakaseke, Nakasongola, Ntungamo, Rakai, Rwampara - This is what I was talking about: when you have such interventions, use a platform of Parliament to engage because these Members of Parliament will be questioned in their constituencies and they will be stuck.As Parliament, you do not want to have a situation whereby one day, you will be accused of fighting Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD). We put a quarantine, Parliament came and stopped it and therefore, we allowed it and it went on. This is why I felt that it would be imperative for the minister to bring a statement here and then we debate it and put him on the spot-on issues of the law and what he would have told us here. But then again the urgency of it - I know some of these districts depend on cows and their children are going back to school. What are we going to do about it? Honourable colleagues, are we going to resolve that go and lift the quarantine so that people sell cows and you cause another crisis? You know! It is better we have ministers here and they give us clear information. Hon. Kivumbi, do you want to guide on the same?COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR11477THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 30 JANUARY 20233.29MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County , Butambala): Mr Speaker, I read that letter and a whistle-blower brought it to my attention. I have a suspicion of that letter because when I looked at the districts where they are trying to quarantine, they left out all the districts in Acholi. (Interjection)I am suspecting that they are saying, “Balaalo in Acholi, please don’t move because the rest of the country has Foot and Mouth Disease”. So, the efficacy of that letter should be interpreted properly because I am suspecting those people who are moving the Balaalo  in Acholi are behind this move and I am fully aware of its background and I am suspicious.Mr Speaker, somebody lobbied me to move this matter of national importance. I am suspecting that this issue should be thoroughly investigated.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Kimosho, what has disturbed you on this?MR ATWIJUKIRE:  Mr Speaker, I find it very unfortunate for a seasoned Member of Parliament – We are discussing issues affecting people who are earning zero and want to take their children to school and you rise to politicise this matter. I have lost all the respect that I had for you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, veterinary doctor.3.30DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Foot and Mouth Disease is a science. It is economical though it is also a disease. I want to request that that we refrain from politics. I went to school for 10 years to study what we are debating today. Mr Speaker, we have serious issues, and I can clearly understand where Hon. Kimosho is coming from. To many of our people, these animals are their livelihood. I want to support your guidance that the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should come on the Floor of Parliament and make a statement, so that the nation is guided. We cannot have 32 districts under quarantine. Our people are not going to survive. Some of the districts where FMD features are just subcounties. Not every part of the district is covered with FMD. They need to come here and present a scientific report, so that this is guided.Mr Speaker, lastly, one of the issues that has brought us problems in terms of disease control, is because we decentralised disease control. Currently, the district veterinary officers and the entire system, are detached from the centre. You find an RDC issues permission to someone to move animals and that has caused serious problems. I want to request that we amend his prayers to include the fact that veterinary services in this country be re-centralised as it was in the past, so that we can be in charge of the disease control in this country. I so submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, doctor. I had allowed the doctor.3.33DR ABRAHAM ISAMAT (NRM, Kapir County, Ngora):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I say something, I want to register my condolences to the family and the people of Northern Uganda upon losing a colleague who was a District Veterinary Officer. This particular issue we are discussing is very contentious. I can now imagine a situation where a District Veterinary Officer, who has been in charge, has lost his life and we are talking about an outbreak of FMD. I want to agree with the colleagues and more so, Hon. Kimashu - Kimosho - whatever the case may be -  (Laughter) -(Interjection)-  that one. FMD is a serious disease and if not controlled, it can put our country in a very big problem. I remember one time I stood on the Floor of Parliament, and I proposed that we would 11478THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029 [Mr Isamat]borrow a leave from Kenya, where a plant was established to manufacture vaccines for livestock diseases, and FMD is one of those. There was a statement that was made, that Uganda was in the process of putting up such a plant but that has not been implemented. We have children who are going back to school and not only them because many of us also derive our livelihood from animals. It is very unfortunate because when FMD occurs in an area, the minimum period it can ravage that place is six months. So, in a situation like this, if this issue is not handled properly, a district may be under quarantine for almost a year. Therefore, I want to urge honourable colleagues to put attention on this matter because when the outbreak of FMD spreads to other places of Uganda, the whole country will be quarantined. I thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, you can now see where the problem comes from. If we operate by letters coming from technical people to technical people without engaging the community, we will fall into such a situation. So, because of the urgency of this matter, I had given two weeks but let the Minister, on Thursday bring a statement to this effect. I will dedicate a whole hour for us to handle this matter so that all of you can contribute. I see Members from Kiruhura, Amolatar and Kassanda, and Hon. Koluo, all wanted to speak. Let us do it that way on Thursday. Otherwise, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please ensure this is done. Honourable colleagues, I had some issues but I realised most of them can easily fall into the debate for BFP. So, I will carry it on from there. Next item.BILLSFIRST READINGTHE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Just wait - Let us first have the Bill, because I had allowed the Bill; I will allow you later.3.41THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala):  Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill titled, “The Civil Aviation Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2023,” be read for the first time. Mr Speaker, I hereby lay, on the Table, the Bill and the Certificate of Financial Implication in compliance with Section 76(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and Rule 117(1) of the Rules of Procedure for the Parliament of Uganda. I beg to lay.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable minister. The Bill stands referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. However, honourable colleagues, the Minister engaged me on this matter with the Attorney-General and this appears to be a very urgent matter because it is to do with the certification of Entebbe International Airport to continue receiving traffic. The issue that came out of the audit - they are saying that, “You must do this by this time or we withdraw your certificate.” Therefore, honourable minister, before I give a timeline, let me give you two minutes to explain the urgency of the matter and why it came up this quick, then I see how best we can handle with the committee.GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA:  Mr Speaker, apologies. Uganda is a signatory to the International Convention on Civil Aviation, (ICAO), 1994. Under Article 37 of the Convention, Uganda as a member state is obliged to comply with the ICAO international standards and recommended practices contained in the 19 Annexes of the Convention.The ICAO Universal Oversight Audit Programme conducted a survey in Uganda an audit from 16 to 18 September 2023.In addition, Uganda is scheduled for a Universal Security Audit Programme, which is a continuous monitoring approach, commencing today 30 January to 8 February 2024. The auditors are already in the country, and this audit is intended to monitor Uganda’s 11479THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 30 JANUARY 2023compliance with ICAO security-related matters of safety, and oversight obligations under the Convention.During the audit in September, several gaps were identified in the primary aviation legislation; the Civil Aviation Act, which if not addressed could expose Uganda to adverse audit findings with far-reaching implications on the country, including a finding on significant safety concern. A finding on a significant safety concern is in effect a notice to the world that it is not safe to travel by air to Uganda or on any Ugandan-registered aircraft. That is how urgent the matter is.Mr Speaker, that is why we need this matter to be fast-tracked. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable colleagues, I think it is a Bill of two clauses. It is all about our conformity to the international specifications and the ongoing audit. If we do not - I do not want us to have a crisis.I have referred the Bill to the committee. Honourable chairperson of the committee, kindly meet tomorrow and give us a report on Thursday; we need to finish this Bill on Thursday. When we have such urgent matters, sometimes our hands are tied especially if they have to do with compliance with international requirements but we will have to follow the due process of calling people. Please handle it tomorrow; It is a very small Bill.MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, on this matter, this Government came here and moved that we suspend rules when we were handling the amendment of the Constitution to remove the age limit, which was not going to kill anyone. Why are they not moving a motion to suspend rules on a matter of this gravity, if they can move that we remove everything on the age limit such that one man can benefit? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Was that a question for me or for Hon. Katumba? Honourable colleagues, the rule says within 45 days. So, whether you do it in one or two days, as long as it is within 45 days as per Rule 129 of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament, there is no need to suspend the rules, maybe if he wants us to go beyond 45 days. MR AOGON: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I rise  under Rule 141 on the delays with Bills.Rule 141(1) says that subject to the Constitution, a Bill introduced in the House shall not be with a committee for consideration for more than 45 days, and (2) states that if a committee finds itself unable to complete the consideration of a Bill referred to it. In sub rule (1), the committee may seek extra time from Parliament.  Rule 141(3) states that where extra time is not granted, or upon expiry of extra time granted, under sub rule (2), the House shall proceed to deal with the Bill without any further delay. Mr Speaker, more than six months ago, actually last year, you referred the Bill on the National Legal Aid to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. You instructed the committee to come back with a report within 30 days. However, to date, even when we have gone beyond six months, the committee has not reported back to the House.I want to beg you, Mr Speaker, that you invoke the powers of this rule to have this Bill considered in accordance with these rules. The Rules of Procedure of Parliament are an Act of Parliament; in effect, they are a law. By avoiding the law, we are running away from the law and it must catch up with those who ran away from it, which might not be a good thing. I beg for your indulgence, Mr Speaker. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Aogon, if my memory serves me right, there were issues, which the committee, mover of the Bill, and the Attorney-General were supposed to work on. The Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs has been doing a fantastic job. By the RESOLUTION TO BORROW11480THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029 [The Deputy Speaker]way, the vice chair is here, I was trying to look for the chairperson – wait, Hon. Aogon.3.47THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMIT -TEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTA -RY AFFAIRS (Mr Yusuf Mutembuli): Mr Speaker,  this is not the first time my colleague is raising this matter. I remember last time when he raised it, I explained and he is aware that this matter went beyond our control be -cause the Speaker directed that he would invite us, the leaders, Attorney-General and the mov -er to discuss this matter but to date, we have not been invited. So, we are still waiting for the invitation.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER : I am going to work on that tomorrow. My office is going to arrange with the Attorney-General for us to meet tomorrow after the session so that we can have this out of the way. We should not delay a colleague’s Bill because of such. We should know whether we are dealing with it or not. Otherwise, it is not even our right; we are just going to ensure that the report is presented but let us reconcile the differences, which the Speaker was talking about. I will consult with her, and solve it tomorrow so that it can conclude this matter. Next item, please.LAYING OF PAPERS(I) THE SEMI-ANNUAL REPORT OF INFLOWS, OUTFLOWS AND ASSETS OF THE PETROLEUM FUND FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 20233.48THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay, on the Table, the Annual Report on Inflows, Outflows and Assets of the Petroleum Fund, for the period ended June 30 2023. I beg to lay.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable minister. The report stands referred to the Committee on Budget for consideration and reporting back within 45 days. (II) THE EDUCATION SERVICE COMMISSION ANNUAL PERFORMANCE REPORT FOR FY 2022/20233.49THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo ): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay, on the Table, the Education Service Commission Annual Performance Report, Financial Year 2022/2023. I beg to lay.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER : The report is referred to the Committee on Education and Sports to do an assessment and report back.(III) THE REPORT OF THE UGANDA DELEGATION TO THE 66TH COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY CONFERENCE HELD IN ACCRA, GHANA FROM 30TH SEPTEMBER TO 6TH OCTOBER 2023, PURSUANT TO RULE 33 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURETHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, Hon. Kalwanga.3.50MR DA VID KALWANGA (NUP, Busujju County, Mityana):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. You sent a delegation of Members of Parliament to attend a conference in Accra, Ghana on 30 September last year. Under Rule 33(2), I am supposed to give a brief of what exactly happened at that conference. However, due to time, allow me to just give a hint of what is in this report. Under this conference theme titled, “The Commonwealth Charter, 10 years on the values and principles of parliamentary to be upheld,” there were various subtopics in which we participated. There were several recommendations that came from meetings that discussed these subtopics. After the conference, we visited the Secretariat of Africa Continental Free Trade, of which we came up with a crucial resolution that you allow the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry to also visit these people to get some LAYING OF PAPERS11481THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 30 JANUARY 2023good trading trends. Mr Speaker, I beg to report and I lay the report. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER : Thank you. Honourable colleagues, the rules require me to appoint time for debate. Clerk, please consider this item on the Order Paper for next week so that we can allow debate on it. Thank you. MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2024/2025-2028/2029THE DEPUTY SPEAKER : Honourable colleagues, you will recall that on Thursday, we received two reports. We received the main report on the Budget Framework Paper from the Committee on Budget and the minority report. I gave you time to read and we agreed that we shall have a very structured debate looking at the national picture. Today, you have to speak from an angle of a national picture. This is a working document, which is not from a party or constituency position, but from a national picture. However, before we proceed with the debate, the Minister of Finance said that there were some clarifications he wants to make. Let us listen to those before we open the debate with the Leader of the Opposition. 3.54THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING, AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. We received the two reports and as we sought your guidance that a few preliminary issues be responded to in order to support the debate that will follow.  I wish to pick out the salient issues in the two reports as follows: The first is that the Budget Framework Paper referred to the Committee on Budget had two ceilings. Mr Speaker, this was observed in both the majority and minority reports, and we wish to respond as follows. It was noted that there was a discrepancy between the resource envelope for the Financial Year 2024/2025 and the total programme allocation of Shs 1.866 trillion. This excess amount was due to the supplementary issued under V ote 130: Treasury operations, which was carried forward into the budget for the Financial Year 2024/2025. Accordingly, the amount has been reduced from the budget under V ote 130. The second matter was on the suspicious domestic revenue, as noted in the minority report. Mr Speaker, the key growth drivers in the Financial Year 2024/2025 will be investments in the oil and gas sector, and Government interventions such as Emyooga  and the Parish Development Model. These are largely targeting agriculture, and are not immediately contributing to the tax base in the Financial Year 2024/2025. The expected revenue contribution will be realised in the Financial Year 2025/2026, and the medium term. Additional proposals to raise revenue further should be addressed. There will be additional revenue, which we anticipate to arrive at after Parliament has considered the tax measures. The minority report also observes that the Auditor-General, in his December 2023 report at page 178, queried the tax exemptions amounting to Shs 1.4 trillion granted to various companies, and that the stated purpose for these exemptions is not met yet the practice continues. Mr Speaker, we wish to respond as follows: All the tax exemptions are provided for under the relevant tax laws. However, the law also provides for the minister’s powers to pay taxes on behalf of certain strategic investments, notably manufacturing, including operators in the private industrial parks. The commitment in this regard is for the following purposes:1. Import substitution and export promotion;2. Creation of employment to the people of Uganda; and11482THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029[Mr Musasizi]3. The benefits arising from backward and forward linkages from the use of local materials. Uganda is now self-sufficient in the production of many previously imported products on account of the above deliberate policy.On the taxation of Gold, in the Financial Year 2020/2021, Parliament introduced an export levy of 5 per cent of the value of a kilogram of processed Gold and 10 per cent of the value of unprocessed minerals. However, in 2021, there was a subsequent amendment to the rates in the Mining Act, 2021, which revised the levy to $200 per kilogram of processed Gold exported to be collected from the exports, effective 1 July 2021. The implementation of the above levy was however, constrained by the court injunction after the industry players petitioned the High Court, challenging the policy. Mr Speaker, there was an issue in both the majority and minority reports concerning the conflicting public debt figures. We wish to respond as follows.The composition of the public debt stock, as defined by the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, as at end of June 2023, was Shs 86.751 trillion, which include the following:1. Shs 34,545 billion of domestic debt –(Interruption)MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, a report on the Budget Framework Paper was presented to Parliament. It actually quotes, in a large part, what Hon. Musasizi is reading now. The trouble is that we have other institutions of the State giving different figures.The procedural issue I am raising is whether Hon. Musasizi should present his Budget Framework Paper and then seek the first right to debate it, which, in the history of this Parliament, is actually irregular. I am raising a procedural issue on whether a person who presented one figure that is conflicting with the ones from the Auditor-General and Bank of Uganda should be the first to debate his own Budget Framework Paper.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. When the two reports were received, the Minister for Finance approached me and said that there are issues, which he feels, if they are not clarified, then the debate might not come out effectively because how some of the issues were presented in the different reports was more or less what he considered to be misleading. He requested for a little time to make clarifications on those issues before we open debate. He felt that the information he would give, as a minister in charge of finance and who presented the Budget Framework Paper, would help in the debate. So, anything that can facilitate a credible debate in this House, to me, is something, which should be acceptable. 4.03MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo North County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, last week, after both reports were presented and even during the Committee on Budget engagement, that matter came up because these are legal issues. Bank of Uganda (BoU) is independent, while the Office of the Auditor-General is an office of Parliament. Therefore, the reports they present are reports to this Parliament. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development accounts to Parliament through the Auditor-General. Therefore, we agreed that the minister for finance holds a meeting with the Governor, Bank of Uganda - because, constitutionally and even under the Public Finance Management Act, the Minister of Finance is also the exchequer - and the Auditor-General and come up with a unified position, instead of us operating in a silo. Therefore, if the minister comes back today without a written position of Bank of Uganda and the Auditor-General, how will his single position help us to proceed? I beg.11483THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 30 JANUARY 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. These are the questions you will ask him during debate. They are also the questions, which will determine whether you should approve the Budget Framework Paper or not, if he gives the answers. If his aim is to mislead you, do not allow yourself to be misled. (Laughter)  You have already known that he wants to mislead you; that is how you have judged him, Hon. Namugga. Please, do not allow him to mislead you. Summarise, honourable minister; I am the one who allowed you. Just make clarifications and do not take long. MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was saying that on the conflicting numbers on the public debt, as at the end of June, our debt stock was Shs 86.751 trillion, comprising Shs 34,545 billion of domestic debt and Shs 52,206 billion as external debt. According to the Auditor-General’s report, public debt amounts to Shs 97.45 trillion. This gives a variance of Shs 11.4 trillion, which is on account of the following: 1. Accounts payable. Mr Speaker, whereas our figure does not include the accounts payable - that is court awards, BoU reimbursement, ROKO shares, etc., amounting to Shs 10.5 trillion, these are recognised by the Auditor-General; 2. The Auditor-General also includes, in his recognition of debt, deposits which are on Government accounts, waiting to be transferred to different beneficiaries; and3. The audit figure includes pension and gratuity, amounting to Shs 316 billion. Mr Speaker, the last contentious issue, which I would like to deal with – (Interjections) - sometimes, you have to listen to what you do not want to hear because when you presented your numbers, I listened. The last issue, which I would like to respond to is that in the minority report, there was a matter of wasteful and unavoidable expenditure, especially on V ote 001 and V ote 002, under the Presidency. We wish to respond as follows. The presidency function, from both the Office of the President and State House, has a support structure that is aimed at ensuring efficient and effective operations. State House has 27 State Lodges across the country with different categories of staff. His Excellency, the President also has the prerogative to establish initiatives and their corresponding offices to facilitate his operations and those of the Vice President. Some of the initiatives include poverty alleviation, health monitoring, anti-corruption, investor protection and youth skilling. The State House staffing structure is, therefore, tailored to facilitating the needs of the presidency with the staff in the following categories:1. The common cadre staff, including accountants, procurement officers, administrators, policy analysts and economists, among others, who support the administration of State House, given that it is a fully-fledged V ote, just like any other Government institution that receives appropriation from Parliament;2. The technical staff responsible for different initiatives established by the President; and3. The support staff who are basically in charge of the President, the Vice President and the state lodges, including administrative staff, secretaries, and others. It is therefore, Mr Speaker, not correct to say that expenditures under the State House are bloated and wasteful. For instance, the 400 vehicles mentioned include the vehicles under State House, Presidency - All the cars with registration plates reading UG…C are part of the vehicles, which were captured in the minority report. On the contrary, the staffing structure and other facilities in State House are tailored to support 11484THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029the effective and efficient operations of the President. Therefore, I would like to correct the impression, which was created out there that all the expenditures under State House are incurred by the person of the President in his house; these are institutional expenditures just like we do with other votes. Mr Speaker, with these, I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, for the clarification. The debate starts now and I will start with the Leader of the Opposition, Hon. Ndeezi, Hon. Ababiku, Hon. Okeyoh, the Member for Ntungamo and Dr Ruyonga. I will then come to this side. Thank you. 4.11THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Joel Ssenyonyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You encouraged us to debate nationally as opposed to a partisan nature; you can be sure we are going to oblige because that is what ought to happen in this House. There are a few pointers that I want to raise regarding our budgetary process and our budget as it is. Number one is this ‘animal’ called corruption. The Inspectorate of Government conducted a survey and found that as a country, we lose between Shs 9.1 trillion to Shs 20 trillion per year to corruption; that is the Inspector General of Government (IGG) report. If we do not address this evil called corruption, we will keep having budgetary shortfalls. The Government, for a long time keeps talking, huffing and puffing about fighting corruption but it stops at the talk. We need to roll up our sleeves and deal with this evil called corruption very seriously. In fact, we sometimes sanitise this issue by giving it flowery names; we call it corruption, misappropriation and squandering of resources. These guys are thieves; the people that are stealing taxpayers’ money. Our hope is that Government will take serious action as opposed to the talk, talk and talk because we keep talking and take little action regarding this issue. I want to paint a picture of what Shs 9.1 trillion can do and by the way, that is the lower limit because the maximum is Shs 20 trillion according to the IGG report.According to the Ministry of Health, the estimated cost for constructing and equipping a health centre IV is Shs 13 billion. Now, Shs 9.1 trillion can construct and equip 700 health centres IV; just think about that. In all our constituencies, the challenges we are grappling with, this money that is stolen by these thieves in the Government could fix that and that is in one year. The following year, that money can do a lot more. We need to redeem this money. According to the Auditor-General’s report that was just released to us, we are losing Shs 53 billion per annum to ghost employees. These are people who either died, retired, resigned or are even non-existent; Shs 53 billion as part of our wage bill every single year yet there are things we keep complaining about that this money could fix. Our demand is that the Government takes stern action against all the culpable accounting officers because this is the Auditor- General’s report and so, we know these fellows; we need to take serious action. Mr Speaker, let me talk about fiscal indiscipline. We plan but then behave as if we do not plan. Every so often, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes to the Parliament to present supplementary budgets. The understanding of supplementary budgets is that these should be especially for the unforeseeable but the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, even at the end of last year, kept tabling supplementary budgets for wages and salaries for staff who have running contracts. How does that make sense? These are staff that have running contracts, you knew about it, but you did not [Mr Musasizi]11485THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 30 JANUARY 2023plan for them. It does not make sense especially, if we are talking about having fiscal discipline. We want to see better in that regard. Let me talk a bit about our debt burden. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was trying to make us believe that our debt burden is just Shs 86 trillion; it is not true because the debt burden is not that, which you borrow domestically and elsewhere. Shs 10.5 trillion is owed by the Government to, among others, business persons that supply it goods and services. These are people that the Government has refused to pay; we do not understand the reason. People borrow money from banks for their businesses and you are not paying as the Government. Their businesses are crumbling and yet these are taxpayers.  Actually, what we should be doing as Government is to, in many ways, propel these businesses but we are cutting off their wings. They supply goods and services to you, as Government but you do not want to pay. You do not even want to consider that as part of your debt burden. I do not understand why; it just does not make sense and this figure keeps growing. Mr Speaker, for want of time, I would have taken you through how it has grown every single year; it keeps growing and for this particular budget that has been presented to us, the Government has only availed Shs 200 billion - [Hon. Ochai rose_]  Do you want to give information? MR OCHAI: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way and the Speaker, for the opportunity to provide information to the colleague. In Government, I would like to say that the authority responsible for the compilation of statistics is Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS). They are highly specialised statistics that UBOS is not responsible for and one of them is the monetary statistics, which the Bank of Uganda is actually responsible for its compilation. The compilation of fiscal statistics, on the other hand, is the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. If you are looking for any official statistics on public debt, where you must refer to is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Therefore, I beg colleagues that we listen to the fiscal authority, that is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, as represented by Hon. Musasizi and then we do the analysis. Thank you. MR SSENYONYI: Thank you - (Hon. Namugga rose_) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order. MS NAMUGGA: Mr Speaker, I am putting to order the honourable colleague who has been submitting - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you are putting to order the Leader of the Opposition (LOP). MS NAMUGGA: No, not the LOP. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the one on the Floor. MS NAMUGGA: No, it is him. Mr Speaker, I sought for - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Namugga, the rules are clear; the one holding the Floor is the one you should be putting to order. Therefore, if it is not the LOP, leave it at that. (Laughter) I thought you rose to put LOP to order since the other honourable member is not on the Floor and so, you cannot put him to order. Otherwise, during the debate, you can clarify what he said. MR SSENYONYI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the colleague for the information. Somebody at the back shouted and said, “LOP only allow information if it is relevant” I said, “well, I will listen to the colleague, he has given his information.” Again, in very practical terms, it does not make sense when you say “you only owe those you have borrowed from.” 11486THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029Once people provide goods and services to you, and you have not paid them, you owe them that money, in very simple economics language. So, in the layman’s understanding, you owe them that money; it is a debt. I do not know why you want to call it anything else. You cannot convince us that your debt, as the Government is only Shs 86 trillion. No! Because the Shs 10.5 trillion is money that you owe and you should pay it. As I was saying, these are business people who are struggling to make a living, they are borrowing money, and their businesses are shutting down because the Government is such a bad entity to deal with; there is no other way to put it. So –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Maybe just for the interruption, Hon. LOP. There is something indeed, which I would also want to understand, as he submits. How come these other debts are called statutory and we must provide money to pay? Then I, a Ugandan, who has borrowed money from a bank, staked my house, and supplied the Government, when my debt comes about, you say the one you borrowed from America is okay, it is statutory, and you cannot default on it, but on mine, you can default, and that they would rather sell my house; mine is not statutory?That is what I am picking from honourable - because I have met Ugandans who have lost property due to Government’s failure to pay their money. They borrow money against their houses and those houses are being taken. Why do we – let us say in a layman’s - because most Ugandans are not economists, we are laymen, including myself, because I am not an economist - how come you classify these foreign debts in such a way that they must be paid, then for me who has even provided you with a services, mine is classified as a second priority. 4.21THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING, AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I can see the spirit, the reasoning and the sentiments that are behind the feelings of our colleagues, you, and me. There is a very big difference between what we borrow to finance the Budget and what someone commits out there on the premise that what he or she has supplied the Government will be paid to settle the debt. We need to make a difference there. Mr Speaker, from the layman’s language and the accounting perspective, they are all debts. That is why the Auditor-General is disclosing them in the books. However, from Hon. Ochai’s perspective, the recognition of these elements is practically different. If you want the official information on public debt stock, it is neither the Auditor-General nor Bank of Uganda, it is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Mr Speaker, back to your issue – (Interjection) - okay, point of order. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, honourable minister, proceed and submit. I have not allowed anyone to speak. MR MUSASIZI:  Mr Speaker, our verified domestic arrears is Shs 2.7 trillion. We have a commitment, as the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, that at least on an annual basis, we, as much as possible, try to reduce them. I wish we had all the resources to settle the Shs 2.7 trillion once, but in the circumstances, every financial year, like in 2021/2022, we provided Shs 666 billion to settle domestic arrears. In this year, we have so far paid Shs 200 billion. Even next year, we have budgeted to pay another Shs 200 billion and this is over and above the provision for court awards. Therefore, Mr Speaker, the spirit to pay, is there. What is limiting us are the resources but we desire to settle all these domestic arrears. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  My role was to understand properly, the logic behind all this. Yes, LOP, please continue. [Mr Ssenyonyi]11487THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 30 JANUARY 2023MR SSENYONYI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the relevant information and guidance you gave. The Minister needs to stop speaking too much English. This is the total amount of money that you owe. Just pay your debts. That is the bottom line. Especially, my biggest challenge is our Ugandan locals - because you see that is money that keeps within the economy. These fellows employ young people. You are not paying them; they are closing their businesses. The entire economy gets to suffer. They pay taxes and so on. We tend to focus a great deal, by the way, on foreign investors. They come here, we give them free land, and tax holidays for several years. Of late, we are even guaranteeing them money. What kind of investors are those yet, our local investors who are putting in their own money that they borrowed from the bank, we do not want to pay them? Let us get serious. Mr Speaker, let me talk a little about sports. Our bid to co-host the AFCON is a daunting task, simply because for a very long time we have not prioritised sports. I hope we can wake up. Sports employs many young people they are out there shining and we normally celebrate them when they return with medals. In the process of going, they are normally on their own. They are in solitude, trying to look for money here and there. There was a time when there had to be a fundraising for shoes for our athletes, some years back. Can we be serious? There was a promise about the Akii Bua Stadium. Mr Speaker, we need commitment from Government to construct this stadium. It is not just a stadium going to be for the northern part of the country, it is a stadium for Uganda and so we need commitment. Even as the Government gives us commitment, we want there to be proper value for money because the figure that the Government has quoted is $48 million, which is about Shs 183 billion. When you try and make comparisons - I was trying to make comparisons. There is a stadium called Marsabit in Kenya with a seating capacity - by the way, the Akii Bua Stadium is meant to be a 20,000-seater. This Marsabit has a capacity of 15,000 people. It cost Kshs 295 million, that is Shs 6.9 billion. This is a 15,000 seater. Ours is a 20,000 seater and the Government is telling us they need Shs 183 billion. These figures have got to make sense because currently, they do not make sense. We want the stadium, but we want value for money. We do not want the ‘animal’ I was talking about called “corruption” to sip herein as we have seen many times. (Interjection)-  I will take the information much later. Let me move to health - (Interjection)-  I have declined the information, honourable colleague. Mr Speaker, we have had this coining of medical tourism in this country because whenever Government officials are unwell and cannot be treated here – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Ministers, take note of the issues. If you feel the information is not right, you will be given a chance to clarify. MR SSENYONYI:  Medical tourism has become a coinage. We were told that with the construction of the Lubowa Specialised Hospital, this medical tourism would come to an end. That promise has since become a shadow of its former past yet each year, we have been injecting money. Mr Speaker, I would like to remind colleagues, because these are not my figures, about how much money we have so far injected in the Lubowa Specialised Hospital. So far, it is Shs 113 billion. What is there to see? Your guess is as good as mine, but so far Shs 113 billion. Let me break it down. In 2021, there was Shs 21.6 billion, another Shs 21.9 billion and Shs 22.5 billion in September 2021. In 2022, there was Shs 23 billion and Shs 23.8 billion in April 2022. When you total that up, that is Shs 113 billion. That is money that has gone. Where is Lubowa Hospital? At the end of last year, part of the supplementary that the minister brought was 11488THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029Shs 2.7 billion to supervise ongoing works at Lubowa Speacialised Hospital. We demand that the Government accounts for this money because this is not little. It could have done a lot more. It could have built health centres and so on. It seems to be disappearing in thin air. We demand that the Government accounts for this Shs 113 billion plus, of course, the Shs 2.7 billion that was deployed to supervise. Let me talk a bit about our men and women in uniform. First, Defence (UPDF). It is good our colleagues are here. Hon. Ssemujju was saying they are listening posts. We shall want them to probably respond. We have a challenge, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Our men and women in uniform - UPDF, Police and of course, Prisons, live like refugees in their country yet they hold guns. We expect them to serve the country but just look at the conditions under which they live. Look at how much they earn. The lowest rank in the UPDF earns less than Shs 400,000 and these are the majority of them but we expect them to watch over you, me, and our nation. In Police, a special police constable, who is the lowest, currently earns Shs 325,000. They go to the same supermarkets, markets and shopping places as everybody else. They take their children to the same schools as everybody else. How does this make sense? Mr Speaker, for Police, there is even a mandatory deduction towards the Exodus Police SACCO, which savings they cannot freely access. I am sure many of them have approached you, Members because they cannot speak on their own because they can be taken to court martial or whatever the case might be. We need to pay attention to these men and women in uniform. They are our brothers, sisters, wives, husbands, mothers or fathers. They are part of us; they are us. Of late there has been a challenge with the roads in Kampala. Just like is the case with many other parts of the country but there has been quite a bit of focus on Kampala Capital City. This our city generates about 60 per cent of our country’s purse. We keep milking this cow but we do not want to feed it. I do not understand why. Of recent, a few roads were constructed - NAM Roads as they called them - but the rest of the roads in Kampala are in a shambolic state. I do not know why we do not want to pay attention to these roads in Kampala where we operate from, where all of us stay. On the weekends, yes, people go to their constituencies but this is the heart of the country. Can we pay attention to this matter and then demand for proper accountability from KCCA? When I was still the Chairperson of COSASE, I did present a report with issues to do with the costings of the road - cost per kilometre. There are issues which need to be remedied. We need to pay attention to the roads in Kampala. Let us not wait for people to protest and then you hear people saying, “Let us go and arrest them. We are going to deploy resources to arrest them.” Deploy those resources to fix the challenges that people are grappling with. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. Hon. Ndeezi, just wait a bit for us not to lose focus. Let Hon. Peter Ogwang make the clarification he wanted to make on the issue of Stadia. 4.35THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like, in a special way, to welcome the Leader of the Opposition who is a friend. I only want to implore him that the people in his office should help the institution of Parliament because the office he is holding is a very big one. No wonder, we call him the Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition. Fast forward, and for the record, the NRM Government, under the leadership of Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, pledged and is going to construct a stadium in Akii-Bua and Buhinga. That is for the record. [Mr Ssenyonyi]11489THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 30 JANUARY 2023Number two, I am aware that there is a report of a committee, which is going to be presented. The Ministry of Education and Sports has a plan for the infrastructural development of sports facilities across the country. To come to the question of a stadium - I could just call it a “field” built in Kenya vis-a-vis  stadium - first of all, there is a difference. When I talk about Akii-Bua Stadium and Buhinga, the question was – (Hon. Kirumira rose_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let me guide. Honourable colleagues, when you ask for clarification once or twice, do not insist. Know that the Member heard you, but has politely declined. So, you also politely sit; you do not insist. (Laughter)MR OGWANG:  Mr Speaker, I was talking about Akii-Bua and Buhinga Stadia. First of all, there was a feasibility study done for the construction of a stadium in Buhinga, which gave us a total amount of about $48 million. It is for multi-sport. When I talk about multi-sport, I talk about very many disciplines of sports within that stadium. Number two, it was within that design that we have a five-star hotel, for purposes of promoting tourism in that part of the country. So, when we begin to compare the cost of a field with the cost of constructing a stadium, it really takes us to a certain area, which, in my considered opinion, I do not want to dwell much on it. That is why I am only imploring my brother, a good friend, Leader of the Opposition that – Mr Speaker, I can even bring the entire plan and lay it on the Table so that we are able to look at it in detail such that you do not say “we are here to try to loot the country.” No, we have come from far, Leader of the Opposition. I thank you. 4.38MR ALEX NDEEZI  (NRM Representative, Persons with Disabilities):  Mr Speaker and honourable members, you may recall that we reconstituted Standing Committees a few days ago. This is the first report we are receiving from the reconstituted Standing Committee, called the Budget Committee. Mr Speaker, I now take this opportunity to congratulate my brother, Hon. Patrick Isiagi on reappointment to the leadership of this committee - (Applause)- Equally, I would like to congratulate the Deputy Chairperson of the committee, my brother, Hon. Remigio Achia, upon appointment to the leadership of this committee. Mr Speaker, I read both the minority and the main reports. Having read both, I also looked at the provisions of the Constitution. It is important to note that the Constitution imposes certain restrictions on Parliament in terms of resource allocation. This is not a wish, but a matter of fact. For instance, Parliament is not supposed to proceed on a motion, which has the effect of imposing a charge on the Consolidated Fund unless the motion is moved by the President or somebody acting on behalf of the President. When I was still a young Member of Parliament, I wondered why this Constitution puts us at a disadvantage. Somebody told me that the objective of the Constitution is to make sure that the ruling party is able to implement its manifesto and be held accountable.Mr Speaker, it is very hard to come around a situation, whereby both the Opposition and the Government agrees on a budget allocation on any particular year. It is a matter of compromise of give and take. It is also important because it gives the Opposition an opportunity to hold the Government accountable. If you decide to participate in everything, including the allocation of resources, people will say you are part and parcel of it. Therefore, having read both reports and bearing in mind the provisions of the Constitution, we should support the main report of the Budget Committee. I strongly support it. (Applause) It is also important to take notes from the Opposition. Democracy is not about winning everything. Also, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should, in good faith, note the concerns raised by the Opposition. 11490THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029Mr Speaker, I have two other minor issues: One, is the question of issuance of the certificate of gender and equity. The reason we advocated for the issuance of this certificate is to make sure that resource allocation promotes harmony in our society. There is equitable allocation of opportunities, resources and fairness. Because of fairness, there is peace; people are happy with each other and there is gender balance and equity.I note from the report that certain Ministries, Departments and Agencies are not complying with the provisions of the certificate of gender and equity. In Constitutional terms, this means that these agencies are not in line with the provisions of Article 32 of the Constitution. They are harming the provisions of Article 32, which is on affirmative action. Affirmative action is a Constitutional obligation.Therefore, I appeal to the Minister of Finance to ensure that sufficient resources are set aside to enable the Equal Opportunities Commission to execute its Constitutional mandate of ensuring that all Ministries, Agencies and Departments comply with the provisions regarding the issuance of the certificate of gender and equity. Lastly, as I have mentioned, the Constitution imposes upon us the obligation to protect certain vulnerable groups in society. Under Article 32 of the Constitution, we are required to promote Older Persons, People with Disabilities, young people and the youth. This protection extends to the budget, because budgeting itself is an administrative process. The output from this process will be transmitted into an Appropriation Bill and later, to an Act of Parliament. Mr Speaker, during the last budget process, we were deeply disappointed to know that the budget for Older Persons, People with Disabilities, Women and the two other vulnerable groups were cut by 80 per cent. The prayers I am putting forward - I want assurance from the Minister of Finance that the categories of the vulnerable persons that are provided for by the Constitution are properly reinforced by this budget. For instance, the budget for SAGE, I am told, has insufficient funding. The budget for National Special Grants for Persons with Disabilities, there is a gap of Shs 3 billion. The budget for Older Persons, there is a gap of billions of shillings. I beg for assurance that these vulnerable categories are properly protected. Thank you. ( Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Ababiku, followed by Hon. Kamateneti and then Hon. Okeyoh.4.45MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I support the adoption of the report where the plea has been made by the committee. I am concerned about the minority report on page 11, under wasteful expenditure. Allow me to read this; “These days, the men who work at State House are organising birthday parties and wedding ceremonies.” Mr Speaker, as a committee that oversees State House, we have clear activities of the Presidency. This is provided for under Article 98, the functions of the President and the Vice-President are provided for. In this process, we have never requested for support for any activity like weddings and birthday parties. Therefore, I request that this is removed from this report unless there is evidence that we requested for support for these activities.Secondly, on the same page, under the list of Presidential advisors, unless there is evidence that there is expenditure for ghost staff, we disassociate ourselves from this list and I can cite examples. No.37 is an ambassador deployed in China, No.42, may his soul rest in peace - this person died. No.44, this person also died. We do not have evidence for ghost expenditure under salaries. Mr Speaker, I join the committee in the recommendation to support recruitment of health workers right from the national level. As we commend the Government for the various [Mr Ndeezi]11491THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 30 JANUARY 2023structures established, we have challenges of shortage from Mulago National Referral Hospital up to the health units at the district levels. I, therefore, request that we support that proposal. Thirdly, we have issues of dilapidated structures under the Ministry of Health. At the district level, I can cite an example of Adjumani District Health Facility, where there is a lot of leakage. Therefore, I request that the Ministry of Health be supported to renovate some of these health units.I am also concerned about delays in delivering of drugs. Mr Speaker, I request that the Committee on Health carries out an investigation because each time I reach Adjumani District, there are complaints about non-delivery of drugs, yet we receive regular messages from the Ministry of Health, notifying Members of Parliament of the delivery and dispatch of drugs.In the report, there is a request to facilitate faster delivery, but since the information is not tallying, let the Committee on Health conduct a monitoring exercise and report so that we get to know whether the Ministry of Health sends us rightful information or not. Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, we must finish this debate by 6.00 p.m. Let us have Hon. Kamateneti, Hon. Okeyoh and then Dr Ruyonga.4.50 MS JOSYLINE KAMATENETI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo):  I thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is on V ote 016, about road equipment for new districts and cities.The Ministry of Works and Transport is planning to procure road equipment for new districts. However, there are old districts, which do not even have road equipment. I can give the examples of Ntungamo, Mbarara and Kanungu districts. In my district, we have over 2,221 kilometres and we have to borrow road equipment from our neighbours. Our roads are impassable. So, I think that before we approve this budget, we should make plans and make sure that we add equipment for all the districts, which are stranded. Another one is about the health sector. Honourable colleagues, we need to put our priorities right. You are talking about regional hospitals but I have not seen Mbarara Hospital. We even have districts, which are very big. For example, my district serves a population of over 650,000 people and we have only one hospital, which does not have a standby generator and an x-ray machine, yet it is a highway hospital, which serves everyone in this country because people move to Rwanda, Tanzania or even from other regions to western Uganda. So, as we plan, let us prioritise these hospitals because they are serving all of us. Another issue is about drugs. Everyone is talking about supply of drugs. In budgeting, you must plan, do research and consult. Recently, we had a report about Ntungamo not using drugs worth Shs 5 billion. These were the bilharzia drugs and they were supplied by National Medical Stores. Do not use Government money to buy unnecessary items and just dump them in some hospitals for accountability. You are talking about construction of new health centres. We have constructed some but they do not have employees; there are no medical officers. We do not have drugs and we do not have equipment.This Parliament is supposed to plan and direct the country. So, ministries, before you bring your budgets, please, consult and plan for our people. We should not misuse resources.Lastly, this Parliament should serve fairness and equity. The Minister of Education and Sports was here talking about lack of money for coded schools. Last year, in the budget, they earmarked 46 secondary schools for grant-aiding. Even up to now, the money that was released was for 46 schools. However, some 11492THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029which were coded were removed and replaced by schools from other districts. (Applause)  In my district, even other people are complaining. We had two schools: Ngoma and Karambi secondary schools. They were allocated Shs 636 billion. However, they were removed and replaced by other two schools. I would not wish to mention them here but that is unfair. So, as we plan, let us serve fairness and equity in this country. Otherwise, I will not support this as long as you do not amend and support my district and even other districts that are affected. Thank you so much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Now, honourable colleagues, allow me to guide. I had prepared something, which I could have shared with you. This National Budget Framework Paper that we are handling is for the medium term – it is for five years:  2024/2025 to 2028/2029. I do not know whether those are three or five years – it is up to 2029. It is a framework.So, now, we are not on a budget; we are on a framework for the budget. When we go to ministerial policy statements, there, we shall be having very clear details. The budget strategy for this Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) is “accelerating economic growth to at least seven percent from a raw material-based to a manufacturing and knowledge-based economy as well as improve the environment of doing business in Uganda and making it competitive with the utility goal being to build an integrated, self-sustaining and independent economy over the medium to long term”.looking at the policy proposals, we should be asking ourselves; 1. How shall we achieve the objectives stated therein, from a perspective of the MTEF that they presented? 2. Are the budget allocations in the framework in line with the budget strategy? Look at the budget strategy they presented and the allocations and we see whether they correlate. 3. Is the MTEF compliant with the Public Finance Management Act?These are the issues, which we should be – I am trying to structure the debate so that we move very well and do not go into debating the ministerial policy statements. We should remain within the line of the MTEF. The resource envelope – what are the proposed sources of funding? Everyone is asking for money; are they adequate and sustainable or we are supplying air? Everyone will say, “give me money”. We have a very good example. We usually come here and adopt tax Bills; we pass tax proposals. In those tax proposals, we reject some of the recommendations from the Government but these recommendations are supposed to generate money. So, if, for example, we reject proposals, which were supposed to generate Shs 500 billion to finance the budget but we go ahead and adopt the budget the way it is, it means we have supplied Shs 500 billion “air” – because we rejected the source of funding but gone ahead to supply. We said “we cannot give you money but let us also supply this money”. So, as we are looking at these – in this National Budget Framework Paper, what is very easy for us to debate here are the funding gaps. However, can we also debate on where we can say: “Government, you are losing resources?”In the reports, they were saying “you did not collect this money from gold”. That is what we should focus on. It is a resource from which we believe we can collect. They are saying that “if we reduce corruption, we shall save this much”. That is the resource that can help us finance the budget. Then, the policy proposals – will the proposed policies lead to the targeted development that they have talked about in this MTEF? This is how we handle the National Budget Framework Paper, honourable colleagues. 4.58MR MOSES ALEPER (NRM, Chekwii County (Kadam), Nakapiripirit): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You have rightfully stated that, actually, what we have been presented with is just a Budget Framework [Ms Kamateneti]11493THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 30 JANUARY 2023Paper and, indeed, it is a strategy for the budget of Financial Year 2024/2025. Particularly, this just links the overall Government policies with the plans that are derived from the National Development Plan (NDP) in order to come up with a budget.At this particular time, this is when all Government institutions charged with policy, planning, budgeting and performance come together so that we are able to achieve the intended objectives in line with the Public Finance Management Act. In that regard, therefore, it is important that we listen to these strategies and then, at an appropriate time, when we are going to discuss the ministerial policy statements, which contain the details that set out the performance and the plans of the spending institutions, that is Ministries, Departments and Agencies and the local governments, is when we can involve ourselves in these discussions.For that matter, therefore, I would like to move a motion that this House approves the National Budget Framework Paper for 2024/2026. I beg to move.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I really pick what Hon. Aleper is bringing but there are many Members who have not had a chance to make a contribution.  Let us give ourselves a maximum of one hour. Honourable colleagues, this means that you have to be considerate that there are others who want to participate. I had already picked Hon. Okeyoh and Dr Ruyonga. Then, I will go this side and start with Hon. Jonathan Odur. 5.00MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. The fisheries subsector is one area, if properly explored, can bring a lot of money to this country but this is an area that is never given attention. The fisheries subsector is always put at the periphery of the agricultural sector, yet it can earn this country a lot of money. It is my humble appeal that when we are looking for sources of funding our budget, this subsector is considered and given allocation. Government gets taxes from the fisheries subsector but little is put in to make them generate more funds. Another area that we are also likely to reap from - honourable minister of sports, with due respect to you, I happen to be your friend and a friend of your colleague, the minister of sports in Kenya - and Pamoja (AFCON). If our country is not careful, we are likely to lose out because what Kenya and Tanzania are doing is ahead. I am patriotic enough –(Interjections)  - what I am saying is that it would be embarrassing for us if we do not march at the same level with our colleagues. This is an area - honourable minister, I seek your indulgence.  Mr Speaker, protect me. I am so patriotic that I do not want us to lose out on Pamoja (AFCON). If we do not work on our stadium, we are likely to lose out. So, honourable Minister of Sports and the entire Parliament, it is my humble appeal that we allocate money to build this stadium and help our country host this function. It is going to bring in many tourists who will generate money through sale of our products. Finally, inland water transport - There are accidents on water that are never highlighted. Recently, we had an accident in Kalangala but there are also accidents in Bukooli Islands, Buvuma. Our people are not protected. They always pronounce a lorry or a bus accident but little is mentioned when it comes to water transport. This is an area that we should also look at if we are to develop this country on affirmative action. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I had picked Hon. Dr Ruyonga then I go this side. I will come back later.11494THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/20295.03DR JOSEPH RUYONGA (NRM, Hoima West Division, Hoima City):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I have gone through V ote 019; water and environment but when you see the allocations, most of them are going to either -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Please, can I have order in the House? DR RUYONGA: … either small towns or villages. There is no mention of cities, especially the new cities. My question is, in the coming three years since this is the National Budget Framework Paper, we want to consider the cities.  I have ever been in a meeting where the minister was presenting Hoima District but he did not know that there is a Hoima City, so, I had to correct him. I am requesting that in the NBFP, let cities also be mentioned.Lastly, we have an issue, which is mentioned here about Bunyoro University - I know this is a NBFP, but this is very disturbing especially to the communities. A task force was formed more than a year ago and they have been doing good work. In the NBFP, they are talking about issues of land compensation and acquisition. Mr Speaker, the community is becoming very suspicious because this is taking long. Sometimes, we fail to say something to our communities. My humble prayer is that the establishment of Bunyoro University and other new universities be expedited. Otherwise, the communities are harassing us and telling us that for 2026, we may not come back. I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. On the Opposition side - now I am picking from the Opposition [Honourable members: “Yes”] and the leader is Faith Nakut because she is the one saying “Yes”. (Laughter)  From the Opposition, I will pick Hon. Jonathan Odur, Hon. Betty Naluyima - and whoever is a Member of the Budget Committee, please, let me know. I am picking Hon. Namugga, Hon. Mwijukye and Hon. Kirumira. I am still giving you a chance, honourable colleagues. I wish we could be quick so that I pick more. 5.06MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. First and foremost, I would like to inform you that I am in full support of the position of the minority and I want to invite you to pay particular attention to the violations of the law that have been well explained in the minority report. Every year, we come here and address the same concerns. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development needs to be sanctioned so that we comply with the law because with the law, you cannot choose to implement one part and use the other to defend yourself. Secondly, when the minister chose to give some preliminary responses to the issues raised, I do not know why he kept quiet on some of the recommendations we made. This House cannot debate in vain. There are recommendations that have the effect of widening the resource envelope. It would have been nice to hear from him looking at all the proposals made by the sectoral committee and the Budget Committee what it is that the minister can inform this House about in regard to the projections in the resource envelope he has mentioned. When I looked at the National Budget Framework Paper, it pointed a picture of disjointed Government Ministries, Departments and Agencies. We cannot have the same Government promise us their strategic objectives in the NDP yet when you look at the budget strategy and sector allocations, they do not speak to that fact. If you observe agriculture, manufacturing, health and education, which form the core of our human resources, they have not been adequately provided for. I am quite aware that the last component of the National Budget Framework Paper gives us the proposed 11495THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 30 JANUARY 2023sector allocation. However, when you look at the allocations, the paper is promising one thing but delivering, in terms of the budget, something else.The other issue is the exaggerated resource envelope. If you look at the closing statement, our financial statements at the end of every year, we have never spent beyond Shs 36 trillion. The Uganda Revenue Authority – our domestic collection has been around Shs 20 trillion. This time round, we think we can collect around Shs 29 or 30 trillion and external financing has never gone beyond six or seven.Therefore, these justifications for exaggerating our Budget to Shs 52 trillion - Mr Speaker, we have identified - is a strategy to allow them to exploit the supplementary window of three per cent. If you subject three per cent to the Shs 52 trillion, it means that you already have somewhere assured of Shs 1.6 trillion, which they are going to use and then come here and say it is something that we allowed. Maybe, we have to condition the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to be very careful when bringing their supplementaries.Lastly, in budgeting and in the framework, you need to be honest, transparent and equitable. If you interrogate the list of these projects that the Government is going to implement, many of these Members of Parliament would rise up in arms. This time, we would like you to be transparent with all the development projects and the priorities that you have listed here.I am tired of being an MP year in and year out to approve the National Budget Framework Paper and ministerial policy statements for a few Members of Parliament. This time round, Mr Speaker, help us to audit. All constituencies in Uganda contribute taxes. They deserve schools, health centres and roads. (Applause)  This issue of going to one- This time I am going to come with a big motion and I will identify each and every project and the last five years why only one or two constituencies have been benefiting. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. He has given you notice, so, do not say he did not warn us. (Laughter) Hon. Naluyima – We should be quick so that we allow more colleagues to contribute.5.10MS BETTY NALUYIMA (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso):  Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. My additions and inquiries to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as he came on board to clarify some matters, we wish to know why he did not clarify on the matters of compliance. In the main report, it was clear and it was reported that there was no quantifiable estimation given and under part – that is under 2.2 where the committee is reporting that there was no compliance as per schedule 3 of the Public Finance Management Act. We are also seeing a report, under 2.4, that the Charter of Fiscal Compliance was not responded to. Could we have those clarifications as the ministry is responding?Finally, concerning the local government sector and the Public Service; as the committee was reporting, we gave it several issues and when we talk about compliance and ways of ensuring that we increase the fiscal feasibility in this country, matters of local governments are key. If in the request, as the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, we put forward several issues that can aid this country to have a better service delivery mode, matters or issues of ensuring that our local leaders are well inducted. We are talking about five years; 2024/2025–2028/2029, but not anywhere was it incorporated. When we talk about the infrastructure of local governments, nothing was catered for and captured as well as many other issues. In summary, I request once again that the matters that were put forward by the Committee on Public Service and Local Government that urgently need to be incorporated and taken care of within the next two years or as urgent as in the next Budget, let them be incorporated in 11496THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029the National Budget Framework Paper such that the local governments can deliver better in this country. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. I had already picked Hon. Namugga.5.13MS GORRETH NAMUGGA (NUP, Mawogola County South, Ssembabule):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am in support of the minority report in regard to the Budget. Firstly, the issue of unrealistic budgeting especially on the side of revenues- I think this is the very reason why in every financial year, there are so many projects that are not implemented and the same is happening even this financial year. Therefore, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should be realistic when giving us some of these figures. Otherwise, I still submit that the Budget figures that are provided are very unrealistic on the side of the revenues and the resource envelope.Mr Speaker, the investment profile of this country – there is a very big difference between the NDP and what we indicate in our National Budget Framework Paper. Therefore, I would like to implore the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to kindly respect these NDPs that we make. There is a very big variance between our plans and our budgets. The other issue is about borrowing. Mr Speaker, it is not that we do not support borrowing but can the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development explain why we have Shs 14.5 trillion under undisbursed loans? Can he also explain why the Government of Uganda in the Financial Year 2022/2023 borrowed close to $739 million to support recurrent expenditure - payment of salaries among others? It is not that borrowing is bad but the investment. We invest money in non-productive sectors, so kindly invest our resources in areas that are productive. Mr Speaker, we have a challenge in costing the Government projects. We include projects in these plans that are not cost. That is why you find variances between output and planning. Therefore, we should implore the agencies to ensure that every time we do these plans, we have a basis for why we include some of these figures. Mr Speaker, they have just amended the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act. I would like us to interest ourselves in the regulations that have just been amended. There are so many issues that have been put but procurement has become a challenge, not that the cadres are a problem but also political influence. You saw the issues of mabaati , where we have blue notes from the ministers and the President to officers. Can we start respecting the institutions of Government such that we can discipline officers who have not executed their mandate? Mr Speaker, we should respect institutions of Government. Lastly, the issue of domestic arrears. Every year, these accumulate and at a very high rate, what is being done for accounting officers who always accumulate arrears? What has the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development done in the line of efficiency and effectiveness in public expenditure? The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is number one in failing to follow the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility when it comes to planning.Therefore, in future, I will move that Hon. Musasizi and his colleagues are put to order in regard to failure to comply with your own Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. Financial indiscipline, especially within the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – This thing of supplementary budgets every year - He is the one who used to come here and say “we shall never have a supplementary budget.” Then the next year comes, you are the one to come to this place. Hon. Musasizi and colleagues should be put to order to know that they should respect Ugandans when it comes to budgeting. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Now you squeeze Hon. Musasizi and after you thank [Ms Naluyima]11497THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 30 JANUARY 2023me. (Laughter)  I am not the one who deployed her, honourable. I am still on the Opposition side. Hon. Mwijukye, Hon. Kirumira, Hon. Aisha, Hon. Paul, Hon. Mpuuga, Hon. Santa and Hon. Kivumbi. Then I go back.5.17MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju):  Thank you so much, Mr Speaker for this opportunity.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Now let me ask, we are still here. I do not know why people are rushing to speak first, are you going somewhere? Do you want to abandon me here? Be patient. We are still here. The Hansard  is clear and everything is still here. Even if you submit at 7.00, you will do it.MR MWIJUKYE:  Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. We have praised the late Hon. Cecilia Ogwal for helping when we had situations of minority report and the majority by looking into both and getting out the best. This is not the time for competition between minority and majority. I have been here for some time. I hear us pass budgets and when you go out there, whenever the citizens’ priorities are not seen, they do not bash the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, they bash the Members of Parliament. They do not talk about the President or the Minister. They say “These MPs.” You will find Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) on radios saying MPs are not prioritising agriculture and roads and the minister will be happy in his home. Therefore, when we talk about priorities, it is because we interact with the people down there. It is not because we are Government or we are Opposition. It is because we are representatives of the people. How do I explain that I have a road that was pledged in 1989 and it is never worked on but I am passing budgets every financial year? How do I go to Buhweju and explain that? The priorities are not being set by us, Parliament; they are being set somewhere and we have to just approve and then, when we go there, they say they are the appropriators. You even find a minister telling the public that it is “these MPs.” They are the appropriators. Therefore, honourable minister, please, listen to us. It is not because we are against anybody. And, that is why I would wish that we look at the minority and the majority reports and we get out the best for our people. It is not about the competition of the two ideas and two reports and that is why we were talking about Hon. Cecilia Ogwal and now, we have even forgotten what she was doing here even before a week elapses.  (Interjection)  Of course, you are a listening post. I know you will not talk about UPDF. The point I am making is that we are the eyes and ears of our people and, therefore, let us look at these reports and get out the best for our people. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Hon. Mwijukye. Hon. Kirumira - 5.20 MR HASSAN KIRUMIRA (NUP, Katikamu County South, Luwero):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. One of the major goals of the National Budget Framework Paper is to accelerate economic growth; increasing the quantitative output of our country. My biggest concern is on the drivers of our economic growth because if you look at the top of the list, we have the Parish Development Model and the big focus there is that they are telling us investing money in the Parish Development Model will quickly transform our economy; that is where I find the problem especially when I go back to the seven pillars that were given. Right now, the big focus is on two pillars; mind-set change and financial literacy and that is how they are grouping people into SACCOs. The Ministry of Finance is telling us that the biggest driver of our economy and transforming the people of Uganda is the Parish Development Model and that is where I want to differ. Our 11498THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029level of investment into any sector should be dependent on the investment return. As a country, we have very many options where we could put money and get a better return on investment and that is where we need to focus. There is a total mismatch in terms of investment expenditure and return to investment. The other issue, Mr Speaker, I moved a minority report last year and the focus was on these debts that we keep accumulating. My prayer was for the Minister of Finance to provide the financing options at this stage precisely indicating where our country is going to borrow money. What are the terms and conditions of these money lenders? If we do not do that at this stage, we are going to find ourselves in a position of the Amarog Capital Ltd; the one that was previously rejected. We are going to find ourselves in a position of going to Standard Chartered Bank, which organised a group of lenders for us to borrow money. Our country paid money expecting to get money and money never came. As a country, we suffered a loss because we lacked planning and that is why I am urging the Government that when we are doing the budget process, especially at this stage, it is paramount for us to know the source of money. We, indeed, agree that we all have to borrow because if you look at our Budget, 22 per cent must be debt but, please, be precise to the country. Tell us where we are going to borrow and the terms and conditions of these money lenders so that we put ourselves in a better position running our country. Thank you, Mr Speaker, THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Aisha, then Hon. Okupa. 5.23MS AISHA KABANDA (NUP, Woman Representative, Butambala):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Budget Committee for the two reports. I speak on the conclusion of the minority report where it is said that if the report cannot be thrown out because of the irregularities, then it should be amended accordingly and that is the ground that informs my submission. Mr Speaker, the minister was short of informing us which was a question in the minority report. What led to the decrease in the revenue expectations while revenue collection increased even around the COVID-19 period and this time, revenue collection is significantly low? That answer was not submitted to us. Not to over-emphasise, but just to amplify the need for getting the sources of debt. Failure to submit sources of debt is supplying air because I am sure by this time, Finance exactly knows where they are going to borrow this money from but they are not disclosing. Supposing they come and make proposals here and Parliament rejects? We need to know the sources.However, most importantly, on page 62 of the main report, there is a request to inject more money into the human vaccines. I recall that previously, we have injected money into science and technology especially in the discovery of vaccines and we have never received any report. Year after year, we are putting money into vaccines; other countries have been able to come up with COVID-19 vaccines but despite the money we put there, we have not been able to get anything. The report talks of retooling. I am dismayed that the report talks of retooling External Security Organisation offices while the report refers to retooling of teachers especially at this time when we go into the new curriculum. Mr Speaker, many of our teachers - especially those of us who come from rural areas - have given up because they say they do not understand what they are teaching. Teachers have not been retooled yet the new curriculum is on. Secondly, students are required to do their research but there is no electricity and computers in schools. [Mr Kirumira]11499THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 30 JANUARY 2023We require that their parents buy the laptops probably but we know many parents are unable. Internet, I am told, is expensive; we know that some parents are risking giving their children phones to be able to do research but we know the risk of a phone to a child because they are tempted to use social media. This Budget does not speak to that.Mr Speaker, on page 73, we talk about … let me conclude that point.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No - you have allocated yourself more time. No, you cannot switch on for more time before you are given permission. Yes, conclude honourable. MS AISHA KABANDA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Page 73 talks about being able to stop early pregnancies. The report talks about the figures of girls that have become pregnant and says to address this, talk about skilling. These are two different things. The problem talked about is different from the cure. When you talk about skilling the pregnant girls, that does not solve the problem of other girls being pregnant. I find the objectives and the solution communicating two different things. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rest it at that. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Hon. Okupa, Hon. Mpuuga, Hon. Santa, Hon. Kivumbi –5.28MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me start from the first aspect of it, the domestic revenue sources. I would like to bring to the attention of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that he should interest himself in the leakages in the URA, especially in the taxation of gold.  Towards the end of last year, November and December, a staff of URA who was able to unearth the fraud, the tax avoidance – people are not paying taxes on gold. She comes from my place.  When she raised that matter, she was dismissed from URA. A month later, she fell sick. We flew her to Nairobi and it was found that she was poisoned. I do not know whether there is a connection with dealing with those who were involved in that scandal. During the CSPOC in Munyonyo, a young man approached me. I did not know where he came from but later on, he introduced himself to me. He said that they came from the UK but originally, his parents came from Guinea. They were here together with another businessman from Dubai.  They were received at the airport by police, led to an office in Entebbe where they were shown the gold plate, gold tablets and they were told to pay. They paid $62,000. They were taken to Munyonyo to sleep. Two days later, the people disappeared.They were communicating with them as they were flying back. They said, “We shall find you at the airport, we shall deliver”. By the time of boarding, they were nowhere to be seen. He said, “I need your help. We are now stuck here. These are the contacts of the people”. What was shocking, using my friends whom I know on the other side, I said, “Please, where does this number lead to?” The answer I got was, “Hon. Okupa, if you want your life, do not follow these things. Do not follow it. You will die.” That is the risk involved in that because the people who are involved in it – I do not know.  Honourable minister, since you have the machinery, please, investigate the issues of gold tax revenues, unless you also possibly fear for your life. (Laughter)  There is a lot of leakage and we are losing a lot of revenue to people who are involved in the gold dealings in this country. The minister should pick interest in this.Secondly, regarding the matter I raised here about grant aiding,  in Financial Year 2022/2023, we had schools that were approved here for grant aiding. Later, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development 11500THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029together with the Ministry of Education and Sports said that they did not have the money. They said they would do it the following year.  In 2023/2024, we again appropriated the money. However, to-date – we should be thinking about those students and pupils, because the parents, once the list was published in the New Vision , they pulled back saying that the Government had taken over. What is the fate of these children today, after hearing what the Minister of Education and the Minister of Finance said? We appropriated money. Can the Minister of Finance together with the Minister of Education and Sports confirm to the parents who come from those areas, where those schools are, that this year, there will not be any money, they should just continue paying for the services of the teachers?  Otherwise, without that, the schools will close. I appeal to the minister to follow up on that matter.  The Equal Opportunities Commission published a damning report, a strong indictment to Government about the distribution of services and jobs in this country. Honourable minister, as you work on the National Budget Framework Paper, please, can you take that into consideration such that we do not see that reoccur in this country? We all belong to this country and we all pay taxes.  Please, take note of that and incorporate it when you are doing the National Budget Framework Paper in the allocation of resources.  Finally, on the issue of the infrastructure, I cannot conclude without saying, please, Kumi-Serere-Kasilo-Kagwara Road; the President promised us in 2011, 2016, 2021 and we do not want him to say the same thing in 2026 campaigns. We even got a letter in 2022, the blue letters, putting that road. They even wrote a letter in 2022 indicating the roads to be worked on: Soroti, Serere , Pingire, Bugondo, Garama and the one of  Ochero.  I am happy with the one of Kaberamaido-Ochero, we passed the loan here but those are the two. Those are the few roads on the eastern part of the Greater North road, if you started from Jinja up to Soroti. How many roads on the left-hand side of the road are tarmac? It is only one, the one of Tirinyi. Please, help us to sort that matter such that we can – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Hon. Okupa. Hon. Mpuuga?5.34MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (NUP, Nyendo-Mukungwe Division, Masaka City):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was here when the minister laid the National Budget Frame Paper and we exchanged pleasantries, including an advisor to him, to this time around follow the law. He promised that he would follow the law. Two things are outstanding. First of all, I have been trying to understand whether the minister came here when I was away and announced a migration from programme-based budgeting to sector-based budgeting. I rarely miss the House and I have never heard of that. A lot of the alignment of the NBFP speaks to sectors. The programmes are vanishing progressively.Relatedly, in the Financial Year 2021/2022, we questioned the absence of an evaluation framework for the programme-based budgeting and there was a promise that it was being developed. None of these programmes, as far as I recollect, have been evaluated. I suspect the reason the minister is running away from the programme to return to the known path of sectors - Can the minister clarify whether we are using both now and we moved back to using both the new and the old that Parliament can understand how best to work with the Minister of Finance? Mr Speaker, I informed the minister then that there was a problem because he was making several announcements to prepare us to debate the NBFP, including a plethora of tax measures and revenue expectations. Then I asked him, “Are you moving to amend the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility?” The minister said, ”No.” The two reports speak to the lack of sync between the charter, the NBFP and NDP III. [Mr Okupa]11501THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 30 JANUARY 2023The minister should understand that in this, there is nobody to defeat, so nobody should be on the defensive. If you have moved like your response in brief communicated, to announce tax measures, you have revenue anticipations, hitherto not anticipated. It means it alters your revenue expectations and therefore, it changes the charter in a way. In Regulation 3 of the PFMA, you are allowed to amend and come on the Floor of Parliament and inform Parliament. There is no crime in that. The law allows you to do that. So, why are you moving in the corners when you have the entire law allowing you to come and say, “We are amending the Charter, and therefore, there are new revenue sources that we have discovered.”  Honourable minister, this will help you not to be explaining yourself every day. Mr Speaker, we made the Charter two years ago but the minister has never brought to the House a public debt management framework. That is why Members are debating whether the public debt rhymes with the promises in the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility. The law requires the minister, next month, to report to Parliament on the performance of the economy. Will you stop him from reporting until he has laid a public debt management framework? This is because the public debt is a huge scare to the country. If this Government were a head of a family, they would mortgage even padlocks in the house. We have to understand how you want to manage the public debt, in the medium-term. Otherwise, without a public debt management framework in place, we are grappling in the dark, yet the law demands that the minister to lay it immediately after laying the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility. Mr Speaker, I implore the minister to come clean on the revenue sources they have debated. How I wish he had made those proposals so that the Budget Committee and the House would debate the proposals so that the figures that would come - I have heard the presiding officers complain about debating tax measures last and then we fidget with the figures. If your tax measures could come at this stage, we would have a beautiful conversation about their possibility, efficacy and how they rhyme with your proposals, honourable minister. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. You have raised the issue of a programme-based versus sector-based budget and this is an issue I raised when the report was being presented here. This is because the Budget Framework Paper was presented to us in a programme-based format – 20 programmes – but the report is in a sector-based format. At that time, we also found a challenge with how the committees are formulated and I assigned the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to study this issue and advise us within three weeks so that we are not to blame. However, the minister also committed that, after, they will consolidate and re-align the budget back to the programme-based format. They said they presented according to programmes, but Parliament processed according to sectors. The dilemma in which the Chairperson of the Budget Committee was in could also be seen when he was receiving reports from “sectoral committees”, instead of “programme committees”. (Laughter)So, we still have a lot – both the finance ministry and Parliament – to harmonise after this budgeting process. Please, let us move. I am not allowing any procedure, order or information. I am handling the debate. We do not have much time. Let us have Hon. Santa Alum and, then, Hon. Kivumbi. (Members rose_)I read the names, so, I do not know why the rest keep standing up. Until I finish these, I cannot pick anyone else. 5.41MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. 11502THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029We are discussing the budget framework paper, which I believe is a plan right from the bottom. However, as long as we go on planning and do not follow them – this Parliament, every year, appropriates the money. However, when it comes to releases, it is a different issue. I am cognisant of the fact that we have a limited resource envelope. My question to you, the minister in charge of finance – just at the start of this session, there was a question about money for the roads. We appropriated, but we do not have money released for this financial quarter, yet you said it would come this February. How much money will come? Is it per what we appropriated? This is because the issue of roads affects each one of us in this House. It affects everybody out there, whether it is a child, a woman or a person belonging to whatever political party or religion. Two, Mr Speaker, when you look at the report from the committee on the budget framework paper, we have achieved only 17 per cent of the National Development Plan (NDP) III. We are planning and budgeting, but the poverty is increasing. Our debt-to-GDP burden has also increased. Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the minister in charge of planning: aware that we have limited resources, which way are we moving? Let me end by talking about the revenue of this country. We have projects, which are under-implemented. We pass the budget here, but it is as if due diligence is not done on most of these projects. Can’t that be a source of our revenue? On domestic borrowing, there is a situation where you are not paying people who have provided services to the Government, yet they are employing many people. When these people’s businesses collapse, it means that we have a challenge in our economy. I want to hear the plans that you have for these people. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 5.44MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA-KIVUM -BI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. Let me go to page 47 of the main report. Mr Speaker, we have spoken about arrears, but let us go to where it touches the common man. This Government has pension arrears of Shs 316 billion. We are all potential pensioners. The last thing you want is for your pension not to be paid. Can we appeal that as they come with the ministerial policy statements, they look for ways and means to provide money for the pensioners? (Applause) We are talking about a known figure. This Government – I have looked at that page; I do not want to go into the details of that page. This Government cannot pay for utilities; they cannot also pay for rent. However, most importantly, we have just assumed the presidency of the Non-Aligned Movement and G77+China, but we have arrears of contributions to international organisations of Shs 113 billion. We are the president, as a country, of two major international bodies. This shames the country, if we are ejected from those organisations because you cannot participate. For all organisations we feel are not important, it is high time we withdrew formally or else, let us be decent enough and find money to pay for our obligation. It is a shame for a Speaker to arrive at an international conference and be told, “You cannot attend because your country has arrears and has not contributed”. This level of shame can be avoided. Can we task the finance minister not to present the ministerial policy statement without providing money for these kinds of things? You are talking about revenue, but you have arrears of taxes and other deductions. Let me ask the minister, why do you deduct and not pay? Where does the money go? I rest that case, but for the record, the Budget Committee should also tell us that you cannot [Ms Alum]11503THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 30 JANUARY 2023compound Shs 5 trillion-can’t you break down Shs 5 trillion and say, these are the expenses? That is a lot of money. The last contribution I will make is on the big elephant in the room. Mr Speaker, we need to spare time and fundamentally speak about this thing called debts. This is because as we speak - and when you look at the resource envelope - as you are clamouring for more roads and schools, the discretionary expenditure is going to be reduced by a whooping Shs 4 trillion from Shs 25 trillion to Shs 21 trillion. This is money that the Government spent this financial year and next year; the money will not be available.What is increasing? We are going to be debt refinancing by a whooping Shs 9 trillion. Interest is going to increase our domestic debts by a whooping Shs 1 trillion.  Going forward, if we continue like this, we are going the way of Sri Lanka. We are on the verge of being blacklisted as a country. Isn’t it high time that Parliament and the Government - I have engaged the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, while I was the shadow minister. However, they do not have – so it is high time we sit and change the way we behave. If not we will fundamentally have mortgaged this country to a level we cannot imagine.Therefore, I want to invite the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or you, Mr Speaker, to find space and time so we can crack the animal called “National debt” and the way we are borrowing. Otherwise, we are in a deep hole. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Kivumbi, that is an issue I think we should give time because when the minister of finance says our debt is sustainable, it is an issue which can come here and we debate; they give their arguments. I have been interacting with Speakers from other countries and surprisingly, when they looked at our debt, they said ours is more sustainable than theirs. Meet Speakers from Southern Africa; those from the Southern African Development Community (SADC). So, these are issues that I think we need to look at and the Committee on National Economy should make an assessment, bring a report and we debate it here. Committee on National Economy, I am giving you one month to report on this issue of national debt so that we can have a thorough debate as we go into the budgeting process.Chairperson of the Budget Committee, there are two things. One, pension is a statutory obligation. Whenever we are budgeting, you tell us that this is statutory - that is, salaries and pension. How can we say we have arrears of pension when it is a statutory obligation? We are breaking the law, as a Parliament.  In this coming budget, let us ensure that as, Parliament, we put money for pension as a statutory obligation because that is what the law requires.  And the minister for finance has been coming and showing us that you cannot touch this money because it is a statutory obligation. Pension is not debatable. It should not be about choices. On the issue of utilities, honourable minister for finance, we can agree. The issue of utilities is about an implementation strategy, which we can sort out this way.Entities are given money for utilities, but they do not pay, yet they know they cannot run without water, electricity and then they come to blackmail the Government. Can’t we agree that you deduct this money at source and give it to the National Water and Sewerage Corporation (NWSC) and pay for electricity? The reason, honourable colleagues, is that money which we have been, for example, paying to NWSC is the money which is being used for Service Coverage Acceleration Programme (SCAP) and other programmes. If you deduct it at source and give it to NWSC quarterly, it will implement water projects in the country. (Applause)What are you losing? Instead of giving it to entities and then they pay attendance allowances for their meetings and workshops, deduct the 11504THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029money for utilities at the source because you provide us with the funds, but they divert. This should be a budget management process.Chairperson of the Budget Committee, do you want to say something?5.52THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Patrick Opolot Isiagi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of deducting at the source is not practical because we supply the money to these votes. There is no way an entity has a right to divert this money unless the Finance Treasury is asleep because this money is paid according to the budgeted lines.In the past, the former Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury (PS/ST) put a ban, protected these monies and ensured each entity must control their utility bills and have the utility bills budgeted for and funds released as protected items; as such, you must pay only when you are paying to the utility supplier.  The entities do not pay like the ministry pays; they make payments via finance. So, it is only finance which is asleep. (Laughter)Mr Speaker, another issue we should take note of is that when we discuss the domestic arrears, by now, we should not even be having it at all. The Government instituted a Commitment Control System, whereby before each accounting officer commits, expenditure is recognised at the time of placing the order. You only place an order if funds are available.Colleagues, when trouble comes - we should condemn the accounting officers, but remember, in policy statements, the accounting officers provide cost work plans pegged to the money and we approve those monies. So, the accounting officers go ahead according to their work plans and the budgets knowing that they have the funds in their budget. At the end of the day, the finance ministry does not release the money, but we go back to finance as far as expertise is concerned because in schedule 3 one of the issues is assessing the financial risks.The experts in finance are supposed to do a financial risk assessment, monitor, evaluate and put steps to mitigate the risks. The risk in terms of public finance could be shocks to the systems, which will cause a shock to revenue. If there is a shock to revenue, by the time it occurs, if our experts are working, they should have already taken steps to get solutions to mitigate it. (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Switch on, Chair.MR ISAIGI OPOLOT:  On the same, we find ourselves in a cycle because somebody is not doing his work. That is where we are. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Amero, Hon. Obigah Rose, Hon. Okot Boniface and Hon. Nakut Faith.5.56MS SUSAN AMERO (Independent, Woman Representative, Amuria):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join the rest of my colleagues to support this Budget Framework Paper. However, I have some issues that I would like to seek clarification on.Mr Speaker, we have been extending the term of the local council chairpersons. I do not know whether we are not in any way disenfranchising the people from voting for their leaders after their term has expired. Even when we look at this Budget Framework Paper, there is nothing provided for on that yet we have kept on pushing this ahead.Mr Speaker, on the issue of the districts, which have been occupied by the cities, I have not seen money provided for it.  I do not know what we are going to do because many of the cities have occupied the premises of the districts and as we talk, they do not allow even the districts to operate within the same premises before they get their new home.Mr Speaker, we have a big challenge of pension and gratuity. The people who are pensioners have been working and were earning money. I do not know why the Government cannot [The Deputy Speaker]11505THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 30 JANUARY 2023know that these people offered a service and at the time when they retire, they should be paid automatically like in other countries.In Kenya, where we did a benchmark, the Government decentralised and after decentralising, everybody knows the retirement dates of the workers. Therefore, by the next month when someone is retired, he is entitled to his pension. Why are we not implementing this? When are we going to amend the Public Service Act, so that we can have pension handled the right way? Mr Speaker, it is very bad for people to work and then when they retire from work, they fight to earn what is entitled to them. Some people die, some people are in Kampala here, some people’s names disappear from the districts and they appear from somewhere else and the money gets to the wrong accounts. We need to look into this very carefully.Additionally, in this report that we are debating, you have guided on the issue of program budgeting vis-à-vis sector budgeting. I do not know whether we are proceeding right if we are going to keep introducing new projects without -(Member timed out.)5.59MR BONIFACE OKOT (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. Parliament is a House of record and I am very concerned because when I read the National Budget Framework paper, I noticed that Table No.3, is about gender and equity responsiveness, I have noticed that the figures that are captured there are mathematically inaccurate. You will notice that in Table No.3, the average figure of 54 per cent for the Financial Year 2024/2025 is not correct. The correct one is 57.56 per cent. Last year I raised a similar matter -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is your source to say that the figure is not correct? MR BONIFACE OKOT: Mr Speaker, last year when I raised a similar matter, you guided that the Chairperson of the Budget Committee should sit with me and we made a computation and indeed the figures were inaccurate. He admitted to the House. This year again, the figures are inaccurate. Mr Speaker -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you want another meeting - (Laughter)MR BONIFACE OKOT: Mr Speaker, I also need your guidance because if we are proceeding with figures that are inaccurate all the time, I seek to know from you whether we are proceeding well and whether we should adopt this framework paper with the wrong figures.Secondly - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us first sort that and I will allow you more time.MR ISIAGI OPOLOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Table No.3 is a report for gender and equity performance. This is a submission by the Equal Opportunity Commission. In their survey, this is what they came up with. So we did not generate this; we are only attaching for reference, what came from the Equal Opportunities Commission. Possibly, if you are more informed and you can support the figures you are reading, then you may not sit with the Budget Committee, but you have to sit with the Equal Opportunity Commission and correct them if you are an authority in it. This is from the Equal Opportunity’s Report, Mr Speaker and colleagues- THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I asked Hon. Boniface Okot for the source. Is it a mathematical issue, an arithmetical issue, or -MR BONIFACE OKOT: Mr Speaker, I am aware that this certificate of gender and equity responsiveness is a requirement, a prerequisite 11506THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029for us to pass this. I have done computations on these figures for last year and this year. I know that these figures are not correct and it would be prudent for us as a House of record to correct these figures because many years down the road we will have considered wrong figures for a legal requirement. It could perhaps have legal implications for the process we are pursuing. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On that one, please my technical team, Clerk, let the technical team on the technical bench help us add up all these figures and give us information, which will help us to see whether they are appropriate or not. By the time we put a question, we shall have gotten advice from the technical bench.MR BONIFACE OKOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Still on the same table, you notice that for two years running, under the program of digital transformation, we have had scores of zero per cent for two years running. It is wrong for us to see a child perform poorly and we act blind. I am requesting from the Government that we also get the assurance that in the next BFP, we have this digital transformation program perform much better in terms of its gender and equity responsiveness. Finally, last Financial Year, 2023/2024, the Innovations Fund, under the Program of Innovations, Technology Development and Transfer, received zero appropriation, despite a Cabinet directive to provide Shs 500 billion annually since 2019. Mr Speaker, I am quite concerned and I want to implore the House that as a gift to the young people, we should ensure we allocate this Shs 500 billion towards innovations to support our young people who are mostly unemployed or underemployed. Thank you.6.05MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Budget Committee, particularly on the issue of buying road equipment for the new districts. I would not want to mince my words here. Much as colleagues are saying they are all districts and they do not have the equipment, this is not fair to the new district. Roads of Terego have now become gullies and valleys. Let us be there for each other. I would think with the meagre resources in this country, we should start with the new districts, because we can no longer borrow from the old districts. They do not want to give us the equipment as if they are their personal property. We have fuel but we cannot work on our roads. In December, we were set to receive this new equipment but up to now, it has gone to the Budget Framework Paper. I hope this time it will not be words or writings, but it will materialise. Secondly, I want to thank you for the issue of police in prisons. Honestly, we need to allocate more resources to these entities. If you go to the remand homes, you will cry. I do not know whether they are now remand homes or they have also been turned into prisons. Food for prisons is not enough. Police are going through hell. Uniforms have grown so old. We need more allocation to those entities. Then to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, we have street children. We have been trying to rehabilitate these street children, but the funding allocated is so meagre and they now go and they come back to the streets. We need to increase the money in that sector and we need to be able to give more money to recruitment or probation offices. I hope as we put money in batches, we have not forgotten the tobacco farmers of West Nile. Honestly, if we can compensate for the Hoima Region, why have you neglected the West Nile?We have had several meetings with you, and we have talked about this, unless you do not want us the MPs of West Nile to come back, we are sitting on a time bomb and we are part of this House. We want this issue of West Nile tobacco farmers set aside in this current budget. If not, then we will need to - (Member timed out.)[Mr Okot]11507THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 30 JANUARY 20236.08MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak):  Mr Speaker, I will speak on three issues, but before that, I wish to thank Hon. Rose Obigah for raising the matter of funding for the street children; UWESO is bursting with children, and they need our support to keep and rehabilitate those children.The three issues I wish to comment on are as follows: to solve the problem of the programme versus sectoral approach, I desire to see a restructuring plan from the Government. The impression coming out now is that Parliament is the one stopping the programme approach, which is not true.Even if committees are changed, and we restructure sectoral committees, as long as the rest of the Government remains constant, the programme approach will not succeed. Therefore, a restructuring plan is very important.Last year, money was given to two ministries to do dams; the Ministry of Water and that of Agriculture but both did not deliver then it went to the community and the community said they wanted the Ministry of Water, others wanted the Ministry of Agriculture and in the end, we all lost out. The issue of the programme approach needs to be sorted out. If we cannot restructure and have a plan for it, then it is better to abandon it. Regarding the issue of the science scale, I desire to see a harmonised position. This Parliament has already asked for that because when we rolled the enhanced science scale, we received a number of complaints.In some institutions, everybody became a scientist just because it was a branded science institution, even those who did not qualify. While in some institutions scientists were not paid even when they were scientists. I desire that as we process the budget, there should be a harmonised position to reduce the complaints so that everybody is served fairly.The third is about regional referral hospitals in our country. There are standard positions that are required in each regional referral hospital, without which there will be disasters. It is my wish that we consider regional referral hospitals. If they need a specialist anaesthetist, for example, in Moroto Regional Referral Hospital- yesterday we buried a woman, anaesthesia was not well provided for, Tomorrow. Mr Speaker, I will bring to your office a matter of urgent importance on that issue.Regional referral hospitals need to be supported because these are the “Mulagos” of those regions. If they are not functioning, what are we giving the people there? Should everybody come to Mulago? If we address these 3 issues, I will be a very happy woman.6.12PROF. ELIJAH MUSHEMEZA (Inde -pendent, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to draw the attention of the House to what I term as un -realistic budgeting.If you look at the last three financial years, have we been able to raise Shs 52 trillion? Look at the three sources, what the Uganda Revenue Authority collects, and what we get in grants and loans. Have we been able to raise Shs 52 trillion? If we have not, what convinces us that we shall raise that money this time?I have also observed that at the end of the financial year, the total budget is not what we initially appropriate because of the many supplementary budgets that we passed. We might be talking about Shs 52 trillion, but at the end of the financial year, the budget is talking of Shs 56 trillion.This leads me to the issue of ceilings of programmes, which have areas that have high investment returns. Look at tourism, which we have all agreed is an area of high investment returns, it can bring income very quickly to the economy.However, the ceiling - if you now look at the Budget Framework Paper, is the same as this current financial year. This is where we should put more money because most of the challenges 11508THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029we are mentioning are a result of low income. So, how are we going to address the issues of low income so that we can address other issues? Unless we do that, we shall remain in unrealistic budgeting. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, when we talk about issues of revenue, a very good example is some place where Hon. Peter Ogwang and I visited - it was some sports facility.Whereas our sports facilities here are demanding money every day, the other side is making money. But what did they do? For us when we go to Namboole Stadium, we even appointed a board, you find people dying to sit on the board of Namboole -you have a board of Nakivubo Stadium. That is an entity that does not raise money, yet it has a board and people are dying to be on it, so they can fail it completely.But what are other countries doing? After building a national stadium like Namboole, appoint management firms - international management firms, they showed me their records, they have projected that in 15 years, they will have already paid the actual loan. However, the economic value brought to the country within five years - such a venture brings money to that country because these management firms are the ones who manage international conferences, competitions and events, so they attract them to this country and they end up making money.The guy told us, “Look, even the money we have made has made the stadium look much better than what the government gave us.” But for us, Namboole - I receive calls from people lobbying; you are a friend to Hon. Peter Ogwang, I need to be on the board of Namboole. To do what? To kill it? You know I lost an election, at least put me on the board of Nakivubo. You find the Cabinet is spending a whole day discussing the board of Nakivubo. You cannot manage a stadium with a board; you need a professional firm.So when we are talking about these issues, I think in some cases my fear is that you have people who have never even sold a tomato to know what it means to make money, and they are making decisions on how the Government should generate revenue. My friend, go start a business, get a loan, go in it and try to run a stall, airtime and mobile money booths and see what it takes to generate money. It is not easy. We must make decisions that are painful but that will help our country.I do not know, maybe our thinking is different, but if for every organisation you appoint a board, I can tell you, you will never manage to generate revenue for this country.6.17MS PAMELA KAMUGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I address myself to vote 106 on page 110, this is the Ministry of Works and Transport. My question is derived from that sector, about the Kampala-Jinja Express Highway. I understand that UNRA has already procured a contractor. Unfortunately, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not allocated money for compensation for the right of way. From Kampala to Jinja, if you are to drive, it takes almost six hours because of the bad road, the potholes and the traffic. Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the minister, why are you punishing us who are using that road and all Ugandans. I do not want to say that because I come from eastern Uganda, but the road is for all Ugandans. I implore the Minister of Finance to find money so that we can compensate people and then we get the Kampala-Jinja Express Highway. Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER : Thank you. That is the road that drives our economy. That is the road where you cannot say that you are working for eastern Uganda. No, it is the one that drives the economy.6.19MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Musasizi is the Minister of State for Finance. He is on record of normally being very organised and articulate in presenting [Mr Mushemeza]11509THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 30 JANUARY 2023his issues. However, today, I am surprised. (Laughter)He was the Chairperson of a substantive Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development in this Parliament. He knows the issues Members raise here and the resolutions we pass here under your chairmanship, on key issues that affect each one of us as Members, and on key issues affecting our electorates in water, roads, health, and all sectors. Sir, I would have expected that in presenting this Budget Framework Paper, the minister would speak to the resolutions of this House relating to these subjects. People have raised issues on pensions. Former employees of the East African community are dying without getting their money. This House passed a resolution on those pensions. What has the minister spoken about this? People have cried on road equipment, especially those districts that have not got them. This House has passed a resolution on this. I expected the minister to specifically come and say, on these issues you have raised, this is our response. What is wrong with my friend, Hon. Ssemujju? (Laughter)MR SSEMUJJU:  Mr Speaker, when Hon. Baba was a minister, he was worse than Hon. Musasizi. As a backbencher, he has now seen the sense. Having been a minister, speaking the same way, or even worse than Hon. Musasizi, is he in order to complain? When in all his statements here, some we threw them out and others we complained. Is he in order as a former Minister for Internal Affairs to begin complaining when he was speaking the same language?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I think the record should reflect. No one has said anything whereby we should judge him as an individual to say this is worse or bad.  Hon. Musasizi has only been technical and because the technical issues are sometimes – Hon. Musasizi has to convey both good and bad news. When there is no money, he tells you there is no money. When there is money, he has already supported us here, honourable colleagues. I would not want us to judge any of our honourable colleagues to make them feel uncomfortable that what they have said is bad. Hon. Baba, you were presenting very well. Please proceed. (Laughter)MR BABA:  Thank you for protecting me. This Kira Municipality man had better watch his words. You will be sacked from that portfolio if you are not careful. (Laughter)My issue is that we have passed resolutions here as Parliament and I expected that in presenting the BFP, the minister specifically responds to them, especially to matters of concern to honourable Members of Parliament. I am sure Hon. Musasizi can do that very well for us. Thank you. 6.23MR FERIGO KAMBALE (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two concerns. One is about the domestic arrears. I appreciate the explanation the Minister of Finance gave, where we have a commitment control system in place. According to him, he was saying that commitments are made according to work plans. That system does not require accounting officers to commit according to work plans. They are supposed to commit according to warrants raised by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. If the finance ministry is not serious, about disciplining accounting officers who cause these commitments, we shall have big problems. Problem number one is where you accumulate arrears, no payments, and businesses end up collapsing. Problem number two is that some of these suppliers and contractors, have gone to court and they are attracting nugatory expenditures to the Government. So, we need to be serious. Those who are causing commitments, illegally, let them be disciplined.  Secondly, on the issue of tax leakages, Hon. Okupa mentioned something about gold export 11510THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029tax. I am a member of the Committee on COSASE. When we examined the audit report of the Financial Year 2021/2022, the Auditor-General indicated that we had not collected Shs 650 billion, because of not being serious about the gold export tax. When we were examining that report, we were surprised as committee members, when the Commissioner-General of the Uganda Revenue Authority could not give clear answers why he could not collect Shs 650 billion. It indicated that there are some people dealing in gold export who are not paying taxes. We are requesting, therefore, the finance ministry to be clear to us. You cannot afford to lose Shs 650 billion in one financial year, and we are talking about under-collection when it comes to the Uganda Revenue Authority. Now that we are looking at the Budget Framework Paper, it is imperative and important that the finance ministry – like we are talking about public debt management framework – (Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Conclude, honourable. MR KAMBALE:  Like the Public Debt Management Framework, we should have a separate paper here to tell us how to curb issues of tax leakages. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, this is a Budget Framework Paper. They are now going to prepare the ministerial policy statements, where we shall have finer details. The views from all sides; from the majority report, from the minority report, from your submissions here are issues that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should take so that they guide him and the Government when processing both the ministerial policy statements as per sectors and programmes, but also coming up with the final budget estimates. What you have said here the minister should not say, no, for this one, I do not accept and this one, I agree. No, here we are just giving advice to the Budget Framework Paper he has given. So, he will now go back and read the Hansard  and assess it. There is nothing you are submitting here that is final for you to say: “No, this missed – the Speaker not allowing me to speak, I have missed presenting this very critical issue, which is not going to be captured in the budget”. No, it is a framework and we shall continue with this.Therefore, in line with Section 9(8) of the Public Finance Management Act, we have reviewed the Budget Framework Paper and debated it. We have received reports from all sides. I now put the question that the Budget Framework Paper for Financial Years 2024/2025 to 2028/2029 be approved, with amendments.(Question put and agreed to.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.(The House rose at 6.28 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 31 January 2024 at 2.00 p.m.)[Mr Kambale]