

Wednesday, 9 January 2019

Parliament met at 2.05 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Happy New Year, honourable members. I would like to welcome you to this sitting and from the break that we had to enable us be with our people for Christmas and also receive the New Year. I congratulate you upon being ushered into the year 2019. 

We remember the Lord our God who has gifted us with good health - a favour we must thank Him for. During the Christmas break and thereafter, we lost many relatives, friends and other Ugandans whose memories are still fresh in our minds. Further to this, Members’ attention is drawn to the passing of Mama Victoria Kambere, mother to hon. Atkins Katusabe, Member of Parliament for Bukonzo West. Burial is scheduled for today in Kyogha South, Bwera Subcounty, Kasese District.

Honourable members, just this morning also, we received information of the death of Commissioner of Police and Director of Uganda Police band, Josephine Kakooza. She died early this morning. Burial arrangements are not yet in place because it has just happened. I got information from the Inspector General of Police. 

In view of this, honourable members, we should rise and observe a moment of silence for those I have mentioned and those I have not mentioned.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as it is in life, there are bad things but there are also good things. Many good things have also happened. We have registered successes in various aspects as well as additions to our families. Some honourable members have had children and many of our people too. We thank the Almighty God for these blessings and continue to pray that He gives us more of these blessings.

Honourable members, you will recall that I wrote an article, which was published I think on 31 December 2018 and 3 January 2019 in both the New Vision and Daily Monitor. I entitled it, “2019: A new dawn for us all”. It is lengthy, but I thought there are some aspects of it that we could reflect on at this moment.

First, I would like to emphasize the point that we need to individually and collectively throw away some of the bad attitudes and things that happened in the year 2018 and only carry forward the good ones to the year 2019. The attitudes of hope, positivity, forgiveness, love, reconciliation, unity are vital in our lives. That should guide us each time matters come before us either as members of committees or whatever position as Members of Parliament, especially those that relate to our relations with fellow Members of Parliament. Our attitude should be to solve these matters in a way that brings reconciliation that furthers unity of this august House. 

Secondly, we need to erase the dark memories in our lives so that we are better Ugandans, able to promote the social, political and economic development of the country. I appeal to you as we carry out our work, whether in the constituencies, committees or in Parliament itself, that positive attitudes should always be at the back of our minds. It is only through that that we will be able to succeed as individuals and collectively as a nation.

Honourable members, you will recall that in our legislative programme for the Third Session, it was agreed that the First Meeting was to be used for handling Bills and the second for reports. Now we are in the Third Meeting, which was supposed to be designated for the budget. 

As we are aware, the sectoral committees are mandated under rule 144 (2) to discuss and review the Budget Framework Paper and report to the Budget Committee not later than the 20th day of January. Thereafter, the Budget Committee scrutinizes the sector committee reports and presents a report to Parliament for approval by 1st of February. Today is already 9th of January. I wish to remind the chairpersons of sectoral committees and Members of these statutory timelines and advise that we should adhere to them. 

Last year, we had a situation - I am sure the Minister of Finance has now been able to improve on this - where the Budget Framework Paper was not accompanied by the necessary documentation; the Certificate of Gender and Equity was not attached. I remember I had to call a sitting here, which was the shortest sitting in the history of this entire Parliament. That sitting lasted only five minutes. Members were still coming in but business was done and we left. That sitting was called only for the Certificate of Gender and Equity to be laid before the House. 

Honourable members, as we go through this process of the Budget Framework Paper and analyse the performance of institutions in relation to issues of gender and equity, I think we need to start looking broader, other than just at what the law says. There are things that we may not even know. 

Something has just occurred to me, for example; this is a national Parliament and I like moving around and try greeting our staff here in their local languages, but I discovered one stunning fact that we may need to take cognizant of. The Karamoja region is not a small region because we have the Matheniko, Bokora, Jie, Pokot, Dodoth, Pian, Ik - that entire Karamoja subregion – but there is not one member of staff that comes from there in this Parliament.

The only member of staff from there comes from the extreme side – from Abim - and he used to be a policeman who now works with the Sergeant-at-Arms. These are things that we might need to look at as we look at gender and equity. There are the Pokot, like my friend from Upe. This is something we should think about and reflect on as Parliament. These are just concerns that we might need to deal with more proactively rather than leave this gap glaring in our eyes.

In connection with the above, I wish to inform the chairpersons and the deputy chairpersons of the sectoral committees that the Budget Office has organized a half-day training on Tuesday, 15 January 2019 in the Parliamentary Conference Hall beginning at 9 am. The purpose of that training will be to guide us on how to scrutinize the national Budget Framework Paper, given that some of the chairpersons and deputies are handling that exercise for the first time. We have all learnt things that we have done for the first time. When you are doing something for the first time, you need to be guided on how to be able to achieve it. Please, attend this because it will help you in the way you deliver on that mandate of processing the Budget Framework Paper.

Honourable members, as is the usual practice, at the beginning of the year Parliament hosts the Parliament Week. The activities are scheduled to take place in the South Wing parking yard starting from Sunday, 13 January 2019 to Saturday, 19 January 2019. This year’s theme is, “Championing accountability to improve service delivery.” Various activities have been lined up for honourable members and the general public. I wish to request you to actively support and participate in these activities. The programme has already been provided to you by the Clerk to Parliament, so please see to it that you participate in most of the activities. 

Honourable members, I am also informed that from Friday, 11 January 2019, service providers in charge of setting up for exhibitions and other activities will start erecting tents in the South Wing parking yard. Thus, this facility will not be accessible. Members are encouraged to use the underground parking area for ease of access because you will not be able to access the upper parking area.

Honourable members, I would like to thank you again for coming to this first sitting in this new year. I am delighted to be the one here to be able to start the new year with you. Let us brace forth because very soon, in a few months, we will be receiving our second last State of the Nation Address and we all know what that means. (Laughter) I am not scaring you, but I am just reminding you that we should use the time that we have now to help Ugandans understand that we were here and we did something for them, so that when they are being called upon to do certain things, they handle that with some favours. (Laughter) 

Let us use this opportunity to do a lot of work and achieve a lot. There are lots of Bills in the committees, pending reports and issues from Ministry of Finance that are also still pending with the Committee on National Economy. Let us see how we can finish all of them. There are also petitions that are with committees. Let us finish all of them to give us that visibility and we go out to face the people with a bang! In that way, everybody will understand that these people were there and they worked. Let it not be remembered that this generation of parliamentarians did not achieve what the people sent them to achieve. 

Honourable members, thank you very much and I welcome you again. Let us start business. There were some Members that had urgent matters. 

2.19
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Women Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, as an elder, I would like to wish everyone a happy New Year as well. 

Mr Speaker, your communication has been very passionate and I think it would be very unfair if we did not make comments on it. First, you raised a very serious matter of regional spread or equitable sharing of whatever is available. In this case, you cited one issue of employment within our own institution, which is a very serious observation. If we, ourselves, cannot live according to expectations and in compliance with the laws that we make, then how do we criticise other institutions. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate your comments that were published in the newspapers. I did not only read them, but I analysed them and I tried to see how we would pick out some lessons and bring them to the Floor of Parliament. One of the issues I would like to talk about is how we are sharing the national cake. Many times, we have asked how people are spread out in the different positions in Government and up to now, we have not received that information. I think arising from this call which you have made today, the relevant sectors will come to us and tell us how they are positioning people in the various top Government jobs. How do they justify their placings there? 

I think it is important because we are leaders. When people look at me as a leader, I am not only judged as a leader by the people of Dokolo who elected me, I am also judged by the people from the east, west and central. Wherever I am, I should be able to prove that I am taking care of their interests just as much as I am taking care of the interests of the people of Dokolo. 

Mr Speaker, I just stood up to appreciate your comments that were published in the newspapers and the passionate statement you made on the Floor of Parliament at the beginning of the New Year, 2019. May God bless you too. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, one of the happy occasions that we should witness are birthdays. One of us has a birthday today. The honourable member for Kitgum Municipality has just turned 37 years old today; happy birthday. (Applause)

2.23
MR ELIJAH OKUPA: (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Mr Speaker, taking on from where hon. Cecilia Ogwal ended, this week Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) released statistics of the poverty levels of this country and the east tops the list. This is not very good for us who come from that region. On the issue of sharing resources, I think that must be taken into consideration, to help the people from the eastern region.

Mr Speaker, I thought there would be a report that would be discussed here by the Committee on Equal Opportunities, but we found it in our pigeon holes. It had a lot to say. This is a researched document. I wish that the committee could lay and present that report in the House here. This is because I believe in discussing this issue of sharing natural resources with facts. That document is pregnant with statistics that would help us shape this country. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

2.04
MR JOSEPH KOLUO (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The people of Toroma, whom I represent, began the new year on a sad note. On Saturday, 5 January 2019, five people had gone to collect firewood from one side of Lake Bisina. When they were returning, their boat was affected by a strong wind and it capsized. Two people perished on the spot and three survived. The offshore rescuers were able to do the needful. However, in that area, in 10 years’ time, so far more than 30 people have perished. 

Mr Speaker, I tried to contact the police for assistance and a speedboat in search of the people who had drowned. They told me that in the whole of the eastern region, they do not have a boat like that one. They advised me to contact Entebbe, but it was in vain. On Sunday, I mobilised about 60 locals and they retrieved the two bodies.

Mr Speaker, this is a real calamity and I pray for the following: 

1. 	The Minister of Works and Transport should try to avail a speedboat on Lake Bisina, especially in the areas of Kokorio or Omatenga.

2. 	The Government, through the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the National Environmental Management Authority, should support the people of Toroma by giving them seedlings so that they can plant many trees to provide firewood.

3. 	I also pray that the Government considers supporting the families who have lost their beloved ones.

4. 	Finally, the Government should try to avail lifejackets to lake users. We have a ferry and in case of any problem, many people without lifejackets will die. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to lay this paper on the Table. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to comment on this issue of Lake Bisina?

MR KOLUO: I would like to lay this paper on the Table. It shows the list of the people who have so far died at that spot in Lake Bisina.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who has compiled the report?

MR KOLUO: I got this information from the local leaders in different parts of Kapujan Subcounty.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who has authored that document? 

MR KOLUO: I want this to be on record so that –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who has written it?

MR KOLUO: Myself. Thank you.

2.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I would like to also join you in thanking God that we are all here in 2019. Happy New Year to all of you. 

I would like to convey my condolences to the people who died on the lake as the Member has indicated. It is not only that lake that is experiencing these issues. We all know about the recent incident. However, there are also other people who have died on Lake Bunyonyi and Lake Albert. The Ministry of Works and Transport is working out a long and medium-term strategy to address these issues across the country because it is a rampant problem.

The second issue is about rescuing those who need help. The Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees will get in touch with hon. Joseph Koluo tomorrow. If there is some relief that is needed now, they will ensure that it is delivered because with what we have, we can reach the people who are suffering. I thank you.

2.30
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Happy New Year to you and your people of Omoro. 

I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the killing of my people by hepatitis B. Sometime back, I reported the increasing death of my people from hepatitis B. However, up to now, I have not got any response from the concerned ministry. Recently, we buried 10 people due to hepatitis B. The vaccines are there. I visited National Medical Stores and even interacted with the General Manager, Mr Kamabare. He told me that the vaccines are there. I am wondering why the vaccines have not been taken to these areas that are highly affected.

Mr Speaker, my prayer is that Nakaseke District is included on a national vaccination programme immediately. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Unfortunately, I was engaging the Minister of Health. The problem is hepatitis B in Nakaseke which has killed many people.

2.31              
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Happy New Year. It is sad to start the year with such a sad story about hepatitis B killing our people. 

This issue was raised before we closed last year. The Speaker directed us to bring a comprehensive report. I would like to request that I come with that report to the Floor of Parliament tomorrow. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will that include this issue of cholera that we have just heard?

DR MORIKU: Mr Speaker - 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have a statement?

DR MORIKU: This is on cholera.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you want to proceed now? No, I must accommodate you on the Order Paper, Madam Minister. Honourable members, I will alter the Order Paper to accommodate the minister to make this statement on the cholera outbreak. Let us finish with this quickly. 

2.33
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Happy New Year to you all. On 29 December 2018, I buried one of my voters. She was called Alice Namuganza, a wife to Rashid Muyindulo. They rammed into a parked sugarcane tractor on Kamuli Road. 

We have buried so many people in my place and the entire Busoga region due to accidents caused by these sugarcane lorries and tractors. They leave them parked on the highway and they do not have lights. It is not uncommon, Mr Speaker, to find a tractor or a lorry at night without lights on a highway, using a torch at night. You can find a truck with one light and you would be lucky if it is parked on the side of the road. You can find a truck with one light and you might think that it is a boda boda and you drive on thinking that you are overtaking a boda boda. 

Mr Speaker, the accidents in Busoga caused by these sugarcane trucks are too many. We have buried so many people. The sugarcane trucks are driven at a high speed. We have tried to engage the district police commanders, but they have failed to contain this problem. That is why I am standing here. 

I would like you to help me, Mr Speaker, to order my friend, hon. Obiga Kania, the Minister of   State for Internal Affairs, to cause a meeting of all regional police commanders with their corresponding traffic officers, together with the owners of the sugarcane trucks and the sugarcane manufacturers. We would like the minister to cause this meeting to happen and bring us a report. In that report, it should be recommended that the factories which are on the highway should get parking lots for offloading because right now, the trucks are parked on the highway and they block traffic.

Additionally, honourable minister, ensure that there is a towing vehicle on every highway so that no lorry or tractor stays on the road due to mechanical problems –(Interruption)- I will take the information – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I thought that by rising on an urgent matter of public importance, you have the information. If you did not have all the information, you should not have raised it. If you have finished and a Member has a supplementary matter, he can raise it but not in the middle of your submission.

MR WAIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In that report, we want the statistics on the people who have died because of these lorries and tractors that carry sugarcane. We also need a timeline. Thank you.

2.37
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Mr Speaker, this problem is not restricted to Busoga only. You recall what happened in Kiryandongo when a bus that was travelling to Kampala rammed into a parked tractor that had no reflectors. Recently, hon. Odonga Otto had a similar problem because of a truck that was parked on the way and had no reflectors and he got an accident. Thank God he is recovering. This concern should not be restricted to Busoga. 

My concern is that each time there is an accident, we try to put in place only short-term measures. It is important that if there are things that need to be done as per the traffic laws, they should be followed all the time. We should not wait until there is an accident and then we put in place short-term measures and then stop. When there is a problem of over speeding, then you begin to talk about speed governance because there has been an accident and in a few months, it is forgotten. That kind of thing will not help this country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you have driven on Jinja Road, then you understand what the Member for Bunya East is saying. It is a unique problem on that road. I think that is why the point is brought that way. It is not just about the Basoga but it is about that section that has issues. The people going to Kapchorwa and other places have to squeeze themselves on that road and that is where the problem is.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you. That region of Busoga hosts so many people. Particularly, West Nile has a sizable population there and specifically Obongi. When I was going to visit the people of Obongi in Jinja, I came face to face with this problem. 

The road that goes via Kasangati-Kayunga-Bugerere up to the Nile Bridge has the same problem as the main Jinja Road from Kampala. I almost got into the same situation but by the grace of God, I realized it when I was very close to it. I found two trucks loaded with sugarcane parked at the roadside with a lot of people nearby. A boda boda man had already knocked the vehicle and people were surrounding him, trying to resuscitate him. I reduced speed because I saw so many people on the road but I did not see the tractors. Therefore, this problem is urgent. It requires a solution. It can affect any one of us using this road.

The sugarcane trucks must have their own roads within the sugarcane plantations. They should not use the highway. This sugarcane business is not an emergency. It did not come yesterday. Why didn’t they plan to have separate roads for the transportation of the sugarcane, not moving on the highways like they do and we struggle with them. We need the industries, but we need the people more than the sugarcane money. They should have their own roads. If they want to have DMCs –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable, the factory might be 30 kilometres away. How do you create another parallel road of about 30 kilometres?

2.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Mr Speaker and colleagues, happy and prosperous 2019. I am glad my colleague has raised that matter. We will cause that consultation meeting to take place. We will involve him and other stakeholders fully and be able to come here with a report in the shortest possible time.

I urge that since the stakeholders are quite many, give us an opportunity. The stakeholders will involve the sugarcane growers and transporters, the traffic police, the Ministry of Works and Transport which licenses these vehicles, and us the leaders. Therefore, it will take a bit of time. We, however, recognise the urgency of this matter and we will handle it as soon as possible. We will be in consultation with you over the matter. Thank you.

2.42
MS ROBINAH SSENTONGO (NRM, District Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Happy New Year to you all. I stand on a matter of national importance concerning brutal murders that have happened in Kyotera District, which I represent. 

Three people were brutally murdered in cold blood in just one week from the 1st to the 8th. On the 1st, Ms Jalia Nakajugo of Kakoma, Nsambya in Kalisizo Rural was murdered and she was buried on the 2nd. I personally attended the burial. Yesterday, on the 8th, two people were murdered, Mr Ibrahim Kakooza and Mr Robert Nyabenda of Kidda, Mabaale, Kabira Subcounty.

My concern is about such a big number killed in just one week. If we go on at such a rate – This is not the first time that people are being killed in those numbers in Kyotera District and other parts of the country. No report has been given to us on who has been killing my people in Kyotera for the past two years. Now it has happened again. 

People’s security is at stake. People are now worried about two things: people are being killed under unknown circumstances and no reports are being given so that they can know what is happening. My prayer is that we get immediate security for my people and we get reports and the culprits are brought to book. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Mr Speaker, our condolences to the people of Kyotera and the families of those who were killed.

It is not true that for the last two years, people have been killed in Kyotera and we have not given reports, both here and in the courts of law. I think I am on record as having presented reports about the killings last year and the other year, which occurred in Kyotera and the greater Masaka Region.

Mr Speaker, regarding these incidences which have been reported this week, I will get back to the police authorities on the specific cases and find out whether investigations are going on and the nature of killings - whether they are criminal or otherwise –(Interjection)- and then I will give a report to this House and the colleague. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have no authority to access the microphone before I have allowed you. It is discourteous for you to start yelling on the microphone when another Member is holding the Floor. You can rise and raise the procedural issue without the microphone and we can hear. Please, it is disruptive. There are people recording what is going on. Now what are they going to record? 

MR KASIBANTE: My apologies, Mr Speaker. I have a very simple procedural issue to raise. Isn’t it procedurally correct to grant the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs leave to rest from outside? I can see him struggling to be with us here. I do not know if Parliament would procedurally grant him leave to go and rest from outside instead of resting from here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can imagine. An important statement that was coming from the minister about people who have died in this country is being disrupted for that purpose. Can we have Jinja Municipality East.

2.47
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of violation of human rights by the Uganda Police and the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) of Jinja, Mr Eric Sakwa. 
	
Mr Speaker, on 23 December 2018, the RDC of Jinja commanded an operation and arrested 14 of my constituents on allegations that a dead body was found on the shores of the beach. The point in issue is not about stopping of the investigations, but these people were arrested and have been incarcerated for almost three weeks now and yet they have not been produced in any courts of law. I have made efforts to reach out to the police including the Inspector General of Police (IGP) and RDC himself but as we talk, these people have not been produced in court and they are in cells.

Mr Speaker, this violates Article 23 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda on personal liberty and Article 28 on presumption of innocence. Therefore, I would like to seek the indulgence of the Minister of Internal Affairs to inform the House and the country at large about the circumstances in which people can be held for more than three weeks without charges being preferred against them.

Mr Speaker, the only explanation I have been getting is that the President talked about that incidence when he was addressing the country and therefore, the District Police Commander (DPC) cannot even grant bond and the RDC has even refused to make a statement. 

Mr Speaker, we are in such a state where people’s rights have continuously been violated. I seek the indulgence of the House and the minister on this matter. Thank you.

2.49	
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Mr Speaker, I have just been informed by the honourable member about the people who were arrested and the circumstances under which they were arrested. As soon as possible, I will find out what happened so that I can tell you whether they are still arrested and under what circumstances they have been kept. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these are the Members who had contacted me. As the rules require, you come and we have a chat about what is going to be raised. However, I am seeing Members who did not have the courtesy to come and see me and yet they have urgent matters, which I will not allow them to raise because we have not discussed them. We will deal with those urgent matters tomorrow because today, I do not know what they are, so I cannot guide on how we can proceed with them. That is what the rules allow me to do. So, I am going to use the rules properly. 

Can we now go to the Order Paper? I have amended the Order Paper to allow the Minister of Health at an appropriate time to make that statement on cholera.

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Happy New Year to you all. Mr Speaker, I was on this Floor sometime back in August and I raised a matter of national concern about the different school fees being charged by Government aided day schools. We were promised by the minister concerned that he was going to come with a full report. As I stand here, we only have nine days to the release of the Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE) results and the majority of the candidates were Universal Primary Education (UPE) pupils who cannot even afford school fees.

When you look at the new fees structure, some of the day scholars will be charged Shs 700,000, Shs 500,000 or even Shs 1,000,000 in Government aided schools. Our parents sweat to raise that school fees and that is where all the tax payers’ money goes –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you rose on procedure. 

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Mr Speaker, I was just explaining my point further. Can we have that report today before the release of the results? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I cannot rule on this matter because you are aware of this issue. Please, help us.

2.52	
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join those who have already wished you a prosperous new year and congratulate you for surviving 2018 and wish you the best of 2019.

My ministry is as concerned as Members about school fees charges, which are sometimes prohibitive and unrealistic. The minister set up a committee under the chairmanship of Prof. Eric Kayanja to study this problem and advise the ministry on how we could go about it. 

Following the advice of that committee, the ministry came up with guidelines on school fees charges. These guidelines prohibit schools from increasing school fees without authority from the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Education and Sports. Therefore, anyone who has not followed these guidelines to the letter is behaving irregularly. We should be made to know who they are so that we take appropriate action. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

MR ANTHONY AKOL: Mr Speaker, I listened very carefully to the procedural matter that was raised; it was concerning the report that should be brought here. Therefore, is it in order for the minister to come to the Floor of Parliament and try to answer the whole issue without bringing the report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the ministers’ statement was clear that the report will be guided by the findings of the committee. Otherwise, without the report of this committee being presented to him, he cannot present a report that has no substance on this serious matter. That is what he said. Therefore, I think he is in order.

Honourable members, we are not going to debate by procedure; we are going to handle business –(Mr Lokwang rose­­_) – Are you rising on the same issue of the minister?

Honourable minister, please prepare a brief on this particular issue in the meantime while we wait for the comprehensive report that is coming on the advice of this committee that has been appointed by the minister. In the meantime, come and brief the House on how we can proceed with this matter. 

2.56
MR HILARY LOKWANG (NRM, Ik County, Kaabong): Mr Speaker, last year, I raised an issue of commercialisation of education where notes in primary schools are being prepared like course units. For example, books are printed and once a term ends, they are rendered useless and another set is printed for the next term.

Mr Speaker, I witnessed this when I bought some books for my pupils but I realised that the books were only meant for that term. Actually, this forced me to buy more books for the next term and yet they were the same. The minister had promised to come with a comprehensive report on that matter but now that the ministry has not given us feedback about that matter, I think the minister should prepare something regarding that matter. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister you have heard that matter. Those are pending issues that are in your docket. Please see how to handle them. Can we now get to the Order Paper?

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL GRADUATE SCHEME BILL, 2018

3.00
MR MAJEGERE KYEWALABYE WAIRA (Independent, Bunya East County, Mayuge): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Graduate Scheme Bill, 2018” be read for the first time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the Bill. Is it accompanied by the necessary documents? Would you like to lay on Table a copy of the accompanying documents?

MR MAJEGERE WAIRA: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table a copy of the National Graduate Scheme Bill, 2018.

Mr Speaker, on the Certificate of Financial Implications, we used the section 76 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. Whereas section 76 gives mandate to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give a Certificate of Financial Implications, there is a provision in case the ministry plays hide and seek and that provision is section 76(4). 

Actually, we can even refer to our Rules of Procedure. Rule 117 (4) says, “Notwithstanding sub-rules (1), (2) and (3), a Certificate of Financial Implications shall be deemed to have been issued after 60 days from the date of request for the certificate”.

Mr Speaker, Parliament granted me leave on 22 November 2016 and they overwhelmingly supported me. Together with my colleagues from the Parliamentary Youth Forum, we embarked on processing the Bill with assistance from the Office of the Speaker.  
	
On 21 June 2017, the clerk wrote to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – I have evidence of delivery of that letter. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have a copy of the letter?

MR WIARA KYEWALABYE: Yes, I have a copy of the letter and even the delivery notebook. I am going to lay them on Table.

On 23rd June after expiry of the 60 days, I follow up with my colleague, hon. Bwino. We got hon. Kasaija busy but he gave us his secretary who took us to the officer who was handling this Bill. He is called Mr Wagona. 

Mr Speaker, Mr Wagona told us that he was going to write to the Ministry of Education and Sports and to the Ministry of Health. Of course I wondered whether that was the work of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

When we came back, we waited and on 5 March 2018, after seven months, the clerk again wrote to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development reminding them about this Certificate of Financial Implication. Mr Speaker, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development feigned ignorance of the first letter; they said they never received it and yet I was at the ministry and I even saw them working on it. 

On 9 May 2018, the clerk again wrote to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but the ministry kept hiding and they did not respond.

Mr Speaker, on 13 December 2018, I wrote to the Speaker highlighting the plight of the Bill and the Speaker gave us a go ahead. She said that if the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was adamant, we should go ahead and present the Bill. She actually stated on that letter that the Bill be put on the Order Paper.

Mr Speaker, with that mandate, the clerk published the Bill and that is the reason we are here. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development -

MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE: Mr Speaker, I have a full file of evidence and I beg to lay it on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. We cannot just receive anonymous documents. We do not know whether that huge document – just lay the letters only. We do not want the rest of the file. 

Honourable minister, why do we have difficulties with Certificates of Financial Implications on Bills?

3.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, hon. Majegere has been following up this issue from a particular office and so, I would like to crosscheck and then inform the House why the certificate was not issued.

However, the Speaker, informed us in the previous sitting that all Bills which have not received a Certificate of Financial Implications and are within 60 days should be laid on Table for debate.

Mr Speaker, we are working to ensure that moving forward, once we receive a request, we process it in two weeks; that is what we committed ourselves to. However, on this particular Bill, I do not have all the facts. May I inform the House tomorrow?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the reason these certificates are necessary is so that a Bill, when passed, does not just start gathering dust on the shelves. That is the challenge that was faced in the past. Bills are passed and there is no money to implement them. We pass Bills and on the commencement date, we put “active” but by that date, the Bill cannot kick off. That is why this issue of the Certificate of Financial Implications was brought.

It is important that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which is in charge of financing the implementation of Bills, should guide the House. Is this Bill capable of implementation in terms of availability of finances? If it is not in this financial year, can it be in the next financial year? This is the guidance that we need so that we do not engage in passing laws that will not help in the improvement of the body of laws that are already in this country. That is the purpose.

If they write to you, you have a mandate to respond saying, “No; this Bill cannot be accommodated this financial year.” You have to inform the House so that we know the implication of what we are going to pass. With that undertaking, we will take that but the Bill stands referred to the appropriate Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to handle within the framework of the rules and report back to the House.

Do you want to lay those documents?

MR KYEWALABYE: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay these documents.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Lay them one by one please; just the letters.

MR KYEWALABYE: I beg to lay on Table a letter of 21 June 2017, written by the Clerk to Parliament to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; requesting for a Certificate of Financial Implications of the National Graduate Scheme Bill, 2017. It was received on 23rd June. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay the delivery note indicating the dates and confirming that this letter was received by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

I beg to lay a letter written on 5 March 2018 by the Clerk to Parliament, again reminding the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to take this matter serious. I beg to lay the delivery note, again, for the letter of 5 March 2018 which the ministry was also denying.

I beg to lay a letter written by Kenneth Mugambe, for Permanent Secretary to the Clerk to Parliament, dated 21 March 2018, which also denies the ministry ever seeing these documents.

I beg to lay a letter dated 9 May 2018, written by the Clerk to Parliament to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, again emphasising the issue of a Certificate of Financial Implications. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And the delivery note? (Laughter)

MR KYEWALABYE: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the delivery note, confirming that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development received a letter dated 9 May 2018. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think that is sufficient. Let the records capture that. It will guide our work on how to handle this matter. Thank you very much, hon. Majegere. The Bill is referred to the committee for expeditious handling. (Applause)

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF HEALTH TO PARLIAMENT ON CHOLERA OUTBREAK IN KAMPALA CITY

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Mr Speaker, I have the pleasure to present a statement on the Floor of Parliament on the Cholera outbreak in Kampala city.

The Ministry of Health received a report of four suspected cases of Cholera on 5 January 2019. They were treated at Kiruddu Hospital following a complaint of diarrhoea and vomiting. This started way back on the 4th of this month. The suspected cases were from Kabowa Parish in Rubaga Division. The health workers at Kiruddu Hospital immediately suspected that it was Cholera and gave appropriate treatment.

Following that report, on the same day, the ministry made necessary arrangements to transfer the cases to Naguru China-Uganda Cooperation Hospital where a Cholera treatment centre was established. Subsequently, three more patients were received the following day and as of 8 January 2019, there were 10 suspected cases of Cholera, of which two cases have been confirmed. 

As I speak, majority of the cases have improved and others will be subsequently discharged. There are no Cholera cases reported in Nakawa, Central and Kawempe Divisions although our teams are on the ground, sensitising the community and doing surveillance. 

Actions that have been taken by the Ministry of Health to prevent the spread and control of the Cholera outbreak

Following this report, the Ministry of Health, in collaboration with all the stakeholders, carried out the following:

    1. We opened a treatment centre at Naguru Hospital for suspected cases and those that have been confirmed.

    2. Samples have been taken, especially for stool, to test and confirm.

    3. We earmarked an ambulance to pick and transfer any suspected cases of Cholera to the treatment centre in Naguru Hospital. This ambulance is accessible 24 hours and the names and contacts of the responsible officers have been given. 

    4. We coordinated with stakeholders to follow up the cases to their places of origin so that we are in position to identify the possible causes. The investigation teams established that the current outbreak of Cholera was due to faecal contamination of our environment, since the affected community and households have built close to the waste drainage channels, with inadequate latrine facilities and unhygienic home conditions.

    5. To address the risk factors for the outbreak, we did the following with our stakeholders, most especially Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA), the United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund (UNICEF), Uganda Red Cross (URC) and the affected communities.

    a) Sensitisation on Cholera prevention through home visits and distribution of information, education and communication materials.
    b) We also intensified latrine emptying in Kabowa and Bukasa where the toilets were full.
    c) Inspection of homes by the health workers and Uganda Red Cross volunteers to educate the community on Cholera prevention.

Additionally, we took immediate measures which included home to home search for suspected cases so that they are treated and they seek care immediately. This has been done in collaboration with the health care providers especially the medical officers and health workers at Makindye and Rubaga Divisions.

We ordered for more Cholera medicines to replenish stock in Naguru and Kiruddu Hospitals and communication has been sent to all the districts to be on the lookout for suspected Cholera cases and to report it as soon as possible.

Mr Speaker, these are the measures, which have been taken by the ministry. We believe they will prevent new cases and avoid the current outbreak from spreading to other parts of Kampala City. 

It is important, for that matter, for all of us to know how to prevent Cholera. Cholera itself is an acute diarrhoea disease that is transmitted by faecal-oral route when we ingest food or water that is contaminated with the bacterium that causes Cholera. The bacterium is excreted in faecal materials from the sick person. Cholera affects both children and adults and it can kill within hours. 

The main symptoms are acute diarrhoea with massive loss of fluid from the body and it is transmitted through eating contaminated food. It is for that matter, therefore, that Cholera is a disease for the poor. People at risk of Cholera are those with inadequate sanitation facilities and those with access to unclean water and poor personal and domestic hygiene. 

The communities at greater risk are mostly those living around lakes and rivers, fishermen, refugees, communities in the landslide prone areas and urban slum dwellers.

Mr Speaker, although Cholera kills and spreads quickly, it is preventable and it can be treated. Prevention is through ensuring that we have access to clean water, construction and use of latrines in our communities, practise handwashing with water and soap and other protective hygiene practices. 

Good infection control measures especially in the Health Facilities
There are new interventions that have been proven very effective and these include the integrated use of oral Cholera vaccine to complement water sanitation and hygiene for the Cholera endemic communities or hotspots. 

Mr Speaker, in Uganda, we have 11 districts that are along the international borders that are called the hotspot districts. They have been selected for immediate treatment, especially the oral Cholera vaccine. 

Among the interventions, good leadership and community engagement are quite important for the success of sanitation and hygiene. Leaders must be exemplary to cause positive change in the people they lead. 

Furthermore, strong multi-sectoral collaboration with other ministries – that is what my ministry has been doing – most especially with the Ministry of Water and Environment, Ministry of Local Government, Office of the Prime Minister, KCCA and other key stakeholders, are very important in terms of prevention. 

Mr Speaker, the Government of Uganda has got a five-year strategic plan to prevent, control and eliminate Cholera. The plan incorporates all the points I have raised and to ensure its success. I would like to thank my ministry for the timely intervention. 

I would like to appeal to all of us that we should work collectively in order to eliminate Cholera. It is shameful to talk about Cholera in this era; it is not a disease we should be talking about. I believe that with our interventions, we will be able to contain and eliminate Cholera. 

I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, that is a ministerial statement. It attracts debate. The nature of this particular statement, as you have understood, is information about an outbreak, which is in the areas mentioned and how to take preventive measures. There could be issues to be clarified and other matters that you can raise.

3.20
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the elaborate statement. However, the minister has given us a catalogue of what ought to be done to deal with Cholera and how to prevent it. She has told us what the community should do, how the community should be sensitised and the roles of the leaders.

However, I think what we expected, especially me on behalf of the people of Dokolo, was to be told how you are implementing the five-year strategic plan that you have put in place. “In Dokolo District, for example, on the ground, we have already started doing these; sensitisation through radio stations and prevention measures are already in place…” because Cholera is a reality. 

Therefore, you cannot talk to us about a strategic plan or what you intend to do or what ought to have been done, which has not been done. Lives are already being lost. I would like the minister to be more proactive and tell us what is on the ground and what she wants us, leaders, to go and enforce or monitor. That is what I expected alongside the report the minister has presented. Thank you.

3.22
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a water and sanitation specialist, I feel so much perturbed. As we talk, in Kampala, many people - I watched on TV - are dying. 

Honourable minister, we all live in Kampala; it is the epicentre of the country. May I know the measures you have put in place especially for Kampala? This is where the chaos is - the ghetto katogo. I am sorry for using that language. 

However, the way people –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What was that word, anyway?

MR WALUSWAKA: The word is “ghetto” and it is where poor people come and stay together –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: “Ghetto” is okay but you used another word which –

MR WALUSWAKA: “Katogo” is a mixture of the poor and the rich. 

Honourable minister, on the issue of Kampala, Madam Musisi tried to bring sanity in Kampala - I do not know whether a new executive director was appointed when went for Christmas. I think that is why there is a Cholera outbreak; it is because Madam Jenifer Musisi was strict. 

Mr Speaker, we now need to know who the executive director of Kampala is because of implementation. As a politician, you cannot chase away people - these are our voters - but a technical person can tell people what to do and what not to. 

Finally, we went to see how these street children live and we noted that there is a problem of water. Has Government provided water for these poor people who cannot afford it? Government should provide free tap water to the so-called ghetto places for instance here in Kampala. Otherwise people are going to die.

The sanitation facilities are lacking and the people with latrines charge heavily to a tune of Shs 500. That is why people opt for kaveera. The minister for Kampala and the Minister for Health need to come together to provide free sanitation facilities especially to the poor people. I thank you.

3.25
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntugamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the minister for the report. I would like to seek clarification from the minister; I had anticipated that you would address the immediate issue of treatment. If we have an outbreak and then we emphasise a future plan of prevention, control, elimination; the outbreak is a killer disease and needs immediate measure.

Therefore, we expected that you would come with a robust report indicating what you are doing and what you are engaged saying, “This is what we are working on and we are saving lives here, with statistics. This is what we have managed to do in the shortest time possible.”

Mr Speaker, this Cholera outbreak has been reoccurring overtime. We have reports here and the issue is raised. There is intervention and we are told about prevention, control and elimination. My concern, Madam Minister is, when will this elimination eventually happen?

Therefore, if there is an outbreak and you are telling us; who will come up with the report? We will have to explain on elimination and prevention because as this comes in, we report here and there is an outbreak. 

Therefore, which are these long term solutions that you provided or you plan to provide this time specifically so that we deal with this issue firmly and maybe it will not happen again? Could we get clarification? Thank you.

3.28
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. This is a very serious issue before us, members of Parliament. People out there expect us to come up with an immediate clear cut plan.

What I expected from the honourable minister was that we have an emergency and we need emergency handling especially with regard to the budget. You did not indicate that your ministry has a shortage of this much and you would like the Parliament to come out clearly and look at the contingency fund. This is the essence of a contingency fund; for emergency cases like Cholera outbreaks.

People come from Isingiro to buy goods in Kampala. It is I now the entire country and like my colleague said, Kampala is an epicentre of Uganda; everybody comes to Kampala. Even today, people from Isingiro are in Kampala. Isingiro could be a little bit free from now but you never know what they carry from Kampala.

Therefore, could you kindly come up with a clear cut programme especially with the budget? If we have a shortage of the budget or the personnel, then do that. Let us support you and help the people of Uganda. It is an emergency and not business as usual.

My heart almost stopped when I saw some of those photos on television. I imagined if I were a foreigner intending to visit Uganda, I would have stopped. Children in Kawempe, Bwaise and downtown areas fetching water from dirty terrible sewerage in jerry-cans - I wanted you to clearly state that those are areas that you are going to handle as emergencies.  

I would like to say that you should use Shs 5 billion. We would rather do that than just play about with people’s lives. I thank you, very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether I did not hear the minister properly. The minister said they have had a robust response and the remaining two people are likely to be discharged tomorrow. Did I hear correctly or did I not hear properly? That is what the minister said.

Therefore, an outbreak is not necessarily an emergency if it can be contained. Let us not escalate the situation which is completely already under control. We scare people when the minister says- if they are telling us false stories then we can deal with that.

However, if the minister is saying that they have contained it and that the last two people are being discharged today or tomorrow, isn’t that sufficient response?

3.31
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report. The clarification I would like to make is about the issue of decentralising the emergency response.

I used to work with a hospital and I remember in 2005 when there was a Cholera outbreak in Kampala, within a period of three to four months, it almost run in most parts of this country. This response that we have right now in Kampala; do we have plans for other areas as we try to ensure that there are supplies and responses or plans in case there is an outbreak in other communities for example in Karamoja where I come from?

Mr Speaker, I realise that our ministries are working in isolation. The Ministry of Health wants to work and the ministry in charge of water also wants to show what they are doing. Fortunately, we also have the Ministry of Trade and Industry - the kaveera which we see in those sewerage systems. I do not know when we shall stop having this kaveera, which is blocking the sewerage systems and trenches and causing issues of Cholera in Kampala. 

We know the moment these ministries work together – the Ministry of Water and Environment should be in position to share some of this information whenever they are going to the field visits. They should be able to communicate and send alerts through the Ministry of Health of the potential outbreaks that are likely to occur. We do not have to wait for an outbreak and then we lose people. 

Fortunately, right now the situation is being handled but honourable minister, we need a decentralised response in case we have it northern Uganda and we have regional hospitals there and in case it happens in eastern or western Uganda. Thank you, very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Even the minister for Kampala should be involved.

3.33
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a survivor of the latest outbreak because several of the villages that I represent, including my own, have been hit by this outbreak.

I would like to thank the minister for this brief. However, Mr Speaker and Members, it fell short of mentioning the exact danger of the outbreak. It ignored the deaths that have so far been recorded since the outbreak of this problem. In Rubaga Division alone, we have lost not less than five lives since the Cholera outbreak. 

The minister mentioned something about 5th January but this epidemic hit Rubaga since last year. The problem is that the minister only responded around 5 January 2019.

Mr Speaker, as it has been put across by several colleagues, the issue of a Cholera outbreak in Kampala calls for a multi-sectoral approach. The actions and solutions that have been outlined by the minister in the statement do not put off the outbreak. They just treat the victims. 

We must find a solution to the outbreak and basing on its causes. Some have been mentioned and I would like to emphasise that the biggest causes of this include the following:

    1. The poor drainage system; I do not need to elaborate because everybody knows what takes place whenever it rains.

    2. There is also the poor waste management system in Kampala. It has become very expensive for an average resident of Kampala to dispose of garbage. You must pay and this has been let out to private companies. You either pay or suffer with it. 

	Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) no longer collects garbage from our people. The poor who cannot even afford rent have to pay for garbage collection. Those who have not paid – and people at KCCA think that when you do not pay, it is at your own cost. However, even those who have paid, the epidemic is there for you.

    3. The other cause is poor physical planning. The minister mentioned it. Somebody has got a plan but he is building on the drainage itself. Even if he did not have a plan, where is KCCA when people are building on the drainage systems? There is that poor physical planning and the systems of physical planning that do not work.

The minister was very precise on sensitisation; however, even with this - yesterday I spoke to leaders from Rubaga Division who attended the sensitisation activity somewhere in Kabowa. They instead came with kits to do with Ebola. Actually, 90 per cent of the sensitisation was about Ebola not Cholera. Everybody was wondered; they were left with kits to do with Ebola yet they went to be sensitised on how to have Cholera out of the communities. 

Therefore, it is as if the ministry, with that five-year plan, has not structured itself into how Cholera can be prevented through sensitisation. When you go to teach about Cholera but instead supply kits for Ebola, you leave me, a teacher, like an ordinary student.

Mr Speaker, I would like to conclude this way; that KCCA, as far as the biggest causes of Cholera are concerned, is placed in the best position to explain how to put off the outbreak. The Ministry of Health can tell us how to treat the sick but things to do with the drainage system and poor waste management - when it has become very expensive for the people of Nakulabye to dispose of garbage - it must be KCCA. In fact, the biggest cause is becoming KCCA itself. Thank you.

3.38
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, BUKOTO COUNTY SOUTH, LWENGO): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for her accurate and articulate statement regarding the Cholera outbreak.
Cholera is a sanitation issue, which as far as I can recall, is being reported here for the fourth time as an outbreak in different parts of this country. 

This time round, if we are talking about Kampala and a Cholera outbreak, it means there are sectoral players that should come in. The work of the Minister of Health is to treat patients but the cause goes back to the Minister of Lands and Urban Development. When do they have a plan to eradicate slums from Kampala? It is a sanitation issue. 

What plans does KCCA have for all the sewerage works and the garbage, which are piling all over the place? We should think about how we can eradicate the Cholera epidemic from Kampala City. 

Regarding pre-urban development, last weekend I branched off at Kigo and I ended up somewhere near Kiruddu Hospital – did not use the main road. I found people have developed those areas but without any urban planning. 

Therefore, while we talk of Cholera from Rubaga, it will break out in Kiruddu and in all these areas, which are coming up very fast. Pre-urban planning must be in place if we are to eradicate this Cholera. I rest my case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to say something later or right now? I see you getting up – okay. Can I have the Workers’ representative?

3.41
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the presentation. I heard her say that the situation is almost under control but I think we still need to sensitise our people because of what I saw on television yesterday.

As they showed the stream where people were getting contaminated water, a builder came and he was shown clearly drinking the water. When the media interviewed him on why he was doing that, he said, “We have always taken this water and if I took the water at the tap, I would fall sick.”

Another gentleman on television had already lost a wife and his three children were admitted but he said it is not Cholera but something else that the doctors have failed to diagnose. We still need more sensitisation for our people so that they can understand the risk.

Another lady who was cooking food also got that water and she said it was after all cheaper to use the water than spending Shs 200 to buy a jerrycan of water. These are people within Kampala. They need to do a little more to make sure that people change their attitude and know that the State is supporting them so that they can be saved from Cholera. Right now people do not know the repercussions.

We also had two patients who ran away from Naguru Hospital. I do not think they have been found yet. They are still at large and are spreading the disease. If they ran away from hospital before they had been cleared to go back home, then we still have a problem.

I thank the minister but I think that there is more that should be done.

3.44
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the brief she has given and for the steps that Government has taken to contain the disease.

Mr Speaker, my greatest concern is the hygiene and sanitation of Kampala generally. The honourable colleague has been asking for KCCA’s plan to contain or improve on sanitation. My question is: what is Government’s plan to decongest Kampala? Flyovers are being built in Kampala to attract even more people to an already congested Kampala. Fifty years down the road, we cannot have two cities. What is wrong with Uganda?

We all travel outside Uganda and smell other cities. How can we describe the smell of Kampala? When it rains, you would not want to move in Kampala. The city smells as if we are moving with latrines in our cars. That is where cholera comes from.

I would like to disagree with the minister when she says that cholera is a disease of poverty. Even here in Parliament, we can get cholera if we mishandle our sanitation. Mr Speaker, if sanitation is mishandled, it can lead to cholera anywhere. It does not mean that it is only poor people who get sick –(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, honourable neighbour, for giving me time to give information - (Interjection)– Nwoya and Buliisa are across the river so she is a neighbour.

Mr Speaker, you know that I am a proponent of other cities. We do not have to wait for Gulu, Jinja, Mbale and Mbarara to face the same crisis. In the Eighth Parliament, when we passed the loan for Kampala WATSAN, it was agreed that the Greater Kampala Metropolitan, including the neighbourhood, requires a structural plan and that Kampala had a looming disaster because everybody is using private septic tanks as opposed to having a sewer.

You have a national water bill with sewerage but without sewer lines. I think the point that the honourable member is raising is very important. This is a multisectoral area; National Water and Sewerage Corporation and Ministry of Water, can we do something about the sewers? When you give clean water, the waste must be drained. Thank you.  

MS ADONG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank my colleague for the information although he debated. I suggest that we need to get serious as a country because this affects all of us. Much as you are saying that we should not debate or escalate the issue, we have social media and other platforms that are reporting that cholera is in Kampala. It is so shameful. 

I urge the Government to pull up its socks and plan to decongest the city. If we attract more people to Kampala, planning will be more difficult. We cannot decongest these slums and create proper sanitation if more poor people are coming to the city.

To the contrary, some of the villages are much better than Kampala. In my village, people have latrines and you hardly see faeces around. However, in Kampala when you are driving and it rains, you do not want to look through the window as the sewers are overflowing everywhere. 

I pray that cholera is contained before the rains come in March, otherwise, we will be in danger. Please, let us plan and make our city have a good smell, not the smell of faeces everywhere. 

3.48
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In 1962, when we got Independence, the population of Uganda was about 8 million; we are now 44 million. People have moved from villages to cities including Mbale, Gulu, Lira, Fort Portal and Mbarara. These towns have got to grow and expand. Therefore, the sewerage systems should be done properly.

I would like to thank the Committee on National Economy because we approved a loan from the World Bank for sewerage expansion and part of that money is going to Mbale and other towns. Therefore, the problem we have now is expansion. Mr Speaker, I served in Beijing before I came back to this country and by the time I left Beijing, it was at 50 kilometres doing the bypass out of town. It has expanded and so has Washington. These cities have grown and Kampala has grown, so we must put facilities in place so that we can avoid these diseases.

However, towns have to grow and expand and this is what I am agitating for. We have the Minister for Kampala here. Kampala has grown and we need a sewerage system in place. This should apply to all towns in Uganda. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, shouldn’t we be drawing to a close? One hour is over. Can I hear from the ministers then we see how to proceed?

3.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the statement she has presented and thank colleagues for the concerns raised because issues of public health are issues of life and death.

Mr Speaker, it is very true that there is an outbreak of cholera in Kampala and we all watched it on television last evening. I would like to put it on record that KCCA, together with the Ministry of Health, are working closely to make sure that we contain the situation.

Mr Speaker, Kampala is susceptible to cholera due to the congestion we have in the city; more so in areas occupied by low income earners. I am glad to inform you that our ministry identified this problem sometime back and we engaged the ministry of water. We recommended that we put in place pro-poor public water taps. We presented this to the ministry of water and to their implementing agency, National Water and Sewerage Corporation, and they are considering it.

Secondly, provision of sanitary facilities in Kampala is mostly done by the donor community because we have a very small budget to this effect. I would like to implore this House that if we want to improve sanitation in the city, we have to improve the budget. However, if we maintain the budget we have right now, improvement might be very difficult.

Mr Speaker, allow me inform the honourable colleagues that as we talk now, KCCA has just secured a grant from Bill and Melinda Gates worth US$ 4 million. It is going to construct sanitary facilities in places occupied by low income earners. This will translate into a construction of 300 facilities and I am very sure that this is going to improve the situation.

Mr Speaker, regarding the issue we are handling right now - sanitation in the city - we need to look at three specific issues: First, we require more funding to enable us provide more sanitary facilities in the city. As we talk, we have only 11 public toilets in Kampala and they are mostly in the Central Business District (CBD), let alone the facilities we have in markets. Those that can be accessed by passers-by - people who come through the city - are only 11. We need funding to make sure that we construct more facilities. 

Mr Speaker, the second reason as to why I am pressing for increased funding is to make sure that we work on the drainage systems in the city. We are all aware that Kampala was built in a shanty area and we need to work on the drainage. Otherwise, with the seven hills that make the city; the lower part of the city floods when it rains. 

If we do not construct serious drainage systems in the city, we shall continue facing problems. This is why whenever we come here to defend our budget, we request for the support of honourable colleagues for increased funding to enable us provide facilities, which will benefit the status of the city. 

In addition, there is a lot of politicisation of everything in Kampala. This is on record, especially in Rubaga Division where the outbreak happened. When we try to sensitise people to make sure that they clean and dispose of solid waste in the way that is recommended by public health standards, political colleagues come and incite the general public. We have tried this, Mr Speaker – (Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am the Member of Parliament representing Rubaga. Just yesterday, the Ministry of Health, through political leaders from Rubaga Division, organised a sensitisation workshop. It turned out to be about Ebola but they mobilised the community through the political leadership. 

Is the minister in order to insinuate that political leaders within the city, particularly in Rubaga, are failing Government programmes? When Government representatives came to Kabowa, the people were discontented because they were only told about Ebola yet they had come to listen to talks on cholera. Nevertheless, the political leadership had done its work. Is she in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is just information. Now you know that the political leaders actually mobilised people. 

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for your very wise ruling. I would like to thank my colleague for providing me with the information. Now I know better. 

Mr Speaker, another issue that I would like to talk about is decongesting the city. However, before that, right now, as the Ministry of Kampala and Kampala Capital City Authority, we are reviewing the solid waste management process in the city. Many colleagues raised that issue and we are reviewing it. Very soon, we shall be letting you know what we would have decided– (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: I would like to thank the minister for giving me a platform to seek this clarification. We understand that in the KCCA Act, there is provision for the metropolitan physical planning authority. The Ministry of Kampala has consistently refused to implement this. How do you intend to plan better for Kampala when you do not have a physical structural plan for the entire Kampala? You have refused to put in place the basic institutional framework. 

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her response on issues of cholera in Kampala. In most cases, it is Kampala where the outbreak of cholera starts and then spreads to other parts of the country. This is a city, which everybody comes to. 

I remember, either in the Ninth Parliament or beginning of the Tenth Parliament, Members of Parliament were concerned about the sewerage system in Kampala, especially when it rains. Can Members put in some money for KCCA to work on the drainage system and the sewer system? The drainage channels are wide open, which is the reason why children access drinking water from the sewage lines. What plans have they got? 

Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for her to just give us highlights? Isn’t it procedurally right for the minister to come to this House and tell us KCCA’s plan on issues of drainage in Kampala toilet systems and the sewage system so that, as Parliament of Uganda, we appreciate it? Is it procedurally right for her to give us just verbal information like that? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister had not yet finished submitting. I was waiting for her to finish submitting and then that would have been a valid point. However, if she can capture that, then it would be okay. 

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Speaker, thank you once again for the wise ruling. Allow me to give clarification to my colleague and friend, hon. Sseggona, about the metropolitan physical planning authority. 

Indeed, the Kampala Capital City Act, 2010 creates it. Unfortunately, that Act does not provide for the secretariat, so you cannot operationalise it. It creates a board and functions and stops at that. Right now, we have a Bill for amendment of that Act before Parliament and it is on the Order Paper today under item No. 7. Therefore, when we get there, hon. Sseggona will help us to make sure that we go through it very quickly and we get the planning function under our ministry. 

On decongestion of the city, all of us want to have coordinated planning in the metropolitan area. We have always told Members that you cannot decongest Kampala when you are planning for Kampala only. We must have integrated planning for the metropolitan area. Again, this is part of that Bill. When we get there, I think as a House we shall agree on what we need best.

On the issue of the Executive Director (ED), it is true that Dr Jennifer Musisi resigned from office on 15 December 2018. As we talk, we do not have a vacuum in Kampala because we have an acting Executive Director called Engineer Andrew Kitaka Mubiru. So, the office is fully occupied and he is carrying out his work. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to inform this House that the position of ED is a presidential appointment. The notice of resignation was addressed to H.E the President and he received it. He is aware of it and the process is on-going. Therefore, we shall have a substantive ED very soon.

I would like to inform colleagues not to worry because in Public Service we never have a vacuum. That is why we have a competent and efficient acting ED handling that office. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank all the honourable Members of Parliament for their contributions. It has been very useful and I pray that – (An honourable member rose)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have just said something about beginning to speak on the microphone before. Clarification is by the minister so you should seek for clarification from her and not from the Speaker. She has to allow you to take the clarification point.

DR MORIKU: I have not yet said a word concerning my response to the issues raised. Thank you. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to make it very clear that there is an outbreak of cholera. It is an outbreak but not an emergency. This is in Rubaga Division and so far, only two cases have been confirmed. For that matter, the situation is under control.

Secondly, I would like to make it clear that this is a multi-sectoral approach. It is everybody’s responsibility and includes the mind-set and the attitudes of our people. Many of us have raised the issue that we should sensitise our people but let us try to look at their mind-set. It is a gradual process. The prayer is that ultimately we should look to a positive approach to mind change.

The other issue I would like to talk about is immediate treatment. I made it very clear that the Ministry of Health has set up a treatment centre. I believe that I did not need to go through what that treatment is all about. Really, the treatment of cholera and the presentation - When a patient falls sick and gets to the hospital, he or she is treated according to the national guidelines. Therefore, if you need the details, we can give them to you but they get appropriate treatment. Indeed, it is true that the two patients escaped. We are trying to follow these patients up. Probably, these patients had recovered or they are still in the process of recovering. 

Apart from the immediate treatment, the key issue, which colleagues have raised here, is the preventive measures. Yes, as Government, we have got a five-year strategic plan, which has been rolled out since 2017 in institutions and communities. We hear radio and television stations sensitising people on sanitation and hygiene, hand washing practices with water and soap, issues of latrines, having toilets in the community, drainage systems and garbage disposal. All these have been mentioned. However – (Interruption)

MS EGUNYU: Thank you very much, honourable minister. You have just stated that cholera is mostly found near rivers, streams and lakes. You know very well that this is a sanitation issue. Honourable minister, may I know the strategies that are set, not only in Kampala but also in other places like the islands of Uganda and especially in Buvuma where I come from? May I know the measures that you are putting in place to help people in such places not to die of cholera?

Mr Speaker, this is something that is itching me seriously and this is the forum where I have to raise it so that I can get a solution. We, the islanders, were told to keep quiet because Ugandan fish would lose market. I kept quiet for some time but now I cannot hold it anymore. In the islands, people are concentrated in one place; you find about 5,000 homesteads with zero distance in one place and they cannot construct their own toilets. These people are in urgent need of public toilets, which Government should provide. As a result, we find our people defecating in the lake or elsewhere. At the end of the day, when it rains, it goes into the lake. Our people have been dying of cholera silently.

This applies to Kalangala, Buvuma and other places. We were told to keep quiet because our fish would lose market. However, I have nowhere to express this issue. Madam Minister, tell us the strategies that you are putting up to help islands. The English saying goes, “Prevention is better than cure”. I do not want to look at the curing side; look at the prevention. Our people are dying and we were told to keep quiet. 

MR NAMBESHE: Honourable minister, in your statement, there is a lot of apportioning blame to the people regarding the question of mind-set and even downplaying the number of cases of those affected by cholera. The truth of the matter is that Kiruddu Hospital was overwhelmed by cases but on keen observation, there was no isolation centre. 

Cholera is very contentious, honourable minister. I wonder why the patients in Kiruddu Hospital were not isolated from those that were not suffering from cholera. That is why most of them were referred. Why is it that your report fell short of mentioning this?     

DR MORIKU: Thank you. I wish you were a doctor, my colleague. I think that I made it very clear that in setting up the treatment centre, the first step is to set up an isolation centre. Cholera cases are isolated. Once they are isolated, they are given appropriate treatment, including intravenous fluids and antibiotics. This is because they present with diarrhoea and vomiting. Those are the cardinal symptoms they present with. There may be other underlying problems, which can be treated, but we cannot go into these details.

I would like to say that the reason why these patients were taken to Naguru Hospital is because the isolation centre was set up there. The other cases were all taken there because of that reason.

I made it very clear at the beginning that we have immediate interventions and long term interventions. Among the interventions I mentioned is the new intervention of cholera prevention where we use oral cholera vaccines. Last year, on 31 August, we launched oral cholera vaccines in Nebbi District. So far, people from Hoima District have been vaccinated and this is because Hoima is one of the hotspot districts. The next step is to vaccinate the 10 districts, which are categorised as hotspots. These include: Nebbi, Buliisa, Pakwach, Zombo, Namayingo, Arua, Moyo, Kasese, Busia and Ntoroko. These are the categories, which will be vaccinated with oral cholera vaccines. After that, we will move ahead because these have been labelled as the first category of hotspot districts.

As I conclude, I would like to say that dealing with cholera is a collective responsibility. We are all called upon to talk about it without fear. We should sensitise our people - mind change is a gradual process - so that we handle issues of hygiene and sanitation. 

It is important for my colleagues to know that when our people plan for poverty, that is when we get problems of cholera because it is transmitted by the five “fs”: flies, faecal matter, fingers, food, and fluids. I pray that the contributions of colleagues are transmitted into practice so that there is a real transformation in the lives of our people. I thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.15
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table three sets of documents. The first set is the annual performance report of the Auditor- General for the period ending December 2018. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the document entitled, “Office of the Auditor-General: The Report of the Auditor-General to Parliament for the Financial Year ended 30 June 2018”. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the third set is not ready. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not even the certificate?

MS OGWAL: The third set was the Sector Budget Framework Papers for Financial Year 2019/2020 to Financial Year 2021/2022 but they are not available for laying.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Didn’t we receive the Certificate of Gender and Equity last year? Why is it on the Order Paper then? Is No.3 on the Order Paper?

The next item is supposed to be the Sector Budget Framework Papers for Financial Year 2019/2020 to Financial Year 2021/2022. Honourable members, you will recall that this document, under the law, was presented and received by this House on 19 December 2018. That contains all the sectors of Government and all the details are there. 

I am told that there are supposed to be extracts from that, relating to specific sectors because committees will be dealing with some other specific details relating to their sectors. Those do not require to be laid before Parliament because the law does not say so. The law only talks about the National Budget Framework Paper, which was already laid before Parliament on 19 December. 

Therefore, if there are those sectoral breakdowns that could come to the Clerk, the Clerk can then write a letter and forward them to the committees responsible to continue handling them in due course, bearing in mind that these processes must end by the 20th of this month and today is the 9th. Therefore, if by today there are still committees that have not received these documents, you are almost late. 

Because of the timeline, standing committees should pause their work, with the exception of COSASE and the Committee on National Economy. The other standing committees should stay and wait for us to finish all these sectoral matters. All of you belong to two committees, both standing and sectoral, and therefore, if we are divided, we will not be able to complete this on time.

Therefore, the work of standing committees, with the exception of those two committees, is hereby stopped until the report on the Budget Framework Paper is delivered to this House. They can then continue with their work as they have always done. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am not disputing what you have ruled but the Minister of Health said that poverty is the cause of cholera and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has laid the Budget Framework Paper on the Table. Also, a few minutes ago, we were talking about equal opportunities. 

The procedural issue I am raising is about the Budget Framework Paper I looked at. This is where I would like to interest members. I have statistics from Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS), which show poverty levels in Uganda. The most disadvantaged place is Karamoja with 60.8 per cent, followed by Bukedi with 47.5 per cent, Busoga with 42.1 per cent, Elgon with 40.9, Teso with 40.5 and finally, Acholi with 34.7 per cent. In fact, they have been highlighted red for danger. Luckily enough, maybe there is no cholera there.

Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to go back and look at this Budget Framework Paper with specific interest to those regions, which are highlighted red? 

We are in danger. In fact, we are in a cholera area but they have not declared it thus. (Laughter) Where cholera is being declared, the poverty levels in Kampala are at 5.9 per cent. If 5.9 per cent poverty levels can have cholera, what about 60.8 per cent in Karamoja or 40.9 per cent in the Elgon?

Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that you direct the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to go and review the Budget Framework Paper in light of this poverty?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I guide on this procedural matter.

Honourable members, this is the National Budget Framework Paper upon which the budget will rest. The law allows us to look at it and make suggestions on how it can better function, especially as we move towards the budget. The time given is that by the 20th, the committees should have finished and by the 1st of February, Parliament should have taken a decision on the matter. That is the timeline provided for in the law. Therefore, if you send the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come back with another document in March, we will not have time to deal with anything.

The committees should pick up all those issues that have been raised by hon. Nandala-Mafabi and some which I had raised earlier and interrogate them in line with what the ministers will say. These should then come in the report, which is going to be presented to the House by the Committee on Budget, so that we deal with them and send them back for review - the red markings you are talking about.

Honourable members, I raised an issue earlier about the Certificate of Gender and Equity, which I think you were referring to. I said institutions are only vetted in terms of equity issues yet there are gaps and I gave you an example of Parliament. I discovered that the whole of Karamoja region does not have any person employed in Parliament. It does not look good for an institution like Parliament. Karamoja is not small; we have all those people - the Pokot, Bokora, Dodoth, Matheniko, Pian among others. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Today is 9 January 2019 and we know that the term of the standing committees expires on the 13th. However, I do not know whether I heard you well when you said except for the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) and the Committee on National Economy, the others should cease.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did I say cease?

MS KAMATEEKA: You said that they should stop their work for now. I am sorry, Mr Speaker. However, Mr Speaker, some of these committees have ongoing work and they were hoping that by Thursday, this work would be put away and they would prepare for the -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us not spend time on that. The committees I talked about were the Committee on National Economy and COSASE. Any other standing committee that has issues has to write to the Speaker for exemption from this directive. It applies across the board and it also applies to the Committee on Human Rights.

If you have issues that you need to handle quickly, write to the Speaker and we will give the exemption. Otherwise, the rule is that all standing committees should pause their work to pave way for the sectoral committees to deal with the National Budget Framework Paper quickly, so that we can send the report to the Committee on Budget. Otherwise, we will be out of time. I know why I am saying except those two.

MS ASAMO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not intend to dispute your ruling but my Committee on Equal Opportunities handles issues of how the budget has performed and the report is almost ready. I think we need to present the issues so that we give the warning light to the other committees on what they are supposed to handle.

There are issues that are coming from, for example, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. We need to bring that to their attention so that they are aware of what we are reporting. Therefore, I would like to beg that our committee be given that permission. Even if it means writing, we shall write but that is our request. Otherwise, it has an impact on the National Budget Framework Paper.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just put it in writing. I am not going to divert from what I said earlier but when you write tomorrow, we will sanction that. My ruling stands about the two committees. Committee on Human Rights, please just write a letter. It is as simple as that.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a procedural matter. I would like to guide. If you allow me, Mr Speaker; some of these things even in the National Budget Framework Paper - Parliament can only interrogate and scrutinise what has been presented by the Executive because they are the originators of the budget process. So, if the Executive does not capture these key issues we are discussing and translate them into financial language, there is no way Parliament can help.

It is very important at this stage to humbly request the Cabinet to interrogate their various sectors and plan financially where they would like Parliament to assist. Otherwise, our role is only to scrutinise, interrogate and approve; the originator of the budget process is the Executive.

Mr Speaker, when the Minister for Kampala Capital City Authority was responding to the issues raised, she constantly said, “depending on the availability of finances.” Who is supposed to inform Parliament?  Who is supposed to make finances available? It is the Executive and the various ministries that are supposed to come up, in their ministerial policy statements, with what is required. As Parliament, we just scrutinise and approve.

Therefore, as we start this process, the various ministers and their ministries should not put the blame on Parliament. Our role is only to scrutinise, guide and ensure that they are in conformity with the various policies before we approve. The ministers should not give the impression that it is Parliament to be blamed should there be a financial shortfall anywhere. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what the Member of Dokolo is saying is right with some modifications though. What does approval mean? What is the purpose of the budget being sent to you for approval if you have no role in making some changes the way you deem fit?

If we were just supposed to approve all the laws that are brought to this Parliament, why would we send them to committees? The purpose of sending them to committees is to ventilate what has been proposed by the Executive and see if they make ordinary sense; if they do not, they make adjustments that make sense. We have that mandate as Parliament. Otherwise, we would not be here. 

We are not here just to approve; we are supposed to check, verify, make alterations where possible and approve those amendments. That is why we put the question that it should be adopted with amendments. That is how we become representatives of the people. Please, let us do this. 

Honourable members, we are supposed to look at what has been proposed in the National Budget Framework Paper, make adjustments and advise in the report that goes back to the President, which comes back with proposals by the 1st of April. This should be accommodating the concerns we have raised in the course of the debate on the National Budget Framework Paper. Can we now move to the next item?  

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I think the matter you are raising is what we have just been dealing with. Let us deal with them at committee level. That is why I am saying the committees should be able to look at these things quickly. Go to the Committee on Budget so that we can look at them again by the beginning of next month.  Next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE JUDICIARY BILL, 2018

4.33
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Whereas sometime last year we presented this Bill to you for First Reading and you duly sent to the committee, the committee has made the report and they have done very good work. We have gone through the report and found that they have come up with far-reaching recommendations and observations, which we would like to incorporate in our final submission. 

Through you, Mr Speaker, I beg the indulgence of the House to give us some two weeks so that I can reconcile with the committee since my colleagues, the Attorneys-General and their auxiliaries, are busy with the Supreme Court. I beg that this House allows me and my colleagues some two weeks so that we harmonise our positions with other stakeholders in order for us to come up with a well reconciled position. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Procedural point? 

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With due respect to my very good friend, the minister, this is his Bill, which is merely coming for the Second Reading. Yes, the committee could have come up with a raft of amendments, but I think it would not stop the minister from reading the Bill for the second time so that Members can start the debate. Maybe through the debate, you will get many other ideas to help you come up with a final position before the Bill is read the third time.

Mr Speaker, this is one of the Bills that have been lying in Government for quite a long time. Therefore, I beg to indulge you, Mr Speaker, not to allow the minister’s request. Let us have this Bill read for the second time and then we proceed. By the time he comes back within those two weeks, both sides of the House and the Executive will have come up with ideas that will enrich the Bill before its third reading. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister has made a request and the point made by hon. Niwagaba is that this is only a motion for second reading where we discuss the principles of the Bill. As the debate goes on, the committee will be highlighting areas where they would be proposing changes and justifying purposes for which they will be proposing those changes. Therefore, it is very difficult to delink, if the committee has already taken the position on a matter that has been referred to them. Otherwise, they will establish the principles during this debate - why they will be bringing an amendment in that regard. I do not know whether we are together on this.

This will affect the debate on the principles of the Bill because all those would have already been dealt with comprehensively. By the time you are coming to negotiate and make some changes, you might be late because some of those principles would have already been adopted during debate on the motion for the second reading of the Bill.

Honourable members, it would be better that we do it in the same transaction so that we deal with the principles and if there are changes they are going to make as a result of the consultation, they can deal with them comprehensively. In that way, the debate will be informed of the full extent of the changes that are going to be made.

Therefore, I think that if we are okay, we could allow the minister the time he has requested for. We can then come back here and move the motion for second reading, where we shall debate the principles already agreed on before we take a decision on the substantive provisions of the law. That is how I would guide on the matter raised by the minister. So, can we grant the minister leave?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, this Bill is now property of Parliament. In fact, it is the same Executive that claims that Parliament delays work. I am very certain that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs invited the minister to appear because he presented the Bill, he gave his views and after that, the committee made a report. If there are issues, which he does not agree with at committee level - the report is ready – let it be presented and we discuss it. Otherwise, the minister is free to bring the amendments.
	
Mr Speaker, we have had Bills come here but the owners of the Bills say “We do not agree here” but the House will always make a decision. The Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018 is overdue; it should have been passed in 2008 but it is now 2019, which is 11 years down the road. Therefore, I would like to plead with you, Mr Speaker, that the committee should present its report. We can allow the debate to go on and then the minister can submit after two weeks. He has a fully-fledged ministry - I do not know how many lawyers he has - why would he ask for two weeks? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They are all in court today.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think for once, I am constrained to agree with my honourable colleague, the minister I see in the shadow, hon. Gen. Otafiire, for entirely different reasons.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who is the shadow? 

MR SSEGGONA: I see him in the shadow the other side, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) I am not sure about his glasses. My only disagreement with the minister is the timeframe he is asking for, considering the schedule. If he had talked about one week, I would easily convince the leadership of the committee; it is a request that he discussed with us as a committee.
 
This is a Bill that has had controversy of disagreements with the Executive. If the spirit of the minister is to find harmony with the committee, this being the property of Parliament, I will not have a problem. However, if the request and the spirit is intended to discuss the Bill outside Parliament, then I would raise very strong objections but if it is to discuss with us internally, it is our property and I think we grant him that time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, can we allow the minister? Let us allow the minister 10 days instead of two weeks.  Honourable minister, would you like to make a commitment to 10 days, on record?

GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues across the aisle, hon. Niwagaba and hon. Sseggona. 

Mr Speaker, I discussed this with the chairperson of the committee earlier on in the day. I intend to harmonise with the committee only, not to discuss with outsiders. The committee has raised some constitutional issues and we agree with some of the observations. Therefore, we want to sit with the committee to harmonise and bring to the House something that is well sorted, so that the debate is from an informed position rather than pulling strings. Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your indulgence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What about the 10 days’ timeframe?

GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: We shall be back in 10 days’ time. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 


BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LAW REVISION (PENALTIES IN CRIMINAL MATTERS) MISCELLANEOUS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

4.42
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You are spot-on when you were calling the minister.

Mr Speaker, allow me to present a Bill entitled, “The Law Revisions (Penalties in Criminal Matters) Miscellaneous (Amendment) Bill, 2015 –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is a motion for second reading.

MR SSEGGONA: I am sorry. Allow me then to move a motion that the Bill entitled, “The Law Revision (Penalties in Criminal Matters) Miscellaneous (Amendment) Bill, 2015,” be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, hon. Gilbert Olanya, hon. Emmanuel Ssempala, hon. Elizabeth Karungi, hon. Edward Otto, hon. Betty Bamukwasa and hon. Joy Atim. Was the motion presented already? That means the motion itself was already presented. Therefore, we are behind the game. 

Okay, honourable members, the motion is already presented, seconded and the report of the committee presented to this House. What is left is a debate on the principles of the Bill. The question that I now propose for your debate is that the Bill entitled, “The Law Revision (Penalties in Criminal Matters) Miscellaneous (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read the second time. That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now on the principles of the Bill. This is a straightforward Bill. Let us start, each Member taking three minutes. 

I do not see any debate arising. Can I put the question for the motion for second reading before we go to the text of the Bill? If you are ready to debate the principles of the Bill – 

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This Bill is not uploaded on my iPad. I do not know whether others have copies.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I called you to debate the Bill. (Laughter)

MS KARUNGI: No, Mr Speaker, I cannot debate what I do not actually have at hand. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion was moved and seconded. Somebody is saying last year; last year was just a few days ago. (Laughter) So, honourable members, can I put the question to the motion for second reading, then we go to committee stage and probably pause at that stage? 

MS NANTUME: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Sensing from what is taking place, we cannot discuss what we cannot even remember. It is not even on our iPads. Moving to the next stage would really be a disservice to us. We shall be doing things that we do not know. We need some time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this Order Paper was approved on Monday. The report was posted on the iPads. Let us proceed with debate and take a decision. Do you want to refresh your memory on this? Honourable members, can we then defer debate and start on the principles of the Bill tomorrow before we take a decision? (Applause)

I do not want to commence because on Monday, I approved this Order Paper with this item included. So, I expected you to have gone back, looked at it and by today, Wednesday, we would be ready to proceed, including the Member for Rukiga. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you. Mr Speaker, the other time it was presented on the Floor of Parliament. I really feel that if you allow the honourable member to summarise the contents of what is there, then Members can debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us just go and look at the report overnight and then we come back and debate. Let us use this time for something else.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister? Was it was moved?

4.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Mr Speaker, the motion was moved last year in December.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, why make it sound so far away, honourable minister, by saying last year. (Laughter) It sounds like a long time ago. It was moved in the last meeting of Parliament, and that is December, which was last month. Last month sounds better than last year? On what matter do you rise, hon. Sseggona? Is it a procedural matter?

MR SSEGGONA: It is a matter of procedural guidance, Mr Speaker. I will seek your indulgence on behalf of the Leader of the Opposition. This is a matter that is dear to both sides of the House and very important to the country. 

I have been asked by the Leader of the Opposition to request you, Mr Speaker, with the indulgence of the minister, if our side could be given just one week to make some serious reflections on this matter in order to come up with areas of agreement. The reason is that this Bill raises questions of serious political and constitutional ramifications. We need to do some consultations with the minister and other colleagues across the table to see if there are matters where we could agree to make it less time consuming.

You will notice that one of the areas it touches is what we consider to have been discussed in the constitutional matter involving hon. Nabila Naggayi Sempala, which has an effect on Article 92 of the Constitution. It is on that note that we propose, from this side, that the House permits us time to do some consultations and probably start on it next week. I so pray.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. The Bill under question was presented in this House four years ago, sometime in May 2015. This is January 2019. The Bill has been with us for four years as Parliament of Uganda. I do not know what my honourable colleague, hon. Sseggona, could not consult on and discuss with colleagues and even Google in the last four years.

For purposes of efficiency of this House, I would request hon. Sseggona to accept that we proceed to consider the Bill as he also, during his free time, continues to consult his colleagues and some books, if he wishes so. That is my request, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, in the House of Commons in Britain, they have something that they call “the usual channels.” The usual channels are not in the rules or the law but they are informal mechanisms where both sides of the House meet informally, beat out the issues and agree on everything so that by the time they return to the House, they spend very little time dealing with matters.

I was telling my colleagues today that when I sat in the New Zealand Parliament, they passed 17 Bills in one day. All it means is that all the consultations are done and all the amendments are agreed to. So, when they come to the House, it is just decisions and no debate. The House spends much less time arguing over issues because Members will have already finished all those discussions behind the scenes. By the time they come to the House, it is just agreement. Each side knows what is coming and we just agree and that is the purpose. 

I think that is how the request is made. That is also how the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs made the earlier request. So, you might want to think about it again. We might spend more time processing a little amendment Bill than we should if the discussions are handled that way.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Speaker, I do concede.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We call them, the “usual channels”. (Laughter) How much time do we need? One week? 

MR SSEGGONA: I think we will take one week. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, use the “usual channels” and come back when you have agreed so that we can proceed quickly. 

MR SSEGGONA: One week will do. I thank the minister knows that we got the report when we were proceeding for holidays. We also had to enjoy those holidays. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. If we do things like this, we would be able to handle things faster because there would be no suspicions or hard feelings about proposals. 

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers from Soroti Child Development Centre. They are represented by hon. Angelline Osegge and hon. Herbert Ariko. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE HUMAN RIGHTS (ENFORCEMENT) BILL, 2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson of the committee, also the Woman Representative for Mitooma District, where are we on this? Are we at the debate stage?

4.54
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Ms Jovah Kamateeka): Mr Speaker, the Bill entitled, “The Human Rights (Enforcement) Bill, 2015,” was read the second time on 20 December 2018. The justification was given. We should be going to Committee Stage. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was a vote taken on the motion for second reading? 

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, it should be debate now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, it should be debate on the principles of this Bill. The question that I propose for your debate is that the Bill entitled, “The Human Rights (Enforcement) Bill, 2015,” be read the second time. Debate starts now with each Member taking three minutes. 

Ho. Nandala-Mafabi, no, please. I have just proposed a question and you are answering with a procedural matter? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, my apologies because I was being disturbed by hon. Mawanda. 

What you are raising is very important. You know we have just come back from the holidays. (Laughter) Most of this information was given to us on 20 December 2018 when we had a lot; we have not really adjusted accordingly. I would plead with you that you allow us study it a bit, maybe until –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I see there are Members who are ready to debate. Can we at least start the debate? Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you can start the debate.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I have not read the report and I do not understand it. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are the mover, hon. Kamateeka. Let us see how to find a way. Honourable member for Kumi Municipality, are you prepared to debate?

MR SILAS AOGON: Mr Speaker, I am not prepared. However, I wanted to submit by saying this is a very critical Bill yet we have just come back from that little break – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are saying you are not ready – 

MR AOGON: I am trying to suggest that we shall be ready tomorrow morning. We need just a few hours to go read the report and update ourselves because the Bill touches the core of the life of the people - human rights. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought that one of the reasons we issued the Order Paper on Monday - 

MR AOGON: I know but when somebody has gone to sleep, waking him up is not an easy process. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Really, honourable members? 

MR EDWARD OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 20 December 2018, on behalf of the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, I presented and tabled the report and the proceedings of the committee. Because of time constraints, I was not able to read the summary of the Bill, which is before me here. I wonder whether if I read the summary, it would be helpful in refreshing Members’ memory on this Bill and whether it would allow the debate to continue. I have the summary. I had to re-summarise it at that time. I have the summary that probably would -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Members requested that they go and study the report so that they can debate. So, let us not go into the summary. We can use the time for something else. This item is also deferred to tomorrow.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE SECURITY INTEREST IN MOVABLE PROPERTY BILL, 2018

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This Bill was also read the second time. Was the report presented? Let us hear from the vice-chairperson of the committee.

4.59
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Sam Bitangaro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The report was presented on 20 December 2018 and it is ready for debate but the minister told me he is not ready. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development?

MR BITANGARO: No, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Also, the Deputy Attorney-General who presented it is in the Supreme Court. So, he requested that we stand it over until tomorrow. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in light of the way we are proceeding, I do not think we will be able to handle any Bill today. However, I would like to say that all these reports were presented to Parliament with the exception of a few, which are still under consideration like the Minimum Wage Bill whose report is not yet ready. 

With those exceptions, the ones whose reports have already been presented to the House, please, let us go and read them so that tomorrow we finish them. Tomorrow, we should be able to finish most of these issues. I am confident that with the exception of those we have deferred by a week, two weeks or ten days, the ones that are ready, we will only look into the reports again to be advised better and be able to handle tomorrow.

So, please, when we come tomorrow, let us deal with those Bills. Those that have already been deferred to next week or for ten days can go on the Order Paper for business to follow. Right now, I am going to have the Order Paper finalised and approved. 

What about the other items on report? Is item No. 16 ready?

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you for allowing me to seek your guidance on this. When you look around, you will really tell that we are not prepared yet the business as indicated on the Order Paper is very serious. Would it not be procedurally right that you guide us on retiring now until tomorrow with the –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you just have to move a motion. (Laughter)

MR SSEGGONA: Yes, with your guidance. Mr Speaker, before I move the motion, last year, we had some serious unfinished business that required the presence of the Minister of Foreign Affairs to brief this House on the allegations of the bribery scandal in the United States of America (USA). The Speaker in the Chair ruled that we would give the minister an opportunity to present to us. 

However, as we were waiting for that, another issue of diplomatic importance arose in the British Parliament in the House of Commons today, with respect to Uganda’s human rights record with a threat of withholding donor support from the UK. Isn’t it important that we would receive the Minister for Foreign Affairs to brief us on the diplomatic effort being made in that direction, considering that we receive a lot of donor support from Britain? In which case, wouldn’t be procedurally right that I appeal to you to require the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs to brief us on those two important diplomatic issues, including a diplomatic scandal where allegations have been made against him?

I am raising this in good faith, considering that he has not been given an opportunity to defend himself and yet a lot has been said against him. As Parliament, it would be fair that we get clarification because this is our colleague and peer and allegations against him have a great bearing on us. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, my understanding of that situation, especially the last bit you have raised, is that the Attorney-General addressed Parliament on those matters substantially and also presented a way forward on how it is being handled. He gave an undertaking that when that or those processes are done, he would come and brief this House. That is my understanding of how that matter has been resolved. At least for now, until the committee that has been set up to do all the needed requirements finish their work, then the minister will be ready to come back and brief the House. Either the minister or the Attorney-General will be ready to come on that particular issue. 

However, general diplomatic issues with Britain are a separate matter; we should not mix the two. On that one, we can alert the Minister of Foreign Affairs on the issue with Great Britain and see if they are ready with the statement tomorrow, though it might be tight for a proper statement to be coming up tomorrow.

Anyhow, the Minister of Foreign Affairs or whoever is in that docket should come here tomorrow so that we alert them to ensure they make an undertaking on how soon a statement can come. Please, notify the minister or whoever can come from foreign affairs so that we can pass this information directly to them and then we see what time they can come back with a statement, whether next week or whenever. Thank you.

Honourable members, House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 5.05 and adjourned until Thursday, 10 January 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 
