

Thursday, 31 January 2019

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. Today, I called the communities of Uganda which are engaged in Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) and we had a long discussion over many issues. I am very unhappy that for the last several years, I have been reporting to this House that there is no communication for the people of Moroto and Sebei. They are not able to listen to radios from Uganda, they are in blackout and nothing has been done.

I wrote to the President and minister in charge of national guidance and no action has been taken. I am now directing the minister to come here on Tuesday to explain to us when he will supply communication to facilitate radios in Sebei region and Moroto.

The other thing which clearly came out is that there are sub counties in Sebei where there is neither primary nor secondary school. In Kween alone, there are over 10 sub counties without schools. Therefore, people have nothing to do but to get married and people get married to get circumcised.
 
I would like the Chairperson of the Committee on Equal Opportunities and the Committee on Education to come out and make a special programme to address those very serious deficiencies. There are no schools and the places are not even accessible. They cannot hear messages from the Government but they are part of Uganda.

I would like the two committees to work together to ensure that the Government pays attention and provides education. We have been talking about leaving no one behind but if they have no primary and secondary schools, we are obviously leaving them behind yet our Constitution requires us to be equitable in development and what is happening there, is not equity. Therefore, I would like our committees to address that.

2.49
MS JUDITH NABAKOOBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to raise a matter on the tension and looming evictions in Mityana Municipality in the areas of Naama Katiko and Nkonya Magongolo, estimated to be one square mile.

On 7th January, residents received communication from the Survey Technical Solutions Limited headed by one Eria Mulengera on the plans for opening boundaries on the land. The residents agreed and the exercise commenced with Naama Katiko. However, along the way on 23 January 2019, before even discussing the results of the exercise with the district land surveyor who had given them permission, they went ahead and brought another communication stopping the residents from paying Busuulu until further notice. The representatives of the landlord one Diana Akankwasa told the residents that in the event that they cannot pay Busuulu, the only option is to buy themselves land by paying Shs 4 million per acre. 

Madam Speaker, since that time there is too much tension, people are being intimidated and they are threatened that if they fail to buy land, they will be forced out of that land. These are poor people, they are women and they cannot even go to their gardens because of the looming eviction. They have been paying Busuulu of Shs 40,000 per year but right now, they have nowhere to take that Busuulu.

My payer is for the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to quickly intervene before the situation runs out of hand. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. They are not here yet but the Ministry Lands, Housing and Urban Development is directed to quickly investigate the situation that hon. Judith Nabakooba has raised, resolve it and report to this House by Thursday next week.

2.52
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. On 25 January 2019, we experienced heavy rains in Kwapa Subcounty, Tororo District. These rains came with heavy storms that destroyed many houses notable among them, was Kwapa Primary School whose roofs were all blown off. The administrative block roof was blown off, P.6 and P.7 roofs were blown off and the library roof was also blown off. As you are aware, the schools are supposed to open next week though others have started. Kwapa Primary School is in a very bad state and we do not know how they will open since all the roofs were blown off.

My prayers are:

The Government should respond quickly to help us to fix these roofs.
We should be supported with books and other scholastic materials that were destroyed.
The community that also lost their roofs and livelihood be supported with relief items to enable them cope up with this challenge that came in untimely manner. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Does the Office of the Prime Minister have commitment to make?

2.53
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have taken note of hon. Fredrick Angura’s concerns. I would like to request him to put in writing what he needs from the Office of the Prime Minister and give me the letter and I will follow it up. Thank you.

2.54
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I come from one of the areas where fishing is critical in Bukakata Subcounty. The fishermen are finding life becoming even harder after the enforcement on the lake. Those who were left with boats are forced to pay Shs 250,000 per person for getting Tax Identification Number (TIN) and they are also supposed to pay income tax of Shs 250,000 per boat before they go to fish. In addition, they pay licenses for their boats.
The major complaint is, the fishermen feel that they are unfairly treated because it seems there is a double taxation in this and it has not been explained. When we interfaced with the community, we were informed by Uganda Revenue Authority officials that the payment for the TIN numbers was done wrongly. The question is, are these people going to be refunded their money that was wrongly paid? Under what circumstance does an individual pay income tax in advance? We need an explanation, Madam Speaker.

2.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we are all supposed to pay tax according to the law and nobody should be overcharged or undercharged. We shall send there our officers on Monday to meet with the community, listen to them and sort out those issues. Sometimes it is lack of appreciation of the law but this is a matter that can be sorted out on Monday by the Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) officials.

2.57
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Madam Speaker, I have been on this Floor twice, addressing the matter of school fees structure by Government-aided day schools. We were promised by the Minister of Education and Sports that they would come up with a report. Schools are opening in a week’s time. However, I can assure you that many parents are worried because when you look at the structure, the Government-aided day schools are like private schools. I do not know why the minister cannot come out. 

My humble request is, can you order him to come as fast as possible with that report in order to save the parents who have been struggling or the House be made aware that we have waited for that report in vain –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank my colleague. One of the Government-aided schools is Layibi College in Gulu. According to the circular that they gave to students last year, the students were paying Shs 300,000 but this year the school sent the circular to students to return to school with Shs 550,000 yet it is a Government school under the Universal Secondary School programme. 

Madam Speaker, we need to help our parents. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue is well known and what we need now is the minister. Schools are starting next week. This issue has been in the pipeline for over months. Therefore, the Minister of Education and Sports should come here on Tuesday and inform the country about what is happening.

2.59
MS GRACE NAMUKHULA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namisindwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On 24 January 2019, a storm blew off 28 houses, two Catholic churches, one Seventh Day Adventist church, two Anglican churches, a Pentecostal church and a primary school in Buwuma in Lwakhakha town Council at the border with Kenya. Four houses in Wekelekha in Namisa Subcounty, also at the border with Kenya.

Madam Speaker, Namisindwa is prone to a number of disasters. Unfortunately, where we hope to go in Bunmbi, Bulambuli District, the plots are now on sale and a number of people from Namisindwa have paid money to buy these plots instead of the plots being as an offer from Government to support people who are suffering from disasters.

My prayers are:

Government should urgently support the people and schools with relief items and put up the structures.
Government should investigate those who are selling the plots that are meant for disaster victims.

THE SPEAKER: As I invite the Office of the Prime Minister, I also have a prayer. Honourable members, wind blowing off iron sheets is because there are no trees. Can I also pray that you – Members – go and assist in planting trees around those schools? Yes, that is my prayer. (Laughter)

3.01
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro): Madam Speaker, especially on the last note, we all need to do that. However, I have taken note and once more I request my honourable sister to get in touch with me and we see that action is taken. Thank you.

3.02
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There are mines in Buhweju and Irimia in Ibanda which have been left to be operated wantonly without monitoring to the extent that they deposit their wastes into a river stream called Buhindagi that flows from Buhweju through Irimia in Ibanda, Queen Elizabeth National Park and down into my constituency and finally Lake George. I raised this complaint to the minster in charge of minerals and his promise has not materialised, for him to intervene and take actions on the miners. 

Madam Speaker, the water is deposited with a lot of minerals. It is dirty, with all the waste from the miners. It is not fit for consumption for both flora and fauna. The animals in the park cannot use it and worst of all my own people cannot use it.

Madam Speaker, my requests for the quickest intervention are:

The Government needs to find alternative source of water for the people because people have been relying on the river and the lake water.
The Government should reign in on these miners and enforce the environmental impact assessment that is provided in the law. If a number of them – like they are breaking the law – are not working as per the guidelines, they should stop them until something is done about it. Thank you very much.

3.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, last Thursday I was in Ibanda and I had gone to check the status of illegal mining in that place. When they learnt that I was going, they ran away. We deployed the police to look after the area because they had really dug very deep pits. However, at night when the police are sleeping, these illegal miners come back. I heard that one of them fell in a pit on Sunday. It is very tragic but the people who are mining illegally are difficult people. They even fight.

That is why, Madam Speaker, you had asked me whether we have put anything in the law that we are bringing in to effectively regulate mining and form cooperatives. I told you we had finished the principle and the policies for the new law and they are in transit through the Cabinet secretariat for drafting. You asked me whether I had asked and I went back immediately because I had to go and find out. 

However, I found that they had already sent it and that is what we are really doing. Illegal mining must be curtailed using the law. At the moment the law is not effective and that is why we want to do this. I was in Ibanda itself.

MR AGABA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry but I think my senior colleague has been evasive about the issue. I sat with him and painfully explained the details. The time I went to Irimia, I found those Chinese with dogs that they were about to eat and expressed it to him that when you do not care about your own people, our own dogs will be eaten and get finished. I thought that the minister would coordinate with me when he is coming down there. It would have been easier and I would have even helped you better to know where and how to pass.

The point is the river is silted with waste from the mines. Stop them! Our people are dying. Take action as a minister and stop the miners. They will come to you crying but if you go there; the river is silted, the people do not have water, the lake is silted and you say, “We do not have the laws”; so who has the law to take action? I think the minister should bite. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: There is also the Ministry of Water and Environment and National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) whose job is to take care of the effluent. We are not letting you off the hook, hon Lokeris. We are just telling you and the Minister of Water and Environment. The Shadow Minister is here? (Laughter) Please address that issue with the Minister of Water and Environment and give us an update.

MR LOKERIS: In the laws we have, our obligations are spelt out including those of National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) which issues licences regarding the environment. We issue for mining but –(Interruption)

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is there is a law that guides industries and the effluent. If the industries are emitting untreated effluent, there is a way you can deal with it. You cannot just say there is no law.

THE SPEAKER: Sometimes, I wonder why a minister says he or she stops here. All these are for the people of Uganda. If you cannot handle it, why don’t you call your colleague to handle it? You cannot say yours is only on licensing and the other one is somebody else’s. (Laughter)

MR LOKERIS: Madam Speaker, when I said there are boundaries, I did not say that these things are not cross cutting. There are linkages and we work together. This one issues this permit while the other one issues that permit but we work together to make sure the mining is done according to the law and this effluent is not emitted into the rivers.

We have even had meetings and talked to the miners to stop using some of the hazardous materials like mercury and cyanide. There is one substance you can use which is safe and this is what we instruct those who have got licences to do the job.

The big miners deposit in a particular place but we want to curb these ones who are illegally mining and do not want to even see you so that they do not pollute the environment and use hazardous materials.

THE SPEAKER: I think you are lucky that the people of Uganda do not know that they can sue you and the Government. So, what are we going to do about that effluent? What are you going to do about the situation in Kitagwenda?

MR LOKERIS: Madam Speaker, we have been grappling with this situation. When we tried to stop the illegal mining in Mubende, there was uproar everywhere that we are taking bad decisions to stop people. When you do not stop them, the people then say you are really mild in action. So, we want to get tougher laws to stop them because we use the mining police to do it. So, there is still a problem between us and the miners –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, I would like to inquire from the minister –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Waira first, then I come to you.

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister says that when the miners realised that he was going there, they took off. We should not look at the miners but at the sites. If the miners ran away, the sites remained. You are still saying that they had deployed police but you are a minister in Government. Why can’t you deploy police to close off those mines? Those people will then automatically come to your office instead of lamenting here.

Madam Speaker, are we proceeding well when the minister is here lamenting yet he was given the mandate to do his work but failed to do it? Are we proceeding well? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, go and take action and report on Thursday what you have done about that situation. 

Before hon Fungaroo comes; in the Public Gallery, we have children and tutors of Child Development Center, Kidongole in Bukedea District. They take care of needy children. They are represented here by hon Ikojo John Bosco and hon Annita Among. There they are; very smart. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.12
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Madam Speaker, I do not know whether you have concluded the issue with the minister. I also had a matter of national importance.

THE SPEAKER: You are on that issue. The other one is closed.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance because it is related to the budgeting process in which we are. There is a problem in Moyo District and in Obongi; particularly related to the budgeting process. It has arisen out of the creation of new administrative units, particularly Obongi District.

There are refugees in Obongi County in Moyo District. Refugees are taken care of by the Government of the Republic of Uganda and her partners. There are funds which are sent for implementation of various service delivery and development projects. With the creation of the district and the refugees falling into a new district and Government giving a new vote code for Obongi District as 629; budgeting is now being done for the new and old districts.

However, my brothers and sisters from Moyo District are up in arms. They want all the operations of the refugee care programmes to remain with Moyo District. They have made attempts to ensure that loans which we passed here, for example, Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development Programme Project (USMID) II and Integrated Water Management and Development Project, which have given windows for refugees hosting districts, are implemented in only Moyo District and not Obongi District in the next financial year. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, the loans were recently passed. Are they really being implemented?

MR FUNGAROO: This is an example I am giving you but there is the Development Response to Displacement Impacts Project (DRDIP) worth $50 million which we passed. It is a project which is running right now. My prayer here is this. It is Parliament that created the new administrative units. It is Parliament that settled the refugees wherever they are settled. These are policies of the Government of the Republic of Uganda. 

I would like, therefore, to pray that Parliament ensures that all appropriation and disbursement of funds are made appropriately to the districts, which have the refugees and activities for which those funds are intended. That unnecessary tension should be controlled by the Government. I beg to pray.

THE SPEAKER: The Committee on Budget and Committee on Public Service and Local Government should ensure that the allocations for the districts are all there. We should see them in your reports. Thank you.
	
3.15
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka County South, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Two months ago in one of the subcounties in my constituency – Ruyonza Subcounty – in Kisagazi Parish, Kayonza Village, 11 cases of hepatitis B were found. Unfortunately, we do not have the ability to test for hepatitis B. Therefore, all the tests are done at Kabamba Barracks, which is about 50 kilometres away. 

Our health centre IV in the district does not have the facilities for testing hepatitis B. Our people are stuck and we believe that this disease is spreading very fast. If 11 cases were found in one village, probably there are now more than that. I have been to the Ministry of Health and I talked to the commissioners but they have not been forthcoming. 

My humble prayer is that a team of health practitioners be sent by the ministry, particularly to this village, because people are very worried; they even fear to greet and relate. They think if they relate in anyway, they will get the disease. As such, there is some bit of tension in the area. It would be good if the ministry sends a team of people to run tests to find out those who are sick and put them on treatment and immunise the others who are not. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Health is required to go and address the issue in Kyaka County, in the village of Ruyonza, and give us an update towards the end of next week.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO STANDING COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 15(10)(C) AND RULE 157 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. 

If we do not add the issues raised today that are not answered, we have 27 issues listed on the Order Paper, including mine on the strike at Makerere University, that have not been answered. This is because either the ministers are not here or some of them are not even competent enough to answer these questions. (Laughter) 

The procedural issue I am raising –(Interjection)– You raise them and they do not give you answers and now you are raising a point of order. I want to know whether it is not time for this Parliament to invoke its rules by first of all requiring ministers to attend plenary. We have a number of prime ministers and yesterday, Madam Speaker, you had to ask a minister to go and plead with one of them to come. These days they do not come and yet they know that you prioritise Government business in Parliament.

Therefore, the procedural issue I am raising is whether it is not about time to invoke the Rules of Procedure to get the ministers to, first of all, attend plenary; and also to give Parliament sufficient answers so that these matters do not pile up and so that the ministers do not come here to say that they will inform their colleagues or ask so and so.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matters are rising because you are also raising them. If you did not raise them today, they would not be so many. However, because they are important to our people, I allow you to raise them. Today, we have five, which are going to be answered; on Tuesday, more will be answered and we shall continue giving them time to answer those issues. I would like to appeal to members of Cabinet to be available so that the issues of the people are handled.

I do not see the people responsible for item No. 3; go to item No. 4.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE SUSTAINED HAVOC ON AND DISPLACEMENT OF PEOPLE OF APAA BY UNKNOWN MILITIA

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we waited for the Prime Minister who did not come and we said we would like to hear the position of Government this morning. I do not know whether anybody is available. 

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, regarding your directive yesterday, the Prime Minister directed that the Minister of Internal Affairs makes a statement on that matter next week. We are preparing that statement and we shall be here next week on Tuesday with it. I have already consulted some of the colleagues from that area and they are agreeable to this arrangement, in addition to having other meetings, so that what we come up with on Tuesday is a comprehensive position. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: What is it, hon. Olanya? 

MR OLANYA: Thank you. Much as the minister said he will come back with the report next week, yesterday the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) and the Uganda Wildlife Authority were going on with burning people’s houses and destroying their property. As we talk, people are in camps and the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) of Adjumani stopped the distribution of food to people in the camps. 

I request that Government intervenes immediately. Let them stop the evictions, burning of people’s houses and destruction of their crops until they are organised enough to come with their report. If we keep on postponing, people are suffering –(Interruption)

MR DULU: Madam Speaker, two weeks ago, I received a call from my Chairman LCV telling me that hon. Gilbert Olanya wanted to talk to me. I was very far away but I communicated with hon. Olanya and he asked me to help him rescue those arrested for burning huts. Is it, therefore, in order for him to begin alleging here that the UPDF and other officials from Adjumani are the ones burning huts? 

I communicated with him on the telephone. As we talk, those arrested for the burning of huts are in prison on remand. After failing to rescue those people, he came via Zoka Central and he decided to organise people – 

Madam Speaker, this is all about making cheap political capital out of innocent people. I am not happy about you people who are sitting here, lying to Parliament so that people see you. Is hon. Olanya in order to begin lying to Parliament? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you asked for support to rescue offenders, you are out of order.

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, I pray that we keep telling the truth. When I was in Adjumani, I went to see the people who were arrested and they are in Adjumani Prison right now. While there, I called hon. Dulu and told him I was in Adjumani to see our people who are in prison. They were arrested and charged for disorganising –

We need to tell the truth in this matter. As we talk, hon. Dulu is one of the people constructing a building in the compound of a man called Ojara in Apaa.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is one of the problems of the absence of Government in this issue. Yesterday, we wanted to know whether the army is there or not but there was no one from defence. It is because Government has left a vacuum and now everybody is - Let us hear from the Minister of Internal Affairs.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, when the matter was raised on the Floor of Parliament, you directed the Prime Minister to answer. 

I took it upon myself, as the minister responsible for law and order, to call my two colleagues, hon. Jesca Ababiku from Adjumani and hon. Olanya from the other side. I called the Deputy Regional Police Commander of Adjumani and put the telephone on loud speaker. He clearly indicated to us that the situation was totally under control. 

Yes, eight people were arrested in Adjumani. One, a juvenile, has been referred to Arua for purposes of maintaining him in the rehabilitation centre –(Interjection)– Let me give this information so that Members can listen to this. The others are both Madi and Acholi who were arrested and are being processed through the right channels of the law. 

We agreed with them that before I make the next statement on this Floor, it is absolutely necessary that we do not only rely on the reports of the police officers on both sides but also from the headquarters make sure that we send people who can give us additional and independent corroborative information. This is why we are coming on Tuesday, and we think that the time between now and Tuesday is adequate. 

However, I must say that this new information, which the honourable member is bringing, that people were attacked last night, is completely new to me and I am going to check it. I do not think it is feasible, but I do not want to say that he is lying because that is not parliamentary language - I will not use it but I will definitely check the facts.

Regarding the other element, I entirely agree with him that if our people are suffering and need some support that needs urgent attention, after immediate verification we shall undertake that. However, the statement will come on Tuesday. Thank you very much.

3.28
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I feel pain because I am the area Member of Parliament and hon. Dulu and hon. Olanya are turning this matter into a joking issue.

Around 45 minutes ago, people in Acholibur were in chaos. There is a chopper that landed there and was taking pictures of houses that were burnt yesterday. Another camp is building up in another direction. It will be unfair for a minister, who promised in Gulu in December when he was there for a mediation meeting - He promised security for the people in Apaa. Up to now, he is still saying that he is not sure of what is happening.

I talked to the division commander who even said that the people who are attacking these people are soldiers who are not under his control. It should not be a joking matter. Steps should be taken and it must be action steps, not just using the politics of this House – “we shall look into that; we shall bring the statement”. We are fed up of that! We are talking about human rights -

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers to this House? What do you want this House to do for you?

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, I would like you to order for immediate intervention that should not wait for the statement on Tuesday. This intervention is in terms of security, food and non-food items for the people as we wait for Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Office of the Prime Minister is directed to go and support the people who are displaced, who have no food and probably no shelter. This is very urgent.

I also direct the Minister of Internal Affairs to ensure that there is security for the people in the camps and those who are injured should be treated. Please, keep the place secure until you come to us.

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT OF THE UGANDA PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON THE INTER PARLIAMENTARY ASSEMBLY ON ORTHODOXY HELD FROM 3 TO 9 APRIL 2018 IN BEIRUT, LEBANON

3.31
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyanga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to present a report of the international conference of the Inter Parliamentary Assembly on Orthodoxy held from 3 to 9 April 2018 in Beirut, Lebanon.

Madam Speaker, I will go through the declaration. At the conclusion of the Beirut Conference, it was unanimously declared and adopted by the participants, among others, that- 

“Parliamentarianism, as a representative institution of citizens and a place of formulation and expression of their demands, is a critical factor of intermediation between peoples and their leaderships, both political and religious. Therefore, with respect to inter-religious inter-ethnic dialogue, tolerance for diversity, and safeguarding of fundamental human rights, parliaments are requested to construct an enduring relation of trust with civil societies.

Relations of democratic countries’ parliaments with the representatives of culture and religious leaderships must be based on transparency and accountability.

Our Parliaments will pursue to strengthen the legal and regulatory framework aiming to:

(a) 	ensure the necessary compatibility of national legislation with the most important universal texts on protection of human rights;

(b) 	promote the identity of national, cultural, language, religious or ethnic groups and their right to live in community with others; and 

(c) 	inter-religious and inter-ethnic dialogue be put on the national and global level.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Ssekikubo, for representing us there. The report is available for the Members.

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT ON THE FIRST MULTI-STAKEHOLDER MEETING ON MIGRATION AT THE UNITED NATIONS HEADQUARTERS IN NEW YORK, 24 TO 26 JULY 2017

3.33
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I rise to present a report of an assignment that you gave to hon. Veronica Isala and I. We went and represented the Parliament of Uganda but it ended up being a representation of the entire Africa, and we gave a very strong position on issues of governance of migration at the United Nations General Assembly. 

Briefly, the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration is an inter-governmental conference and negotiated agreement that was prepared by the United Nations. The end result was that Uganda participated in the endorsement and adoption of this compact last December.

We are very grateful that the contribution we made at the United Nations (UN), giving the African experience, drew a lot of support from other member states outside Africa. We are proud that we came back with the flag of Uganda and that of the African Union, having presented a very formidable position on issues of migration. This is the report I beg to lay here.

Madam Speaker, based on our submission, I was on the panel on governance of migration and also got a “thank you” from the President of the UN General Assembly. I would like hon. Elijah Okupa to come and present this to the House.

3.36
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, allow me to say that when you send Members who are up to the task, it brings pride to this Parliament. This is what hon. Komakech and hon. Isala did for this Parliament; they brought pride to the Parliament of Uganda and to Africa at large. We must applaud them for that. (Applause)

I would also like to call upon colleagues that when they are called upon to represent this country, they should do so effectively, the way our colleagues have done. The President of the UN General Assembly, on 28 July 2017, did write and communicate to hon. Lyandro Komakech and I would like to read about three paragraphs:

“Dear honourable Mr Komakech,

I would like to express my sincere appreciation to you for participating in the first informal interactive multi-stakeholder hearing, which took place on 26 July 2017 at the UN Headquarters in New York. 

The interactive panel on international cooperation and governance of migration was a solid success due to the variety of expertise and different perspectives the panellists represented, including your thoughtful contribution to highlighting national and regional experiences on migration governance and improving labour mobility. 

I wish to thank you for bringing forth an African perspective and a parliamentarian voice to the discussion. I hope you will continue to be interested and actively engaged in the preparatory process of the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration.

Yours sincerely,
Peter Thompson
President of the General Assembly”

This is an award to hon. Lyandro Komakech for effectively representing this Parliament. Madam Speaker, allow me to pass this on to you to formally hand it over to hon. Lyandro Komakech. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, sometimes we are disparaged for travelling because people do not know what we do, but this is part of parliamentary diplomacy and I know that it has been very effective. Thank you, hon. Komakech and hon. Veronica Isala. (Applause)

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BILL ENTITLED, “THE RELIGIOUS ORGANISATIONS BILL, 2019”

3.39
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Madam Speaker, this Bill on religious organisations has generated lots of acrimony. I have also exhaustively conducted consultations with the principal stakeholders. Even if it is a fact that this Bill is not destitute of merit, because of distortions in the misinterpretations by colleagues that contributed to this motion –(Laughter)– I have considered withdrawing this Bill until further notice. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, my job is to facilitate Members to do their work, but I am glad that the honourable member and the House have come to a resolution on this issue.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS AND THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION AND TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. ALYEK JUDITH ON THE INTIMIDATION, TORTURE, DEATH THREATS AND ARREST OF WORKERS OF MEDIA HOUSES, AND SUSPENSION OF RADIO PROGRAMMES IN LIRA ARISING FROM THE DEATH OF MR DICKENS OKELLO WHO WAS KILLED BY AN INDIAN NATIONAL

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you were supposed to come with your colleague.

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, let me congratulate hon. Lyandro Komakech for the award he has won for us. 

You are right that I was supposed to come with my colleague on this issue. I would like to beg for your indulgence, right from the beginning, that I will be asking for clarification. This is because the issues you raised for us to answer were on intimidation, torture, death threats and arrests, as far as the Ministry of Internal Affairs is concerned, but we found it a little difficult to write because the people who were named here were neither tortured, arrested or intimidated. There is no record anywhere in our police stations or in the security organs that they were arrested. Therefore, we found it extremely difficult, but we can ask for more guidance on this matter and see how we can answer it.

The other issue, which was of concern to the colleague who raised the matter, was their continued suspension from employment. This is a matter, which was between the radio stations and Uganda Communications Commission (UCC). As Ministry of Internal Affairs, we found it a little difficult to answer in that respect. I would kindly request that you give us more direction as to how to proceed. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will ask the Clerk to study the Hansard of that day and elicit the proper issues that the honourable member wanted to raise.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. MUHAMMAD NSEREKO ON THE REFUSAL TO OBEY THE RULING OF THE SPEAKER TO STAY THE ISSUANCE OF NEW PASSPORTS PENDING AN UPDATE TO THE HOUSE ON THE MATTER
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I asked the Clerk to get me the text of the case, which I only received at 2 o’clock. I have not read it, so I will read it and then we can proceed with this issue next week. We want to know whether that case is related to what we will discuss here.

RESPONSES TO URGENT QUESTIONS ON THE RENAMING OF THE NEWLY CREATED KALAKI DISTRICT TO LUSWA DISTRICT, WHICH IS IN CONTRAVENTION OF THE 2015 PARLIAMENTTARY RESOLUTION

3.45
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Col (Rtd) Tom Butiime): Thank you, Madam Speaker. At the 6th Sitting of the Third Meeting of the Third Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda, held on Tuesday, 22 January 2019, the hon. Ongalo Obote raised concern over the renaming of the newly created Kalaki District to Luswa in contravention of the 2015 Parliament resolution. I was required to investigate the matter and report back to Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I wish to report that the 2015 resolution of Parliament on the creation of new districts approved Kalaki District, which is currently part of Kaberamaido District, to take effect on 01 July 2019 with its Headquarters at Kalaki County Headquarters.

As of now, there is no request received by my ministry on renaming of the forthcoming Kalaki District to Luswa. If, in future, such a request is forwarded to my ministry, the issue will be presented on the Floor of this House for approval in accordance with provisions of the Constitution. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Do you have a supplementary question?

3.47
MR CLEMENT ONGALO (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for his response, which has allayed the first part of my fears to the effect that Kalaki District exists as created in 2015.

My concern, however, is that the Electoral Commission still continues to insist that they have no knowledge of Kalaki District; they have only knowledge of Luswa District and even in the Budget Framework Paper for the Electoral Commission, which has been presented to the Budget Committee, the Electoral Commission is preparing its budget for Luswa and not Kalaki District.

Therefore, my concern is that whereas the Ministry of Local Government is aware that Kalaki District that does exist, the insistence of the Electoral Commission that they know of Luswa District and not Kalaki will affect the electoral activities in the new district.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the custodian of records of this House is the Clerk to Parliament. Can the Clerk write to the Electoral Commission, give them a copy of our resolution so that they stop creating another district?

3.49
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, as humble chairperson of that committee that oversees the Electoral Commission, I would like to sympathise with the Ministry of Local Government and the people of Kalaki to the effect that the information we have and which will in turn be laid before Parliament, has no Kalaki.

We raised the matter and they do not even know that such a resolution exists. It is high time Madam Speaker asked the Ministry of Local Government to harmonise with the Clerk to Parliament and the Clerk communicates to the Electoral Commission. Otherwise, the name Kalaki District is not anywhere and they said that is strange to them. They even do not know it.

Therefore, if there has been some engineering - it is not about change of name because the others listed there, if I can remember, one is Obongi and Kazo, among others.

Resolutions pass here - the implementing agency feigned ignorance about Kalaki District and this is worrying. I even have the report here, which we have prepared but the funds for the seven districts coming into effect on 1 July 2019 will be without the name Kalaki.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have anything to say? For me, I have my resolution, which says Kalaki. I do not know who engineered that thing called Luswa.

MR BUTIME: Madam Speaker, I stand by my statement. It is Kalaki District to take effect from 1 July 2019. I have no idea about the origin of Luswa District. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Clerk to Parliament, send a copy of our resolution to the Electoral Commission and another one, to the Permanent Secretary of Local Government so that they are aware of these changes and we shall be alive to the issue since we are on notice.

3.49
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I recall very well when these issues came up. You directed that when the Minister of Local Government comes, he would say something about Sigulu Island District.

I have a letter with me here dated 13 January 2009 signed by Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire, the then Minister of Local Government. In his letter, he says that the proposed new districts of Namayingo, Sigulu, Kyegegwa, Buikwe and Buyende should take effect 1 July 2009.

Madam Speaker, when His Excellence came to the islands, he said that Sigulu Island District would be created. I have received your letter, which you wrote to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to explain the operationalisation of Sigulu Island District.

It is my humble appeal, now that the minister is with us here, he should tell us exactly what is happening with Sigulu District since 2009 when it was created. He even said that its financial implications had been approved by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, I think I wrote to you and you have not answered my letter. I wanted to know why the Electoral Commission had not effected the elections.

3.53
THE MINISTER JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire): Madam Speaker, as you know, districts are not created by ministers. They only make proposals and districts are created by Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: I wrote to you to find out why the Electoral Commission had not effected elections in that district.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD). OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, I am going to find out from the Electoral Commission and report back.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020 – 2023/2024

THE SPEAKER: Chairman of the Budget Committee - not here? Okay, let us go to item nine.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE SECURITY INTEREST IN MOVABLE PROPERTY BILL, 2018

Clause 17

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson of the committee, we stood over this matter; let us go through it. 

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chair, in sub clause (1), we intend to delete all the words appearing after the word, "notice" in the second line.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 17 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13

MR BITANGARO: Clause 13 reads, “Registration of Security Interests.” Madam Chairperson, we intend to replace sub clause (2) as follows:

“(2) Notices under this Act shall only be registered -
(a) after the creation of a security interest;
(b) on the payment of the prescribed fees; and
(c) Upon authorisation by the grantor in writing.”

We also intend to replace sub clause (3) as follows:

"(3) Notwithstanding subsection (1), a notice may be registered before the creation of a security interest or the conclusion of a security agreement to which the notice relates, if the registration of the notice is authorised by the grantor in writing."

We intend to replace sub clause (4) as follows:

"(4) For purposes of this section, a written security interest agreement is sufficient to constitute authorisation by the grantor for the registration of a notice.”

The justification is to prescribe condition precedents for registration of notices under this Act and to require authorisation of the grantor every time a notice is to be registered.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 13 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, on clause 4, we only need to delete the last paragraph, which reads, “The provisions of the Land Act, Cap. 227 relating to family land rights shall apply to this Act.” That is the only thing we propose to delete. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the clause be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Chair. Clause 2 is about the interpretation. They intend to introduce a new term, which has commonly been used in this Bill but not captured properly, referred to as a debenture. A debenture is a plot in charge issued by a grantor to secure a facility against assets -  (movable, present and future). Thank you, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: He wants a separate definition of the word, “debenture.”

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, we have no objection and we thank the member for the enrichment.

MR MAWANDA: Secondly, Madam Chair, you had requested that they also take into consideration the following terminologies they have used; “perfect and unperfected” as mentioned in the Bill; I would like to hear the chairman defining these terms.  

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, these are the definitions as requested by the House: 

A perfected security interest means a security interest that is protected from third party claims through any of the methods prescribed in Section 8 of this Act. This is what we would like to add to the definition section. 
Unperfected security interest means the security interest that is not protected from third party claims, as prescribed in this Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

The Title

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Title do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.04
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
 ouyas eH
4.06
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Security Interest in Movable Property Bill, 2018” and passed it with amendments. 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.06
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) (Kahinda Otafiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the House do adopt the report of the Committee of the whole House. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE SECURITY INTEREST IN MOVABLE PROPERTY BILL, 2019

4.07
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) (Kahinda Otafiire): Madam Speaker, under Rule 135 and 137, I would like to recommit clauses 2 and 18. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: What is the reason for your recommittal?

MAJ.GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, there were new amendments which did not appear in the original Bill?

THE SPEAKER: Where have they come from?

MAJ.GEN.(RTD) OTAFIIRE: From the mover.

THE SPEAKER: No, the mover cannot bring new issues. If there was a mistake made in clause 2 or 18, then you recommit. You cannot bring new amendments now. They have not been considered by the committee.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, the Committee of the whole House has just reported the changes made to the Bill that we are processing. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs who is supposed to move us to the next stage seems to be lost. 

The procedural issue I am raising is whether it is not procedurally right to give him sometime instead of taking the time of Parliament for consultations and whether it would not be procedurally right to stand over this matter so he can abreast himself with the gaps that he has?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if I knew the reason he wants to recommit –

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, I beg to withdraw.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.        

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE SECURITY INTEREST IN MOVABLE PROPERTY BILL, 2019

4.11
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) (Kahinda Otafiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Security Interest in Movable Property Bill, 2019” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that “The Security Interest in Movable Property Bill, 2019” be read for the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and the Bill passes.

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE SECURITY INTEREST IN MOVABLE PROPERTY ACT, 2019”

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations to the minister and our committee. Thank you very much for the work done. (Laughter)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY [AMENDMENT] BILL, 2015

THE SPEAKER: This report was received in December.

4.12
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Ms Jesca Ababiku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Indeed, we presented the report on 20 December 2018 to this House and both sides agreed to have consultations. The latest information I got from the minister is that they are still consulting. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would have wanted the debate to start but I do not see the minister in charge of Kampala. Is there anyone standing in for the minister in charge of Kampala? Honourable members, this is a serious issue.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the Chairperson has just told us that the parties concerned are consulting. I thought that the chairperson is part and parcel of that consultation; if the consultation was taking place - reading between the lines - we are getting information that the Attorney-General is withdrawing the Bill. I wish he was here. 

I would like the chairperson – although she has said that the stakeholders are consulting – to throw more light on that.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill was given first reading, it went to the committee and the committee reported. What we are left to do is to debate. What are they consulting about? What are they anticipating in that report?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, even last time, when it was time for debate, there was no minister and there was no Attorney-General. Whenever we reach this stage, that is what happens and I think it is just a trick. That this why I am raising it; the chairperson seems to know more than I possibly do about the issue.

THE SPEAKER: The alternative is for us to proceed with the debate without the mover.

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, when the report was read in this House, issues to do with the constitutionality of some of the provisions were raised and the presiding officer then – the Deputy Speaker – ruled that we go and have some consultations. 

When we returned, the Minister for Kampala Capital City reported to this Parliament that after the consultations we had, she had referred the matter for advice to the Attorney-General and that the Attorney-General was yet to give a reply. 

Madam Speaker, I beg that since the matter was raised from this House, you give us more time and allow the minister to be around and report as advised by the Attorney-General.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all that is rumour-mongering because the Attorney-General did not come here to tell us what he was doing about that Bill. I would like us to start debate now.

Honourable members, in some places, this House has been accused of delaying business; this Bill has been ready since December.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, I think there is a hidden intention to withdraw this Bill because about two weeks ago, the Bill was on the Order Paper and it was among the four Bills. Members requested that they wanted to go back and abreast themselves with the Bill and come back to debate. I remember even the Deputy Speaker asked Members to debate.

Those who were present requested that they be allowed to go back to the dugout where they normally meet to talk about this Bill and come back. What has happened today? Let everybody be aware that there is an intention for the withdrawal of this Bill. Otherwise, we are ready for debate. The chairperson should tell us the truth about what is happening. What consultation takes place for two years?

THE SPEAKER: The chairperson did her job and reported. By the way, honourable members, the Bill is ours. Any withdrawal can only occur here. They cannot withdraw it by operating clandestinely. 

On that note, this matter will be on the Order Paper for debate on Tuesday, with or without the Minister for Kampala Capital City. I have given notice. (Applause)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LAW REVISION (PENALTIES IN CRIMINAL MATTERS) MISCELLANEOUS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

THE SPEAKER: The mover is not here. Next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE JUDICIARY BILL, 2018

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, again, this Bill was brought here for First Reading. The committee reported and we adjourned for Christmas and we were to continue with the debate later. You can now debate, unless the committee chairperson wants to refresh the Members’ minds.

4.18
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The line minister – and he is here – asked for harmonisation. I think it is the equivalent of the KCCA Bill. Our committee and the minister are exchanging notes and we are yet to harmonise. I think by Tuesday, if the minister can commit, we shall be able to begin the debate and synchronise a few of the contentious areas.

4.19
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire): Madam Speaker, I concur with the observations of the chairperson of the committee and I beg your indulgence that we continue with the harmonisation and report back on Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable minister. Once the committee reports, it becomes our property. It is no longer a matter between you and the committee chairperson. It is our business. If you want to harmonise, do it on the Floor here. It is not in your hands or the hands of the committee chairperson. You harmonise it here.

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker that is why I begged for your indulgence. I am at your - (Laughter)

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, I appreciate where the minister is coming from. However, my observation is that the technical people in the ministries seem to no longer respect committees of Parliament. This is because this Bill was read and referred to the committee and there was an effort to have the minister to appear before the committee. Now, after the committee has written a report, we hear there are negations. 

I am a Member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs; have you consulted me, honourable minster? When you appeared before the committee, we had an opportunity to interact with you and form a position. As a Member, I do not know what you are doing. I only hear that you are meeting off cuff.

I wonder whether it is not procedurally right that in matters of this nature, all these engagements only take place before the committee. Otherwise, it tends to waste Parliament’s time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you cannot even amend the report quietly after you have presented it here. Unless the House directs you to revise, you cannot revise a report before we debate it. Therefore, there is nothing to harmonise behind the back of the House.

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is not possible that there is going to be consultation on each and every principle in this Bill; maybe there are one or two issues on which the minister is carrying out consultation. 

I wonder whether it would not be procedurally right for the minister to move a motion so that we can debate the other principles and when we reach the principles for which he is carrying out consultations, probably next week, we can conclude them instead of halting the entire debate on a law as big and as important as it is. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the concerns. This report was laid on 20 December 2018 and when we came back, it was one of the first items. The minister asked for 10 days. The reason the minister asked for 10 days – he wrote a letter and I have a letter dated 21st January -

THE SPEAKER: Who did he write to?

MR OBOTH: He wrote to the chairperson of the committee.

THE SPEAKER: With a copy to the Speaker?

MR OBOTH: With a copy to the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: No, I have not seen that letter.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, the spirit of the minister seeking for harmonisation was to avoid the ping-pong – if there are areas where we could get consensus. 

The Bill is as important as this Parliament always discharges her mandate on some of these issues. Therefore, we are looking at what is constitutional and what is not constitutional and we thought we would shorten the time if we got a meeting of minds. For the members of the committee, we have not met again and we are not amending the committee report. We are still doing the diplomatic exchanges.

Madam Speaker, since the report is already property of this House, you could direct that a small committee out of this House be set up; that will maybe help me with the minister so that we can meet quickly. The other day, the minister called me but I was presenting in the Committee on Budget. I have not met him and do not know whether he had agreed with me but I was in the committee where I concluded today and that explains the time lag. I cannot entirely blame him and neither can he blame me. 

However, if we can have a small committee like it has been done before, we can actually meet with the minister and a few Members to harmonise and come and report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can’t we harmonise at Committee Stage? If there are issues that he is strong about, we can address them at Committee Stage because I do not know on whose behalf you are doing that work of consultation when our report is here. You are setting a bad precedent. 

The Bills are brought here; the ministers are called and I do not know whether they attend but they have had time to look at these issues before the report is brought. This is not a good precedent that we go and organise ourselves there. Are you going to bring another report? Can you do an addendum on a report of the House?

Anyway, on Tuesday, we will debate this matter.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE MINIMUM WAGES BILL, 2015

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Rwakajara? 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

THE SPEAKER: Not here. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

THE SPEAKER: Absent. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE VALUE FOR MONEY AUDIT ON THE COMPENSATION OF PROJECT AFFECTED PERSONS UNDER THE REFINERY PROJECT

THE SPEAKER: Absent. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE VALUE FOR MONEY AUDIT REPORT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF SOLAR ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE IN SELECTED EDUCATION AND HEALTH FACILITIES UNDER THE ENERGY FOR RURAL TRANSFORMATION PROJECT II (ERT II)

THE SPEAKER: Absent.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE VALUE FOR MONEY AUDIT ON THE REGULATION, MONITORING AND PROMOTION OF THE MINING SECTOR BY THE MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT, DECEMBER 2015

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, I think we are wasting our time here. All these people are not here. 

House adjourned to Tuesday next week at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.28 p.m. and was adjourned until Tuesday, 5 February 2019 at 2.00p.m.) 
