PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTTHIRD SESSION - THIRD MEETINGTHURSDAY , 25 JANUARY 2024PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA11420THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029Thursday, 25 January 2024colleagues. I know what it means to lose a colleague in the House and how it shakes all of us. I feel sorry for the family, honourable colleagues, the Speaker, the President, the FDC fraternity and all Ugandans. The burial will be this Saturday, as you may all know, in Kole District. Parliament has organised transport. Therefore, you need to register to ensure that we go in big numbers. I will be there. Let us go in big numbers and pay respect to our fallen colleague. This being my first sitting since this happened, I request you to join me and we stand for a moment of silence.(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I also join Madam Speaker in congratulating you, honourable colleagues, for hosting a successful 27th Conference of Speakers and Presiding Officers of the Commonwealth (CSPOC), where you played a critical role. The feedback we are getting from the Speakers is amazing. They were surprised at how Members of Parliament could go all the way to provide that kind of care and support to them. In many countries, Members of Parliament are bosses – just like bosses - but you showed a very high level of humility, when you stood in and supported our visitors. (Applause)  I would like to congratulate you on that. IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentTHIRD SESSION - 2ND SITTING - THIRD MEETING Parliament met at 2.02 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I welcome you to today’s sitting. We request that the front seats be reserved for the people designated to be on the front bench. If there is any shadow minister seated behind, please, come and occupy your seat on the front bench. If there is any Member on the front bench of the Shadow Cabinet who is not a shadow minister, please – I would like us to respect this bench very much. The same way we demand of Members of the frontbench on this side to be there, I will also be demanding of this side. Therefore, if you are a shadow minister, always take up your position, which is reserved. Honourable colleagues, I join all of you, once again, in mourning our fallen mama , Imat Cecilia Ogwal. It happened when I was away on official duty, so, I have not participated in any of the proceedings and this is my first sitting since it happened. I join you and extend my condolences to all of you, honourable 11421THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 25 JANUARY 2024I also congratulate H.E. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of the Republic of Uganda, and the National Organising Committee for Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), led by Madam Lucy Nakyobe, for organising a very successful NAM Conference and G77+China. (Applause)In that respect, I also congratulate the President for chairing these two important bodies for the period he has been given. I hope the Minister of Foreign Affairs if he finds it okay, comes and shares with us what this chairmanship means for our country and what will be the major issues that we shall be pushing for, especially to raise the voice of the Global South to be heard at the international stage. If the Minister of Foreign Affairs could share with us a statement and tell us how Parliament could contribute to a successful chairmanship, for both NAM and G77+China, we would be grateful. I will be waiting. The acting Chief Whip, Hon. Henry Musasizi, will convey the message to the minister. 2.10THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Mr Speaker, for the record, the Minister of Foreign Affairs will be informed and persuaded to comply accordingly. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Here, we are requesting him; it is at his discretion. He is not required to make a statement, but it is always good to appraise Parliament. We have these Members assigned to international bodies – the ambassadors of the country; it is always good to bring them on board on such issues. Honourable members, I have received many calls about the issue of Foot and Mouth Disease in the country, especially after the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries wrote a letter, which many farmers have sent to me. He wrote a letter to the Inspector General of Police, requesting him to enforce quarantine in 32 districts of Uganda. People in the cattle corridor – everywhere – want to know: when is this ending? This issue has been on for a long time and it is cutting across, from northern, eastern, central and western Uganda. Very many areas are affected. These farmers whose livelihoods depend on these animals need to be appraised. Also, as leaders, when you go to your constituents, you will be asked these questions. We need to be brought on board to know how best to respond to these issues. What is the ministry doing? Therefore, I request the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to make a statement next Thursday regarding this matter. How long have these districts been under quarantine? How long are they anticipated to be under quarantine? What is the Government doing to resolve the matter? When will the farmers get vaccines against foot and mouth disease? How did the disease spread to the various districts, yet they usually close off  districts immediately after they get such cases? What measures are being put in place? What are the ministry’s long-term plans to manage and reduce the economic effects of Foot and Mouth Disease? What support does the ministry require from other stakeholders, including Parliament, to address this matter?It is not that we want to interfere with how they are controlling, but we want to be on board so that we read from the same chapter. Otherwise, you are going to be answering very many questions in your constituencies, honourable colleagues.Honourable colleagues, on Friday, the 26th of January, which is tomorrow, we shall be marking the 38th NRM/A Victory Day Anniversary Celebrations in Jinja. I have received a request from the minister responsible that the Government would like to present a statement on this important day. 11422THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029I will, therefore, use my prerogative, under rule 8, to amend the Order Paper and allow the minister for the Presidency to present a statement after my communication. I want to thank you, honourable colleagues. (Applause)Point of procedure from the commissioner, followed by Hon. Ssemujju, Hon. Mayanja and Hon. Sarah Opendi.2.14MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Namayingo): Mr Speaker, before I raise the procedural matter, I want to congratulate you and the Speaker of Parliament upon the successful hosting of the CSPOC. It was very successful. I also congratulate His Excellency the President on the NAM Conference, which was also very successful. The procedural matter I want to raise is that - when you look at the Order Paper today, it is a very important day for Parliament because we are laying the National Budget Framework Paper. However, when you look at the Frontbench, there are only four ministers yet this is an important day when ministers should be here to listen to everything that is being talked about in their sectors. The procedural matter I am raising, therefore is, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for you, Mr Speaker, to direct ministers to come to the House so that the National Budget Framework Paper is laid when the ministers are here so they can respond and listen to issues that are being raised by the Committee on Budget in Parliament?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Commissioner. Just for clarification - I know it was a slip of the tongue. Today, we are not laying; we are receiving a report from the committee. He has always guided me on budgeting matters so it can happen to all of us.Sometimes, I sit in this seat and I say, “Maybe I wish, colleagues could come…”  To direct old people who know their work! Of course, I know they have taken note and I will raise it because this is a very serious issue. Since we have the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the National Budget Framework Paper is a working document still in the hands of Finance, for now, I would say, let our work not be held because we have a deadline. Honourable colleagues, today, we shall only receive the reports. I do not want us to rush into debating. I want to give you about four or five days of the long weekend to read the report because the report is just coming today. I do not want you to receive the report and then I say, “Debate it right away and adopt the National Budget Framework Paper”. No. Today, let us receive the report. (Applause) We go back and prepare because, in the end, I will guide you on how the debate will be conducted. When we are debating the National Budget Framework Paper, do not tell me issues of a bridge in your constituency. No, we have a very well-structured debate, which reflects the kind of research you have done.MR SSEWUNGU:  Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity. Sincerely, you have just talked about the Minister for the Presidency and you have even amended the Order Paper, but she is not here . (Hon. Rose Lilly Akello rose_)Mr Speaker, what I am saying, is that if you permit me - it is not fair - there were ministers when we were paying tribute to the late Cecilia Ogwal. May her soul rest in peace - All the ministers came. Even those I last saw in the Appointment’s Committee were here attending. Mr Speaker, if you can permit us, we will give you the names of those who appeared on that day, but have not appeared here today. Otherwise, we cannot continue having ministers absent. Even my Minister of Education and Sports came to pay tribute to the Late Cecilia, but I have never seen her in the Committee on Education and Sports. All these are challenges we are facing.I pray that at this stage, there are things we should desist from. These ministers know [The Deputy Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR11423THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 25 JANUARY 2024their roles so let us agree and we give you the names of these people and something should be done. Otherwise, we always spend time in the absence of ministers. Imagine, a minister who last appeared at the Committee on Appointment, moreover, he or she is an ex-official of Parliament not coming into Parliament! You only see Hon. Musasizi, my friend from Ssembabule and others. It is not fair, Mr Speaker. Something must be done. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I hear you loud and clear, Hon. Ssewungu. I would like to stop it at this. Honourable chairpersons of sectoral committees, I do not know how you are processing budgets for these ministers. I want to put on the record of Parliament the issue of the Minister of Education and Sports. The Minister of Education and Sports clearly reached out to the Speaker. Her issue was on COVID-19 restrictions around the presidency, which restrictions are not determined by us or anyone. She requested to be guided because she is a neighbour to the President. (Laughter)  Okay? Therefore, being a neighbour to the President and reaching out to the President all the time, honourable colleagues, as you know requires us to be doing regular COVID-19 tests all the time. We guided her as an office. Hon. Ssewungu, you raised an issue and I am telling you how we guided. We guided her as an office that whenever it is a must that she must be the one to appear, we shall reach out to her. Otherwise, her ministers of state can represent her. (Applause)  That was our guidance, not her choice. That is how we guided when she reached out to us to seek guidance on how this matter could be handled. So, whenever the Minister of Education and Sports is not here, please, know that is the reason; she has permission from us. MR SSEMUJJU:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had the opportunity to be on a programme with the President and I told him the dangers of appointing spouses to public offices. I do not want to repeat what he said because it was on the public platform.To serve in two offices - the Office of the First Lady was made official in Uganda. There are even staff if you look at the policy statement. Instead of guiding the Minister of Education and Sports, I want to plead with you, Mr Speaker that you tell the President to choose. If he wants Mama  to be his wife, then appoint someone else to be the Minister of Education and Sports so that the COVID-19 tests can end. But the issue I wanted to raise, Mr Speaker, if you allow me –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Cecilia Ogwal guided us that you can be a good wife and a good public officer; so let us remain in that line and we participate.MR SSEMUJJU:  My issue, Mr Speaker, from your communication, is on the National Resistance Army (NRA). The 1995 Constitution changed the name of the military from the National Resistance Army to the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF). This was because in the minds of those who were in the Constituent Assembly (CA), they did not want to be reminded of rebellion and the number of people, nearly half a million that were killed in Luwero by NRA.Since we moved, as a country, from NRA to UPDF, the NRA therefore, at the moment does not exist. How does the Minister for Presidency seek for space on the Order Paper to speak about a military outfit that no longer exists anywhere in Uganda? We do not want to be reminded of NRA and what it did in Luwero. That is why we moved away from a personal rebel group to a national army. So, Mr Speaker, since you raised it in your communication, I wanted to seek guidance on whether we can continue celebrating a rebel group capturing power after killing a lot of people. Maybe, we can celebrate the day President Museveni was elected, but to continue celebrating, and you know the President is very passionate with these things; you know what he said about Idi Amin: “That is part of the history 11424THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029that we should forget.” So, can we forget the history of the NRA and continue with UPDF?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Ssemujju, the statement, which I have before me has National Resistance Movement/Army (NRM/A). The NRA had a political wing. I think we can do away with the army part and maintain it as the NRM revolution and then we can go on because on that day, NRM captured power together with its army. So, if you are dissatisfied with the part of the army, we can just go with the political wing and have it as NRM’s revolution. Okay?  Yes, I picked Hon.  Allan Mayanja. 2.25MR ALLAN MAYANJA (NUP, Nakaseke Central County, Nakaseke): Mr Speaker, thank you for the opportunity.  In your communication, you talked about Foot and Mouth Disease and seriously speaking, it is affecting Nakaseke in parts of Ngoma, Kinyogoga and Wakyato. According to a report from the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO), in just two weeks, 225 heads of cattle have shown signs and some of them have died and the ministry imposed the quarantine, but it is not providing vaccines.Additionally, farmers have lost their cattle, but what is Government doing in terms of compensation because it has a duty to protect people and their properties, but they are sleeping on the job.Lastly, Mr Speaker, when you see the ministry imposing a quarantine without providing a vaccine, it is alarming. Some Members have information, Hon. Nyongore, you can give more clarification on this. MR NYONGORE:   Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern - I know that Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) is everywhere, as you communicated, but what I want to understand is the ministry’s way forward to bring the vaccine. In the entire constituency, there are allegations that there are private vaccines, but we know that private vaccines cannot be accessed unless they are brought by the Government.Now, how are private vaccines coming into the community -  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Nyongore, we are engaging in a premature debate. The minister has been requested to bring a statement on Thursday next week. The salient issues you are touching on of private vaccines, we do not know. Therefore, I would request that we all hold our guns and wait for Thursday when the minister will present a statement. The veterinary doctor is burning to say something.2.27DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City):   Thank you. Mr Speaker, when you ordered  that the minister come on the Floor of Parliament to present a statement, there is something that should come with the information. There are two methods that are key in the control of FMD apart from animal movements, the provision and availability of efficacious vaccines. National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO), which is an organisation for the Government, has invested heavily in innovation and they are ready to produce vaccines from this country. They need funds and I want to request that when the minister is coming on the Floor of Parliament, he should appraise this Parliament on how far NARO has reached in ensuring that they produce vaccines from Uganda.Recently, the President of Botswana - last week, he was with our President here and he promised to synergise with Uganda to help us produce vaccines from this country. Therefore, I want to request that you amend it so that the minister can appraise this Parliament on the production in Uganda.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Clerk, when you are extracting information for the minister, please, include that aspect. I would say that about FMD, we stop at this and [Mr Ssemujju]COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR11425THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 25 JANUARY 2024on Thursday, I will give you enough time to discuss this issue. Hon. Sarah Opendi -2.29MS SARAH  OPENDI  (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to welcome you back and say, “Happy New Year” to you, although we are sitting as a House without our senior, our mother and our grandmother, Hon. Cecilia Atim Ogwal.Mr Speaker, you have told us about the burial arrangements, but I want to request you as a person who has been very passionate about the girl-child and children in this country - Hon. Cecilia Ogwal and I had a motion that has been pending on the girl-child, specifically the pregnant girls who are denied education. I am raising this matter because just yesterday, a boda boda  man called Muwonge reached out to me for help. His 14-year-old daughter - he is a widower looking after his children and trying to ensure that they get educated. His daughter was defiled and he reported the matter to Kira Road Police, but up to now, no action has been taken. The painful bit is that I think some schools had opened and he said his daughter had been - he took his girl to school and the matron discovered she was pregnant and the daughter has been sent back home. Mr Speaker, it is time - because these girls do not get pregnant sometimes out of their own will. They are just defiled, some by their relatives, some by neighbours, but if a girl is willing to be in school, she should be allowed to study and complete her education. So, I want to request that we have that motion in memory of the late Cecilia Ogwal, tabled and discussed by this House so that these injustices against the girl-child can stop. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Sarah Opendi, meet me in office on Tuesday at 11 a.m. on this matter so we can look through the motion and see how best it can be handled. Hon. Angura, finally, then we handle matters of national importance. 2.31MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also welcome you back. You have got us in a sombre mood having lost our loved one. We condole with you and the rest of the family. Mr Speaker, in your communication, you appreciated the Speaker and of course, the members of Parliament for their participation in CSPOC and I want to add my voice that everyone did their level best. In addition, as a country, you only left out one other very important engagement that was handled. CSPOC went on successfully and the President presided over, yet another important engagement of IGAD (Intergovernmental  Authority  on Development). I think that one is being held low, but we should recognise that as one of the big engagements that the country was involved in. Therefore, four big programmes have run in the country since the year began; CSPOC, IGAD, NAM and G-77. We should give the President a round of applause for what he did and what was done then to ensure that even IGAD gets a team that is going to help us resolve the conflict that is in Sudan. (Applause)  I thought you had left that. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. For record purposes - because I do not want a diplomatic roar - the President did not preside over IGAD, he hosted it. It was presided over by the President of Djibouti as the Chairperson of IGAD. Therefore, the Hansard  needs to have it clear. Honourable colleagues, matters of national importance. Hon. Koluo – 2.33MR JOSEPH KOLUO (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last night at 7.30 p.m., the residents of Akurao Village and Ominya Parish in Toroma Sub-County were taken unawares by heavy hailstorms accompanied by lightning that hit the villages of Aler, Akurao, Magara, Ajelel, Ajuna, and Aleles in Akurao Parish. The 11426THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029villages of Kangaida, Onyurutu and Ongokia in Ominya Parish.  According to the Councillor, Mr John Steven Otyama, all cassava gardens in the areas mentioned above were destroyed. Twenty houses had their roofs blown off, including the grass-thatched houses. Four hundred hens were killed. Almost all the mature trees –(Interjection)-  it is true I have videos – were thrown down. One old person, Mr John Adiye was seriously injured. My prayers: The Office of the Prime Minister (Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees) should avail these people with cassava cuttings so that when the rain comes, they can plant the cassava.Secondly, trees should be provided by the National Forest Authority (NFA) to these people to protect the environment.Finally, relief items like tents and food should be provided to these people. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Hon. Koluo. On this matter, I am impressed by the details you managed to gather in such a short time, to the extent of counting hens. It is unfortunate that your people were affected in this way.When we make prayers on such matters, we need room for the District Disaster Committee to be able to assess and say they need A, B, C, D. The Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) please take note of this matter. I request Hon. Koluo to call your CAO after here to expedite the process of the District Disaster Committee making an assessment and submitting a report to OPM so that it is followed up seriously. Okay, thank you.2.36THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Mr Speaker, for emphasis of what you have just said, all the issues, which the honourable colleague has picked from the ground need to be confirmed by the relevant authorities. In this case, the District CAO working with his disaster committee, the RDCs, LCVs and the others, as the Government shall instruct them to get us this report and we shall see the necessary steps to take.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Ssewungu2.37MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Next week, schools are beginning and it was the position of this House that schools should be given Capitation Grant two weeks before the term begins. As we talk now, there is nothing sent from finance to schools. I do not know whether the Ministry of Education and Sports, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and fellow Members of Parliament have taken time to study the results of last year’s Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE). It is our schools – Mr Speaker, schools begin with preparation. Private schools are busy preparing for next week’s beginning, but Universal Primary Education (UPE) and Universal Secondary Education (USE) schools are going to start by slashing gardens and the school compound. I would like to know whether the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has sent money to schools as was directed by Parliament so that the head teachers are not blamed.At the end of the day, RDCs will arrest the head teachers yet the failure is on the Government. I would like to know whether and why they have failed to send funds to UPE and USE schools so that the teachers are prepared to teach our children where we have the biggest number of children in this country. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – [Mr Koluo] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR11427THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 25 JANUARY 20242.38THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have not failed to send Capitation Grant to schools. Yes, it is true that we made a commitment that we shall always release the Capitation Grant earlier than the opening of the term. The first term has not yet opened and we are cognisant that by the time the term opens, we shall have the Capitation Grant. I wish to inform the House and my friend, Hon. Ssewungu that the Capitation Grant for Term One, 2024 has been released.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you.MR SSEWUNGU:  I think it is better for the minister to be fair to this House, where you have a failure and weakness, you accept and react immediately. The issue I am raising, and you are in acceptance because we have been here together, is that we are supposed to send money before, Mr Speaker, Sir. Today is Friday and schools are about to begin; what are they using to prepare for the beginning of the term? I pray that the minister assures us that by next week, these schools shall have the funds.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Ssewungu, the Minister has said the money has been released. MR SSEWUNGU:  Mr Speaker, he is double-faced. He says they have not, but they have been released.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, you can give a clarification.MR MUSASIZI:  Mr Speaker, while my brother – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Are you double-faced to begin with? (Laughter)MR MUSASIZI:  Mr Speaker, my face is very transparent and all of you can see that I have one face. Figures speak for themselves. If I say I have released, there is evidence. I wish you had informed me earlier so that I come with a statement here in the House. In terms of money, we do not just talk, we speak with figures and I am telling you we have released the money.  (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, on Tuesday, you will bring a confirmation to the House that, indeed, the money was released. That makes it much easier.Honourable colleagues, I communicated earlier that the two front benches, we will now make it very strict, are for the Shadow Cabinet and on my right, for the Government Cabinet. Therefore, if there is any shadow minister seated behind, they should come and take up their positions. We reserved seats for you, we want them occupied. Shadow ministers, I request that you now come and occupy rightful seats. I do not want you to only be shadow ministers saying “I am the shadow minister”, I want you to be seen and we shall be asking questions and seeking clarification. Hon. Mwijukye – very good.   They know they will sort it. Let us reserve the front benches for the Cabinets. Hon. Kayemba-Ssolo and I conclude with Hon. Ssemujju.2.42MR GEOFREY KAYEMBA-SSOLO (NUP, Bukomansibi South County, Bukomansibi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Happy New Year. My issue is about the electricity distribution in my area, Bukomansibi. I have brought it here many times and we went ahead to convene meetings at the Ministry. One meeting was led by the former Leader of the Opposition (LoP), Hon. Mathias Mpuuga about the places that have never got power since Independence and that includes where I come from Kassebwera Subcounty and my village, Mbale, Kinoni, Kyankoole and other places.Mr Speaker, no pole has ever passed there. We borrowed money in 2022 and Bukomansimbi was one of the beneficiaries, but up to now, we have never got any sign that we shall get electricity.11428THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029Many places are developing, we have good towns and the place is near. Can you imagine that there is no power where I come from, Mr Speaker -(Interjection)-  Information granted.MS NAJJUMA:  Thank you, Rt Hon. Ssolo. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, get a microphone that is working.MS NAJJUMA:  Thank you, Hon. Kayemba-Ssolo for allowing me to give information. Mr Speaker, there is a problem with electricity. In Nakaseke District, some transformers are down in Kayina and Lugugu in Semuto Town Council.When you call the regional managers, they say, you know honourable, that was Rural Electricity Agency Project(REA) and it is not for Umeme. The REA did not hand it over to Umeme, so we get a bit confused when they say it is a project for REA and it did not hand it over to Umeme.We need a ministerial statement from the minister. I contacted the minister and she said Sarah, we are going to handle the situation, but up to now, those transformers have been down for almost a year.The problem is between Umeme and REA. If REA did not hand over the projects, they should sort it so that we know what is taking place. Thank you, Hon. Ssolo.MR KAYEMBA-SSOLO:  Thank you, Hon. Najjuma for that information. At least, you have electricity and just waiting to connect, but for us we do not have - (Interruption)MR MWIJUKYE:  Mr Speaker, I want to thank Hon. Kayemba-Ssolo for giving me the chance to -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kayemba-Ssolo calling you a Rt Hon. does not make you a presiding officer. (Laughter)  Hon. Mwijukye should be the last one you give an opportunity.MR MWIJUKYE:  Mr Speaker, you recall towards the end of the 10th Parliament, many subcounties in this country were connected with power. However, whereas the construction and connection happened, the real connection has not happened. When you go to many subcounties, you will see poles and electric lines, but there is no electricity.I think this was a TBEA Project. We have discussed this many times and it is becoming a campaign issue. People think the poles were brought for campaigns and it is becoming a problem. I think as the minister comes to answer this, she also needs to update us on how far they have gone with that project.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, if you remember, you passed a loan recently - World Bank loan for scale-up and the national launch is on the 2nd in Ruhinda North Constituency and the Leader of the Opposition has assured me that he will be coming to join me for the launch- that is on a lighter note.It will be launched that day and they are going to scale up; connecting homes and families that are already wired and those, which need one pole. I think what we will do, I can request the Minister for Energy- because we had agreed that the Minister for Energy should bring a statement on status updates on electricity projects in the country, we give it enough time, we scrutinise it and have enough discussion because each and every Member is more or less affected.The accusation on you is the same accusation on me. People say, “let us wait for 2025, once it comes, you will see them connected because they will need votes” which is very wrong. Yes, Hon. Kawooya and then, I give my guidance on the matter.2.48THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Anifah Kawooya): Thank you,  Mr Speaker. I wish you a happy new year and congratulate [Mr Kayemba-Ssolo] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR11429THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 25 JANUARY 2024you and the Government for what has been going on.Mr Speaker, I would like to put the record right. Before I came to the front bench, for the last 21 years, I have been a member of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources.  I can say that at that level, I provide institutional memory on that committee.Mr Speaker, Bukomansimbi is my neighbour. I recall vividly that my brother knows that under the Government of Uganda project, Bukomansimbi benefited from a line that was supposed to continue and it was installed and we inspected it.Therefore, it is not true that there has never been electricity in Bukomansimbi before or after independence. I can take him -(Interjections)-  yes, it is true some projects are not finished and some poles even in Ssembabule, where I come from - (Interjections)-   Mr Speaker, having been here for 20 years on the same committee, even my house is not connected , but as you have said, there is a programme for scaling up.Mr Speaker, you are aware that even when I was a member on that committee, two two-thirds of your constituents were scheduled for connection, but they have not been connected.Therefore, it is a national concern that we should handle together. The Minister of Energy will come here as you have said and bring a comprehensive report showing us what is going on and what is remaining. I do not want us to generalise that since independence, nothing has been done in Bukomansimbi.Mr Speaker, I offer to go with my colleague tomorrow evening, so that I show him where electricity is connected. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Kawooya, I already have a programme with Hon. Kayemba-Ssolo; please, do not hijack it. But colleagues, on this matter, every one of us is affected.Therefore, let the Minister for Energy bring a statement to update us on all the electricity projects and then, we give it an hour and a half so that we have enough time to discuss this matter.Honourable colleagues, I think two weeks is enough so that she can prepare very well. You see, we do not want to rush someone and they bring a half-baked statement. Let us give her two weeks and we shall give you enough time to debate.A procedure Hon. Opendi?MS OPENDI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are members of Parliament and the people’s voice in this House. We either speak through petitions or motions.We have before you our motion and it is close to a year now. You put it on the Order Paper and removed it. It is a motion on REA.We can talk about electricity here, but for as long as we do not talk about what goes on behind where REA was the key player, we may not achieve the results that we need.I beg you, Mr Speaker, as people’s representatives, can that motion also be given time on the Order Paper as you had done so that we can discuss it? Part of the challenges we are facing now is because REA was mainstreamed into the ministry. Mr Speaker, can we have that motion on the Order Paper?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You see, honourable members, I am usually conscious when I am guiding the House. I know where we could stop or go beyond. The REA was established by a Statutory Instrument. If the minister decides to withdraw the Statutory Instrument, we cannot direct her, as a House, that she should go and bring a new Statutory Instrument and re-established REA. Secondly, you have received reports here clearly showing you the issues of the merger – now, you are on merger then another motion is coming and then bring another issue.11430THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029I would say that we should be patient and suggest that Hon. Opendi since we have agreed that we are meeting on Tuesday- when the minister brings the statement, we shall see whether, indeed, our issues have been addressed. Beyond that, we shall have more issues discussed and see how best we can handle this issue of electricity. I had seen Hon. Alinga, what was the issue? MS OPENDI: Just for your information, there was a recent court ruling on that Statutory Instrument. Thank you. 2.53MR SOLOMON ALINGA (NRM, Too County, Bukwo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have an issue in Bukwo – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Alinga,  on what point are you standing up? MR ALINGA: I have an issue that I need to raise. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let me allow you to raise it, but you know the procedure of raising it. MR ALINGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In 2022-2023, the Government of Uganda gave Shs 167 million to Bukwo Local Government, and they were supposed to renovate two schools; Amanang Secondary School and St Joseph Secondary School. The work was done and the contractors did their work. However, at the time the contractors were supposed to be paid, their money was swept back. Bukwo Local Government has been making a follow-up since that time. To-date, that money has not been paid back. Now, the contractors have gone to the courts of law and the district has been summoned to go and answer the charges. Mr Speaker, I would like to know from the minister why districts are given work to do, and when the money is swept back, it is not reverted. What happened to the money? Thank you. 2.55THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are two issues in one. One, is the failure to pay the contractor in time and the other issue is re-voting. Mr Speaker, I wish to respond as follows:First, when the Government fails to pay, this results in domestic arrears. I need to check whether what happened in Bukwo forms part of our domestic arrears stock. After checking that, I can guide when and how we shall process the payment. Secondly, on re-voting, the law is very clear. On 30 June, at the end of every financial year, the appropriation expires. Once appropriation expires, if we were ending the year with a positive balance, this money would return to the Consolidated Fund. However, what happens is that that money which is not utilised at the end of the financial year, forms part of the Consolidated Fund. Under programme-based budgeting, we do not carry forward programmes. When the financial year ends, in another financial year, we will budget again. Therefore, if he says that this activity – First, we cannot re-budget because the activity was done and the schools were constructed. What we need to do is to pay the money. That is why I ask for time, Mr Speaker, to check with the treasury, find out what exactly happened and process the payment. Otherwise, Mr Speaker – (Ms Amero rose_)-  Clarification. MS AMERO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek clarification from the minister. He said when the money is brought back, it is taken to the Consolidated Fund. This House appropriates that money and we know what money goes where, and for what purpose it is meant for. Whenever this money is brought back to the [The Deputy Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR11431THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 25 JANUARY 2024Consolidated Fund, no one comes to tell us how much money has been taken away from the districts. Is there a way we can be made to understand how much money comes back so that when we are going to appropriate, we know that we have this amount of money to start with? MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am sorry if the Members do not get reports on accounts from the Consolidated Fund when the year ends. This is public information which is even audited, and the Auditor-General produces a report with all this information on an annual basis. There is a question; this is an expectation gap and any lay person would not appreciate what happens because a district loses money. We say, for instance, Kumi has returned Shs 100 million, but nobody ever gets to know what it does and how it crystallises into the system. Mr Speaker, when we adopted what we call a Treasury Single Account, under it, there is no vote, which has money. All the money is in the Consolidated Fund. When you want to make a payment, you only simply invoice and we charge your budget from the Treasury. What does this mean? When we close at the end of the financial year, we sweep everything and money goes back to balance the Consolidated Fund, which in most cases, closes in negatives. In other words, we never have money to return. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Hon. Alinga, I hope your CAO has reached out to the Attorney-General since the district has been sued. So, follow up on that. You do not need to respond to that. 3.00MR LAWRENCE SSONGA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. This is the fifth time I am talking about this issue and today, I will go ahead and lay a document. This is about the policy of linking all our revenue border posts to tarmac roads. This will help to generate a lot of revenue for Uganda, and with that money generated at the border posts, we shall be in a position to do internal roads in Uganda, even if they are of less economic value. The issue is, in my hand, I have the detailed engineering design for tarmacking Nebbi-Goli- Paidha-Zombo-Zeu-Warr-Vurra-Lia-Odramacaku road, which is on the Congo border, covering many districts in West Nile. This very road is generating a lot of money for Uganda, but none of the border posts, with the exception of Vurra, is linked to a tarmac road, yet, we have a high potential of generating money from the Congo market. Mr Speaker, you will recall that when you came to Paidha, we raised this issue and you confirmed that that area is very productive and it should have access to markets. Therefore, the feasibility study and detailed engineering design were done in March 2018 and I have been pursuing this. We are wondering why this road is not prioritised and budgeted for so that we can generate more money for this country. My prayers are:1. That the Minister of Finance, through the Prime Minister, should update this House on the progress made in pursuing  money  for tarmacking this road from BADEA, the Arab bank based in Khartoum.2. The Government should find money, in this budget, so that we can work on that road to generate more money for the country.3.  There were two bridges that were done on the road; Wariki Bridge and another in Vurra. We want the minister for works to come and update this House on why the projects stalled, yet there are seven other bridges to be done.4.  Nebbi-Vurra Road, there is a road from Panyimur to Pakwach, along the Nile, which is a tourism and security road. We pray that it be included as an oil road 11432THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029because there are prospects – I am a natural resource person – of oil along the Nile. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Let the minister for works respond to this matter on Thursday next week.MR BIYIKA:  Mr Speaker, I beg to lay this report of the consultancy services for feasibility and detailed engineering design of selected national roads, Lot 2 and Lot 4: Nebbi-Goli-Paidha-Zombo-Zeu-Warr-Vurra-Lia-Odramacaku Road. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Where did you get it from? MR BIYIKA:  From Uganda National Roads Authority.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay. (Laughter)  I need the source. Hon. Sarah Opendi has just reminded me about the directive of the President while he was in Kasese, about all roads linking the border posts. However, let the Minister of Works and Transport respond to this matter on Thursday during the Prime Minister’s Time and we follow it up.I was in Paidha while I was the Government Chief Whip. I reported the matter to the Cabinet and the President, indeed, talked about that area. That is a read that we must give priority. (Applause)3.05MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding a Government stock farm that Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire has grabbed. In the process of grabbing it, he arrested a breastfeeding manager, whom he did not even allow to breastfeed.The most important thing, Mr Speaker, is that when you are charged with custody of and responsibility over a Government, if we do not stop this level of impunity, we will wake up one day when, Mr Speaker, you have also taken over Parliament and you will say: “Someone has sold it to me.” (Laughter)How can a Government minister say that a Government farm was sold to him? His duty should have been to arrest – since he is even in charge of internal affairs – people who grab a Government farm. However, he simply claims that he bought it from them. If I had a way, I would get Gen. Otafiire and those who sold the farm to him and send them to Luzira.Since I do not have this power, Mr Speaker, can the Government tell us whether the level of degeneration has reached this far, that a minister can go and take over a Government farm, arrest a breastfeeding manager and even tell her not to breastfeed? Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. (Mr Ssenyonyi rose_)  LoP, do you have something to say?3.07THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Joel Ssenyonyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a legal matter related to this issue. There is a High Court ruling that set aside a special certificate of title that introduced third party interests, which included Gen. Otafiire’s. His was a third party interest. So, his interest is inconsequential, legally speaking.Two, this Njeru Stock Farm houses the only livestock breeding plant for the whole of eastern Uganda. Three, this very farm hosts the only liquid nitrogen plant that serves all hospitals in eastern Uganda. So, for the minister, with impunity, to grab this farm, he is depriving ordinary folks of service delivery. Mr Speaker, if we allow such impunity to prevail, we shall be depriving the ordinary folks of service delivery.There are certain positions that require a certain level of dignity and discipline. If you occupy an office, as a minister, you must operate with dignity and discipline. This is unacceptable, Mr Speaker.[Mr Ssonga] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR11433THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 25 JANUARY 2024THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. We have elders in this House, who usually guide us on such matters. I saw the minister for agriculture complaining and then you also have the minister for internal affairs raising his issues.Hon. Muruli Mukasa, such matters –(Laughter ). The Cabinet Secretariat is under Public Service: the Office of the President is the head of Public Service.3.09THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Muruli Mukasa):  Mr Speaker, before I say anything as an elder, allow me to say Happy New Year and, specifically, welcome you back to this honourable House.The matter that has been raised regarding our senior colleague, Hon. Otafiire, is a grave matter, but it is not a new one. I think it has been around in the air for quite some time and I think some legal steps were taken, as we have just been updated by Hon. Ssenyonyi.The best thing would be, in the circumstances, for us to request Hon. Otafiire to come and make a personal statement. Allow me, Mr Speaker, to quote a Luganda proverb, which says:  “Lubaale wo mulamu tasamilirwa.”  In other words, the short and long of it is that Hon. Otafiire is here; he is an actor in the matter that has been raised and I think it would just be opportune for him to come and make a statement on Thursday and, maybe, clear the air.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you for the guidance, Elder. Honourable colleagues, I want you to bear with me on this matter. To begin with – that is why I had to seek the wise counsel of our elder. Unfortunately, honourable minister, the steps you have advised us on are under Rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure. A statement of personal explanation should be initiated by that person. So, we cannot just order someone.I know Parliament handled this matter – Hon. Sarah Opendi, would you like to say something?MS OPENDI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. As rightly said by Hon. Muruli Mukasa, this is not a new matter. The Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries extensively investigated this matter and a report was presented to this House, with recommendations. Maybe we need to pick the discussion and recommendations that the House passed and we start from there.As far as I remember, the Government was asked to get back its farm and, if Gen. Otafiire has any legal claim, then, maybe he can be compensated. Otherwise, it is not a new matter in this House. Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. I want to give my final guidance on this matter. Let the Prime Minister handle this matter, come and report to this House in two weeks. Let us give the Prime Minister time. I saw Cabinet ministers exchanging in the media. I think we give the Prime Minister a chance and maybe the Cabinet at its level. I saw the minister in the papers saying he would raise it in the Cabinet. So, let us give them a chance and the Prime Minister should report back in two weeks. What is very important is that the manager should be released. Prime Minister, take up this matter. If a manager of a Government facility is arrested by the Government for protecting the facility, please, come in and save her. Just ensure she is released so she goes to breastfeed, as you sort out the issues with the General.MS NAKADAMA:  Mr Speaker, much obliged. We are going to follow up on the matter. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Next item.  11434THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON CELEBRATIONS MARKING THE 38th NRM/A VICTORY DAY ANNIVERSARY .THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Minister for presidency – 3.14THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ETHICS AND INTEGRITY) (Ms Rose Akello):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me join my colleagues to welcome you back to the House and wish you and your colleagues a Happy New Year. On behalf of the Minister for Presidency, I am presenting a Ministerial Statement to Parliament on Celebrations Marking the 38th NRM  Victory Day Anniversary. Mr Speaker, this ministerial statement seeks to inform Parliament about the 38th NRM/A Victory Day Anniversary, which will be celebrated on Friday, 26 January 2024. It is a day when our fellow countrymen and women, either dead or alive fought for a fundamental change through a protracted people’s struggle that lasted for five years under the visionary leadership of His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. Mr Speaker, the 38th Anniversary NRM/A Day celebrations will take place in Jinja City on Friday, 26 January 2024. Mr Speaker, wide inter-ministerial consultations with the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs (MoDV A) political commissar; Uganda Media Centre and Cabinet, among others, were carried out for a theme to appropriately signify the importance of holding these celebrations. The theme takes cognisance of all the efforts and sacrifices made by the brave men and women to liberate Uganda from anti-people forces that had held citizens hostage, during the immediate post-independence era of our country. Mr Speaker, it is for the above considerations that the theme of the 38th NRM/A Victory Day Anniversary celebration is: “Building a Country we all Cherish”. The proposed theme fits into the wider NRM Manifesto 2021-2026 Theme in which, His Excellency the President and NRM Party committed to secure the future of all Ugandans over the next five years. Thus, the proposed theme for the 38th NRM/A Victory Day forms a basis to access and report back to the wider Uganda populace towards building and bequeathing a country we all cherish and, by extension, a point of reference within the region and the continent. Mr Speaker, an inclusive and detailed synopsis reflecting upon the aforementioned theme is being prepared. The synopsis will demonstrate how much the NRM has achieved in securing the livelihoods and future of Ugandans by building a foundation for pan-Africanism; social-economic transformation, democracy and patriotism, which are the building blocks for Uganda to be cherished by those living today and those to come in posterity. This synopsis shall be circulated to all Resident District Commissioners, district chairpersons, and the Chief Administrative Officers to guide their publicity programs on this auspicious occasion. Mr Speaker, thanksgiving prayers were held as follows: i. Friday, 19 January 2024 - prayers in all mosques; ii. Saturday, 20 January 2024 - prayers in all Seventh Adventist churches; iii. Sunday, 21 January 2024 – prayers in all other churches. The publicity programme for this event began two weeks ago. This includes the following: a. Talk shows and discussions at both the national and district level. At the national level, they were held on televisions and radios that have country-wide coverage. These media houses included UBC Group, Vision Group, NTV , NBS, and Top TV . b. Social media campaigns organised by the Uganda Media Centre on WhatsApp, and Instagram started at least two weeks before the D-Day. MINISTERIAL STATEMENT11435THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 25 JANUARY 2024c. Talk shows by RDCs at the district level on local radio stations across the country. The Uganda Media Centre will send information to all RDCs focusing on the theme and synopsis to facilitate the dissemination of similar messages to the masses countrywide. d. Syndicate articles in the print media by the Uganda Media Centre to engage editors of various newspapers to publicise the day. e. Display at strategic locations in Kampala and the Busoga subregion of PVC banners to further enhance our publicity.f. A press conference by the minister in charge of the presidency was held on Monday, 22 January 2024 at 10 a.m. at the media centre. g. Live coverage of the main event by UBC, television, and at least, three other private TV stations. The Vision Group, NBS, and NTV . h. A commemorative magazine published by the Uganda Media Centre to be distributed on the D-Day to the guests at the venue. i. A synopsis, which was prepared by the Uganda Media Centre was surveyed to RDCs to enhance publicity by our various media partners. Mr Speaker, the National Organising Committee (NOC) has so far extended invitations to approximately 800 dignitaries to sit in the presidential tent in strict adherence to the COVID-19 standard operating procedures. The above notwithstanding, the district leadership will mobilise the general public in big numbers who will not require invitation cards and COVID-19 tests to attend their celebrations. (Interjections)  These will be seated in the 5,000 seater tents as well as 300 seater tents to shelter them from sunshine and rains.  (Interjections)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, the minister is presenting her statement as provided for under rule 52. The content of her statement is her content. We can agree with it or not, but let her finish her statement then we see how to treat it. (Applause)  Please, honourable minister, conclude. MS ROSE LILLY AKELLO: Mr Speaker, the National Organising Committee has not received any indications of state visitors to grace the occasion. I will provide an update on this matter as new developments unfold. Arrangements have been made to serve all the invited guests with lunch, a soft drink and water on the D-day at the venue. On the other hand, NOC will make a provision for the general public to have a meal and drink after the function, which will be coordinated by Jinja City.  (Interruption)MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, you gave the Minister for the Presidency an opportunity to present a statement on Liberation Day. She is now telling Parliament how many bottles of soda will be drunk –(Laughter)-  and how many banners will be put up. Is she in order not to read the statement for which you gave her the opportunity? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you read the statement? (Laughter)MS ROSE LILLY AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was trying to tell my friend, Hon. Ssemujju, that you will have enough food and drinks there. (Laughter)A parade will be mounted by the UPDF, Uganda Police Force, Uganda Prisons and Uganda Wildlife Authority. A total of 34 guards will be earmarked to participate in the parade. The breakdown is here. Each guard will comprise 20 persons –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Go to the investiture ceremony, honourable minister and conclude.11436THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029MS ROSE-LILLY AKELLO: My apologies. Each guard will comprise 20 persons. The forces will be expected to wear their respective ceremonial attire during the celebrations. The discipline forces will, in January 2024, start with in-house rehearsals at their respective grounds, while joint rehearsals will start on the 20th. In conclusion, I wish to urge all those persons invited to attend this function, especially the political leadership in the Busoga Subregion, to turn up for this celebration. I beg to submit, on behalf of the Minister of the Presidency. Thank you. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable colleagues, such a statement, under Rule 52(2) of our Rules of Procedure, may be debated. I have chosen that it should not be debated. It is an information statement; the information is very clear. Next item - (Hon. Namugga rose_)LAYING OF PAPERS(I) THE OPPOSITION’S RESPONSE TO THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2024/2025 TO 2028/2029THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the shadow minister lay, then I allow your point of procedure, Hon. Namugga. Shadow minister –3.25MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the LoP, I beg to lay a response to the National Budget Framework Paper 2024/2025. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, the Leader of the Opposition invoked rule 53 that allows him to bring statements, including responses to the National Budget Framework Paper and others. Clerk, please, upload this document on Alfresco for Members to be able to read through. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will also receive it, so that it helps you note points, which you can consider when you are doing the final budget estimates.The LoP could not bring it here earlier because Parliament was on recess. However, the shadow minister happens to be a member of the Budget Committee and the views of the Opposition were presented there. How they were handled; that is a matter for another day, for which we shall be getting an update once the report is ready.With that, it does not require us to again refer this to the Budget Committee when their report is ready, since the issues were captured. I would like that clarification to be made and put on record. I am going to suspend the House for five minutes, so that the Chairperson of the Budget Committee can come and present the next item. I had allowed Hon. Namugga to speak before that.MS NAMUGGA: Mr Speaker, I thank you. I also join my colleagues to wish you a Happy New Year. As you know, I was the shadow Minister of Science, Information and Communications Technology. When my sister was communicating about publicity - I do not intend to respond to her statement, but I wanted to bring to your notice something that is very important to this country and for the Minister of ICT to update this country about communication and publicity.Uganda Broadcasting Corporation will be in charge, as a national broadcaster, of ensuring that Ugandans watch this event. I would like to inform this House that UBC’s Signet was cut off and we cannot have free-to-air. UBC is highly indebted, but the minister is comfortably seated here, when his colleague is submitting about publicising all these Government events on the national media. Can the minister clarify why Ugandans cannot watch free-to-air TV using the UBC media? Thank you. LAYING OF PAPERSLAYING OF PAPERS11437THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 25 JANUARY 2024THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Namugga is raising a very critical matter. When we were moving from analogue to digital, we were assured that those who could not afford those pay-per-view pay stations would be able to get free-to-air channels, including UBC. Signet has been off. Honourable Minister of ICT, any update for us?3.30THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank my sister for raising this issue. The migration process from analogue to digital has been on, but it is not yet completed due to budgetary constraints. (Interjection)  You have asked for a response and I am giving it to you. I do not have to say what you should hear; I say what is factual.Regarding –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Baryomunsi, here is some guidance. We have found that sometimes, when we are cleaning up the Hansard ; when you start responding to voices, which are not on record, someone who is reading the Hansard  and did not understand what they were saying says, “What is wrong with this person? He should have been flowing”. Please, do not bring matters, which are off  record on record, through your responses. (Laughter)DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the guidance. Therefore, I should be listened to in silence. (Laughter)  The issue that Hon. Namugga is raising came as a result of the satellite company cutting off those free-to-air stations because UBC had failed to raise $1 million. You recall that we recently passed a supplementary budget, which included sources for UBC to the tune of Shs 24 billion, so that issue is being sorted –(Interjection)  Yes, we passed the supplementary budget before we went for Christmas. The payments are being done and the free-to-air stations, which had been cut off will be restored. (Interjection)  well, I can come back and get a specific date. The Speaker has ruled that you should not interrupt me. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Baryomunsi, please, go ahead. DR BARYOMUNSI: We thank Parliament because it approved the supplementary budget and the management of UBC, together with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development are doing the necessary payments so that it is restored. However, we got guidance from the President that starting this financial year, the Government is to allocate at least Shs 30 billion to UBC and part of the work will be to complete the migration process and therefore, those challenges will be sorted as we allocate additional resources. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Now, honourable colleague, this is a very direct matter. Please - this is a matter on which we passed a supplementary budget. Let us wait and see whether money has been released in the third quarter. DR BARYOMUNSI: Regarding tomorrow’s function, it is a national function and it will be relayed live by UBC and other media houses.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Baryomunsi, I had expected that you would start by thanking Ugandans for putting on smiles during the NAM Summit. ( Laughter) Those who could not smile used pegs; everyone was smiling. DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, let me take the opportunity to thank Ugandans for having worked together so that we have successful summits, the NAM and the G77+China. I did make a comment that we should show hospitality and not hostility to the delegates. By the way, we always traditionally do it, that even when we have challenges, when the 11438THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029visitors come, we should not display those problems and, indeed, Ugandans complied. Therefore - ( Laughter)  I, therefore, take the opportunity to thank all Ugandans, including parliamentarians for smiling and it continues even post-NAM. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. House suspended for five minutes so that we can have the chairperson of the Committee on Budget coming in and we receive the report on the National Budget Framework Paper (NBFP).(House suspended at 3.34 p.m.)(On resumption at, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Can I have order in the House? Next item.  MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2024/2025 TO 2028/2029THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Minister of Finance – Can the Whips talk to their Members in the corridors at least to reduce their volume? 3.40THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING, AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Mr Speaker, pursuant to Article 155(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Section 9, 3 and 5 of the Public Finance Management Act and Rule 145 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to move a motion for adoption of the National Budget Framework Paper for Financial Year 2024/2025 to 2028/2029. I beg to move. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Is the motion seconded? Hon. Mulimba, Hon. Kawooya, Hon. Nankabirwa, Hon. Omara, Hon. Ninkusiima, Hon. Rwemulikya, Hon. Nsibambi, Hon. Komakech, Hon. Olanya - nearly the whole House. Honourable minister, would you, in summary, justify your motion?MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The NBFP for the Financial Year 2024/2025 was drafted and guided by the theme of “Full Monetisation of Uganda’s Economy through Commercial Agriculture, Industrialisation, Expanding and Broadening Services, Digital Transformation and Market Access”. Mr Speaker, the total funding for the next financial year is projected at Shs 52.722 trillion, comprising domestic revenue of Shs 29.958 trillion, budget support of Shs 28.94 billion, domestic financing of Shs 4.116 trillion, project support of Shs 8.877 trillion, domestic refinancing amounting to Shs 9.456 trillion, and the local revenue (NTR) of Shs 287.1 billion. Mr Speaker, all these resources will be utilised and spread across the 20 NDP III Programmes.Mr Speaker, also to note is that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is working on the tax measures, which will be tabled in this House as part of the Budget submission for your scrutiny and approval in April. Mr Speaker, what are our priorities for next financial year’s budget? 1. Peace and security 2. Roads3. Electricity4. Funding to activities that earn us money, for example, the Parish Development Model and other wealth funds. 5. Investing in the people of Uganda6. Adequate planning for natural disasters and international commitments. Mr Speaker, five growth areas have been prioritised under the overall budget strategy of growing the economy tenfold to be implemented starting the Financial Year 2024/2025 and these are the following:1. Tourism development 2. Agro-industrialisation 3. Mineral-based industrial development [Dr Baryomunsi]11439THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 25 JANUARY 20244. Oil and gas development, including petrochemical industries and,5. The knowledge economy. Mr Speaker, we are cognizant of the complementarity of other Government programmes to the attainment of the above growth targets. The Government will continue to support other key interventions and priorities under the NDP III Programme. Mr Speaker, we laid the NBFP in December and it was referred to the Committee on Budget. We have been involved in responding to several issues raised by the committee, and also, we have supported it in processing the report. I already have the report in my hands. At this point, I beg to move that you allow the committee to present its report. I beg to move. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable minister. Committee chairperson, I will request you to do a summary, mainly focusing on recommendations, but then the Clerk will capture the whole report on the Hansard  so that anyone in the future who is following up can get the full report. 3.46 THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET  (Mr Remigio Achia):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Committee on Budget processed the NBFP for 2024/2025 to 2028/2029. I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the proceedings of the committee. I also lay on the Table the reports from the sector committees. Mr Speaker, there is also a minority report, we were given notice, but up to this minute, we have not received a copy, but the notice is here. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Do not mind, the minority report will be presented immediately. MR ACHIA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. A report of the National Budget Committee on the National Budget Framework Paper for the Financial Year 2024/2025 to 2028/2029.  Mr Speaker, as you guided, I will look at the recommendations, but briefly, to say that;In accordance with the provisions of Articles 90 and 155(4) of the Constitution, Sections 9(1) to 9(8) of the Public Finance Management Act, and Rule 45 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, committees are mandated to discuss this and we have done that. Part One: Legal Compliance; Mr Speaker and colleagues, compliance of this budget to the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.  In accordance with Section 9 of the Public Finance Management Act 2015, the committee noted that some of the requirements were not complied with and the committee recommendations are that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure that it complies with all the requirements as per Schedule 3 of the Public Finance Management Act. Observations of the committee with respect to the Budget Framework PaperThe committee observations:i.  The Financial Year 2024/2025 budget is the last budget for delivering on the National Development Plan III. However, only 17 per cent of the NDP III results have been achieved as at the end of 2021/2022. This poor performance was mainly attributed to the challenges all of us know associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and the global economic downturns, the slow implementation of most of the 69 core projects. We want to observe that only 20 core projects are under implementation, among others. ii.  The NDP III target to reduce poverty from 21.4 per cent to 18.5 per cent by 2024/2025 was not achieved as it stagnated at 21 per cent. 11440THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029iii.  The NDP III targeted to maintain core inflation within the target band of 5 per cent, according to the National Budget Framework paper, core inflation is projected at 3.8 per cent in 2024/2025, 4.4 per cent in 2025/2026 and 4.5 per cent in 2028/2029. This means that the microeconomic stability of our country is in good hands.iv.  One of the observations across board was that the allocative efficiency at programme level is largely consistent with the NDP III as the share of the budget allocations indicated in this budget (Financial Year 2024/2025), are largely consistent with the share of budget allocations as provided in the MTEF. v.  Lastly, we noted that programme planning, costing and monitoring capacity in many ministries, departments and agencies and even in local governments is still inadequate. Mr Speaker, people are still working along the sectors instead of programmes as indicated in the NDP III. The committee recommends that:a. Government should strengthen economic growth prospects and reduce poverty in the medium term. It should also have specific interventions in each of the productive sectors matched with resources allocation and targeted to the poorest and vulnerable persons across the regions of the country. The resources and interventions should be invested in more human capital development and productive programmes, such as agro-industrialisation, tourism and the manufacturing sectors, among others.b. Programme planning, costing and monitoring capacity in both MDAs and local governments must be strengthened if we are to achieve the intentions of our development budget.c. Going forward, the National Planning Authority should develop plans that are informed by more realistic fiscal assumptions and lessons learned from the challenges in effective execution of the previous plans. As you noted, 17 per cent is off target. The targets in the plans should be matched with resource allocations during plan implementation through the annual budgets. Mr Speaker, on the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility as required by law, the committee noted and recommends that the budget for the short and medium-term should fully comply with the fiscal responsibility requirements and any deviations must be guided by Section 7 of the Public Finance Management Act, inclusive of the reasons for the deviation and adjustments to be done to bring the nominal debt to GDP back to the CFR path over the remaining financial years.On gender and equity requirements, the committee noted that there has been remarkable improvement since the last financial years. As this time round, only one programme did not satisfy the requirements for gender compliance. However, no specific measures to equalise opportunities for men, women, persons with disabilities and marginalised groups were provided alongside the gender certificate as presented to this Parliament by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.We, therefore, recommend that:a. The programme secretariats that do not submit the required programme budget framework papers on time should be subjected to the sanctions as provided for in Section 78 of the Public Finance Management Act; b. Equal Opportunities Commission is supported more to undertake periodic national gender and equity gap-mapping surveys instead of doing it at the end of the financial year; c. More capacity building should be undertaken at all MDAs, especially with regard to the gender disaggregated data collection tools. [Mr Achia]11441THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 25 JANUARY 2024On climate change responsiveness of the NBFP, the Minister of Water and Environment assessed all the 20 programmes and it is worrying that only 10 passed above the 50 per cent mark - it is interesting, Mr Speaker, that Parliament was one of the worst performing in response to climate change. On the Contingencies Fund, the committee observes that in this budget, only Shs 169 billion has been provided for, when it should have been 0.5 per cent of the previous budget, that is, Shs 263 billion. However, this is a good improvement. Mr Speaker, I beg to move to Part 2 of this NBFP Paper on the different sectors. I think Members can read the Microeconomics Framework Information on inflation, exchange rate and debt in that part. Part two are recommendations from the different sector committees together with their observations and recommendations and the suggestions from the Committee on Budget. Committee on Presidential AffairsV ote 001: Office of the PresidentThis is page 53, capacity building for RDCs, RCCs, Deputy RDCs and Deputy RCCsThe committee recommends that provision of an additional Shs 1.5 billion to V ote 001 to cater for the capacity building of RDCs and other relevant officers be provided in this budget. On office accommodation for RDCs, the committee recommends that an additional Shs 2.8 billion be availed annually to V ote 001 to enable the Office of the President to construct five offices, each financial year so as to mitigate the challenges of office accommodation of the RDCs in the medium term.V ote 107: Uganda AIDS CommissionThe committee recommends that Shs 3.2 billion be provided to V ote 107 to facilitate dissemination of HIV prevention messages to the general population, including the vulnerable youth in schools and those out of schools. V ote 158: Internal Security Organisation (ISO)The committee recommends that the Government considers provision of an additional Shs 42.9 billion to enable ISO enhance recruitment of agents to avert the increasing threats of corruption, terrorism, cybercrime, organised crime, livestock thefts and negative foreign influence. This money could also go a long way to strengthen the foundation of a security in the Kampala metropolitan area and rolling it out to other cities and hotspots across the country.It goes to increase coverage of field deployment gaps at regional, district, borders, cities, municipalities, resettlement camps, subcounties, town councils and parish levels across the country. Enhancement of technical infrastructureThe committee recommends that Government provides Shs 26.67 billion to ISO to enhance the operational capacity of the new technical equipment that was bought recently, its maintenance and expertise to facilitate the ongoing classified special operations for effective and efficient delivery of the mandate bestowed upon them.On inadequate budget provisions for administrative support, the committee recommends that the Government provides Shs 12.493 billion to V ote 158 to enable ISO to effectively facilitate their operations for timely information gathering.On the construction of the Institute for Security and Strategic Studies, the committee recommends that Government provide Shs 22.9 billion to V ote 158 to enable ISO to construct the Institute of Security and Strategic Studies.Wage shortfallThe committee recommends that the Government provides Shs 3.529 billion to V ote 11442THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029158 to enable ISO fulfil the wage obligations and strengthen its human resource.V ote 159: External Security Organisation (ESO) Foreign Intelligence ManagementThe committee recommends that Shs 3.187 billion be provided to enable ESO to efficiently and effectively maintain foreign diplomatic stations, foreign strategic areas of interest and field stations.Retooling of External Security OrganisationThe committee recommends that Shs 28.883 billion be provided to enable ESO acquire the modern technical and transport equipment as well as classified assorted assets. Budget enhancement to administration and financeThe committee recommends that Shs 17.724 billion be provided to ESO to effectively execute their mandate. Construction of ESO headquartersThe committee recommends that Shs 30.781 billion be provided to V ote 159 to start the construction of ESO headquarters. V ote 167: Science, Technology and InnovationsEstablishment of Uganda’s Biosciences ParkThe committee recommends that Shs 44 billion be provided for the biosciences park because it will mitigate the spreading of scarce resources to many parts of the country such as universities, yet interested scientists can converge at the biosciences park as a one-stop centre for the equipment so that they can carry out research efficiently.Inadequate budget provisions to Pathogen Economy ProjectsThe committee recommends that Shs 29.83 billion be provided to support research and development (R&D) in vaccines, therapeutics, diagnostics and human capital development for the pathogen economy. However, the indicative allocations to support projects must be broken down to particular intervention to ease provision and monitoring.Lack of budget provision to commercialisation of sericultureThe committee recommends that Shs 17.8 billion be provided to V ote 167 to facilitate interventions in the commercialisation of sericulture in Uganda.Inadequate funding for the Uganda National Council for Science and TechnologyThe committee recommends that Shs 3.5 billion be provided to the National Council for Science and Technology to enable them to execute their mandate.Proposed allocations to National Science, Technology, Engineering and Innovation Skills Enhancement Project  (NSTEI-SEP) ProjectThis is a project on teaching/skilling young people in engineering and technology innovation. The committee recommends that the funding gap of Shs 19.4 billion be provided to (NSTEI-SEP) to enable them to operationalise the skilling centres, I think, in Lyantonde and Rushere.Proposed budget allocations to the space programmeThe committee recommends that a funding gap of Shs 9 billion be provided to the space programme to develop the country’s capabilities in this industry.Proposed budget allocations to the Innovation FundThe committee recommends that Shs 37.5 billion within the medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF) ceiling be allocated to the known on-ongoing project which have been [Mr Achia]11443THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 25 JANUARY 2024highlighted. However, the Shs 37.5 billion must be broken down to specific activities – the committee was interested in the breakdowns.The committee, therefore, recommends that Shs 20 billion be provided for the management of uncertainties in this area – as we faced COVID-19, you know what happened. Committee on Gender, Labour and Social DevelopmentV ote 018: Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social DevelopmentRestoration of funds reallocated from the ministry when finalising the budget for Financial Year 2023/2024The committee recommends that Shs 32.9 billion be reinstated and mainstreamed into the MTEF to comply with the proper budgeting principles and avoid a paralysis of critical services in the ministry. Integration of Kiswahili language in UgandaThe committee recommends that Shs 3.25 billion be provided to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to enable the ministry to implement the activities under the Kiswahili integration. Co-funding under the GROW ProjectThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development avails funds worth Shs 2 billion as co-funding to support interventions under the Growing Livelihood Opportunities for Women (GROW) enterprise.The National Apprenticeship and Graduate V olunteer SchemeThe committee recommends that the ministry for finance avails funds worth Shs 5 billion to cater for the operationalisation of the National Apprenticeship and Graduate V olunteer Programme.Withdrawal, Rehabilitation and Settlement of Street ChildrenThe committee recommends that the ministry for finance avails Shs 0.15 billion for the withdrawal, rehabilitation and resettlement of street children in all the urban centres of the country – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable committee chairperson, sorry for the interruption. I was checking the Act and I am seeing a mismatch between your report and the budget. You are given a budget based on programmes. However, you are reporting on sectors. You should be showing us what has happened and what should be given to a programme, not sector by sector.MR ACHIA:  You are right, Mr Speaker. This was one of the observations we noted. Whereas, we have moved from sector-wide approach to programme approach, as Parliament, we have not reorganised ourselves and our committees to reflect that change. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  That is why the Committee on Budget consolidates. So, you should have consolidated the sectoral committees into clear programmes so that - because now the report is not aligning with the budget framework paper which was presented here. Hon. Ekanya, how do we proceed on this? Oh, you are a member of the committee ? (Laughter)  I do not know - if you had followed the programme the way they are and consolidated the different sectoral committees into clear programmes the way the budget was presented, it would have been very easy.4.07MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo North County, Tororo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a committee, we faced a challenge from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – we need to be honest and I think the chairperson is failing to tell the truth. We were in a difficult situation on whether to bring the report or not. However, 11444THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029because our work is basically to report to the House, the chairperson engaged the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to make a written commitment, especially on the budget ceiling and the expenditure. The minister committed to putting in writing some of those issues so that that letter is laid on the Table. When the deputy chairperson started presenting, I did not see that letter.So, being a member, I decided to diplomatically allow the process to continue. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable chairperson, would you want to say something about this? I want us to be aligned. The minister for finance could also come in.4.08THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Patrick Isiagi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we are delegated to process, we get input from our sector committees. The sector committees present in the form of a sector having a number of V otes within the sector. Even when we go ahead, at the tail end of the budget process, we shall supply monies to V otes, not programmes.  So, this issue of programmes is still a dilemma which has not been aligned at all stages. This would call Parliament to amend the rules to form ourselves into programme committees. But we are still at a stage where there is a dilemma even when at the end of the day, finance will bring all proposals in terms of votes. We can say still these votes fall under what they call programmes and up to today, I think it is now the fourth year, when they are talking about programmes. The programmes would now mean us budgeting from zero and justifying each activity in its total entirety and there is nothing like that as yet.The prayer is that we continue with this Budget Framework Paper and still go back and ask both finance and us, Parliament to re-organise ourselves. If the word “programme” - Mr Speaker, one time we asked maybe this programme thing is coming for the purpose of procuring another software, but at the end of the day, we are not seeing any big difference in it. I beg to move.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleague, that is a very good observation, but my concern is: if we receive the Budget Framework Paper in programme form and   process the report in a sector form - At the level of the Committee on Budget - maybe our technical people should have - I know that the chairperson has been working hard and the work has been too much. Our technical people should have consolidated these votes under programmes so that when you are reporting here, we start with one programme and finish it; go to another programme and finish it.4.11MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Mr Speaker,  I think we have to be true to ourselves. Members of the Committee on Budget were, as at 2.00 p.m., still signing the report which is even why you had to suspend Parliament.I do not want to embarrass the committee to which I am a member, but the circumstances under which we work - there was even no minute to do the consolidation. I can assure you, Mr Speaker, if we had submitted a report, you would never have suspended Parliament to allow Members to continue signing.My prayer is to allow us to continue because this is NRM standard. (Interjections)  In the future –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Ssemujju this is Parliament. This is the report of Parliament, not a report of the Government or NRM.MR SSEMUJJU:  Okay, if you are offended, I withdraw. We will blame someone for these standards. I have said, I have withdrawn. I want to make you comfortable. These are the standards. [Mr Ekanya]11445THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 25 JANUARY 2024I want to request you, Mr Speaker, to allow the committee to make a presentation. This committee has worked. There was a day, the Hon. Opolot-Isiagi made us stay in Parliament from 9.00 a.m. up to 9.00 p.m. I told him we even have a marital obligation, but he said we continue.Those are the circumstances; there was no time for the technical people to consolidate. I do not think consolidation is very difficult, but there was no time to do so.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, we are working in statutory deadlines. This is not where we have the luxury of having much time and Chairman Opolot-Isiagi and team, I know what you have been going through. He has been updating me. These people have had sleepless nights so I really want to appreciate you, as a committee. (Applause) The only question I would ask the minister so that we proceed very well is how he will process this. We are giving you a report in sector form yet you gave us the Budget Framework Paper in programme form. Assure us that you will be able to process because it will help you so it meets the standards of the Budget Framework Paper.4.14 THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Mr Speaker, I want to first of all thank the Budget Committee for their tireless effort to come up with this work. I was very impressed with them yesterday from 9.00 a.m. up to 4.15 p.m. and I left them working. Now that we are here, we are not far away from where we want to be. All this information can still be linked to the 20 programmes which I am interested in. After Parliament has made a decision, we shall consolidate this information and put it back into the 20 programmes so that we give it the meaning we want to get from it. I pray that we continue, Mr Speaker, with your guidance. The chairperson should continue and will receive the report. Then after the report has been adopted, I undertake that we shall consolidate it and bring it back into the programmes. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: With your assurance, let us continue. Let the Committee on Rules Privileges and Discipline study this issue as raised by the chairperson and report back within three weeks so that we know how we can harmonise so we look very clean.Chairperson, do a summary, because when you go vote by vote, we shall sleep here.MR ACHIA:  Mr Speaker. I do not know how to know how to do the summaries. I think I will not miss to read the vote which deals with the African Cup of Nations (AFCON) because some people want to hear the details in that.Let me go to the vote for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. We took the recommendations as suggested. Members will read the recommendations. We have the National Women’s Council -we have the National Youth Council; we have the National Insurance Authority –Regarding the Industrial Court, there is recruitment of three judges of the Industrial Court and so, we have provided Shs 1.3 billion to cater for this recruitment and the usual votes which are there. Equal Opportunities CommissionWe have recommended that Shs 2 billion be availed to strengthen the capacity of the state and non-state actors to mainstream equal opportunities and affirmative action and their need for headquarters. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development needs Shs 4.5 billion for rent provided for National Planning Authority (NPA). We have the National Population Council, the National Lotteries and Gaming Regulatory Board –11446THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029Uganda Free Zones AuthorityWe have given them Shs 4.4 billion to help them to expand their activities. We got some revenue of Shs 100 billion last year from them. V ote 129: Financial Intelligence Authority (FIA) We have requested that Shs 2.8 billion be provided to FIA in Financial Year 2024/2025 to review all the anti-money laundering laws.Under V ote 153: Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets, it is just capacity building. Under V ote 163: Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority, it is the usual activities; nothing new.  Uganda Revenue Authority (URA)The committee recommends that URA be provided Shs 55.9 billion this Financial Year, 2024/2025 and the remaining Shs 111.9 billion be provided for across the medium term in order to facilitate the recruitment of 1,278 staff and for effective mobilisation of revenue.Furthermore, the committee recommends that URA be provided with Shs 9.16 billion and the remaining Shs 22 billion across the medium term in order to develop an oil and gas monitoring system and position itself to process oil and gas information. Under Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority, there are regulatory aspects.Office of the Auditor-General The Office of the Auditor-General be provided with Shs 30 billion to recruit additional human resources in order to do more value for money audits.Under the Committee on East African Community Affairs, non-user recommendations.  Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Judiciary need Shs 11.082 billion during this coming financial year to implement the new plans and finish the building. IGG, we have given money for digitalisation; The Parliamentary Commission - we have provided for the wage shortfall. Uganda Law Reform Commission –have been given money to acquire one station wagon for the chairperson.V ote 106: Human Rights Commission We want their budget announced so that they can do their work well. On Law Development Centre – members can read. URSB (Uganda Registration Services Bureau), we have provided that the committee recommends that Shs 3.9 billion be given to URSB to implement its new staff structure.Also, the Directorate of Public Prosecutions (DPP) - the committee recommends that Shs 25.8 billion be provided to the Office of Director of Public Prosecutions to recruit and promote staff with the aim of increasing the scope of criminal prosecution and with it, as you read in the papers today, the Judiciary is expanding and creating more circuit courts. They need more staff. We also gave Shs 10 billion to construct their upcountry offices; Shs 10 billion for procurement of transport equipment for the state attorneys; Shs 8 billion for security and procurements.V ote 010: Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and FisheriesOn the Parish Development Model, the committee recommends that a total of Shs 10 billion be provided to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to support the National  Parish  Development  Model (PDM) activities and also for the [Mr Achia]11447THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 25 JANUARY 2024ministry to fast-track the implementation of the Agricultural Value Chain Development Strategy. Extension servicesa)  The committee recommends that an additional Shs 10 billion be allocated in the budget to facilitate recruitment and deployment of additional extension staff. b) The shortfall of Shs 5.4 billion for the rollout of e- extension systems across the country, be provided.c)  The committee further recommends that where extension workers have been deployed, a study should be done to assess their impact on agricultural activities in those areas. Agricultural mechanisationa)  The committee recommends that with the Climate Change Smart Funding, priority should be given to the already existing mechanisation centres by recruiting enough staff, providing sufficient equipment, and when they are fully operational, the other remaining centres can be embarked on instead of creating new centres. b)  The ministry must formulate and present before Parliament a national mechanisation strategy and equipment management and distribution policy so that this country can know how the tractors are being distributed.c)  Lastly, a total of Shs 20 billion be provided for equipping and operationalising the mechanisation centres and another Shs 10 billion for the purchase of ox-ploughs and an additional Shs 6 billion for rehabilitation of water harvesting facilities. On Dairy Development Authority, Members, the provisions are there. Page 106, National Agricultural Research Organisation - NARO -a)  The committee recommends that Shs 3.3 billion be provided for production of Aflasafe technology. b) Shs 3.5 billion be provided for the development of soil suitability maps. Cotton Development AuthorityThe committee recommends that Shs 170 million be provided in the budget for Financial Year 2024/2025 to enable the Cotton Development Authority to set quality standards for Ugandan cotton. Pader Seed Processing Planta) The committee recommends that Shs 300 million that was allocated in the Financial Year 2022/2023, but later not released, be provided in the coming financial year for external works on drainage, drying bays and landscaping.b)  Shs 1.172 billion be provided for operational activities, for security, labour and that sort of thing. Support to cotton production developmentThe committee recommends that Shs 5.210 billion be provided to support cotton production in the country. Uganda Coffee Development AuthorityMr Speaker, people are unanimous that the Shs 49.9 billion, which was for coffee seedlings and was not paid, should be cleared. These coffee seedling arrears should be cleared. The committee also was very strong that the Uganda Coffee Development Authority is doing a great job and that a budget for the procurement of more coffee seedlings be reinstated under Uganda Coffee Development Authority, so as to increase production to meet the strategic objective of the coffee roadmap of Uganda, not to put everything in the PDM.11448THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029V ote 006: Ministry of Foreign Affairsa)  This was very important. The committee recommends that the annual budget requirement totalling to Shs 25.054 billion for subscription to international organisations, be provided to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and priority should be shifted to settlement of international subscription in order to protect Uganda’s image abroad and safeguard our interests and also avoid embarrassments. b)  The committee strongly recommends that all the subscription arrears totalling to Shs 41,867,512,120 should be transferred to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs budget from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to sort this problem. c)  All subscription arrears transferred there should be settled by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as a one-off. d)  Lastly, provide additional Shs 14.4 billion for economic and commercial diplomacy, including business expos for all the embassies. Our embassies are suffering; they do not have money for business expos instead of us flying from Uganda to do business expos there. There is also a committee recommendation that there will be provision for a budget line for post-Summit activities for Non-Aligned Movement and G77, with a provision to the tune of Shs 4 billion for the next three financial years since Uganda is the Chair.There was also the removal of funds, which was treated as travel abroad, but for ambassadors, it is considered as internal travel. The committee recommends that the budget for travel abroad totalling to Shs 4.55 billion for the ministry be given, and Shs 11.65 billion for Missions Abroad should be reinstated to support the core functions of the Missions Abroad.Committee on Physical InfrastructureV ote 016: Ministry of Works and Transport; the details are there. The committee recommendation would be to the effect that the committee urges the Government to prioritise safety of inland transport by availing Shs 4.60 billion for immediate interventions.a)  On Regional Mechanical Workshops, the committee recommends that Government avails Shs 23 billion annually for the maintenance of the road equipment to facilitate improvement of the DUCAR network.b)  Government rehabilitates all mechanical workshops with an aim of improving their capacity to deal with the increased equipment needs, as well as cater for the advancement in technology that is being used in the manufacture of the road equipment. c)  Lastly, that Government considers establishing mechanical workshops in a phased manner at sub-regional level to ease access and improve the level of equipment availability in the districts. On the road equipment for the 16 new districts and 10 new cities, and urban councils, the committee recommends that Shs 18.3 billion be provided for refurbishment of old Chinese equipment and for the distribution to municipalities as well as providing equipment to the new districts.Also, another Shs 21 billion should be provided for DUCAR.I am on page 117; Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development The ministry’s zonal offices, which were built with money from donors - the committee recommends that the ministry provides Shs 4.3 billion towards the operationalisation and maintenance of those offices. [Mr Achia]11449THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 25 JANUARY 2024Development of Physical Development Plans The committee recommends that additional funds be provided for the development and implementation of physical and land use plans in the Financial Year 2024/2025. The committee further recommends that Shs 10 billion should be allocated towards physical planning, as it will go a long way in enhancing physical planning and empowering the National Physical Planning Board of Uganda. VOTE 017: MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT Persistent Underfunding of Mineral Development Programme.The details are comprehensive on the gaps, but the committee recommends that Shs 12.6 billion is provided for the maintenance and certification of the National Minerals Laboratory, among others. V ote 019: Ministry of Water and Environment (a)  Compliance to the National Climate Change Act, 202l The committee recommends that the Government should provide Shs 10.9 billion for mainstreaming climate change in all the Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs). (b)  Inadequate Budgetary Allocations to Service Coverage Acceleration Project The committee recommends that the Government provides Shs 35 billion to this project, which has impacted the provision of improved water supply services to the urban population across the country.  (c)  Support to rural water supply project - source per villageThe committee recommends that the Government should provide Shs 50 billion to support the improvement of water storage and network expansion countrywide. (d)  Strategic Towns Water Supply and Sanitation Project (STWSSP)The committee recommends that the Government should provide Shs 12 billion as the counterpart financing requirements under the STWSSP project.(e)  Water for Production Project Phase IIThe committee recommends that the Government provides Shs 40 billion for the Water for Production Project Phase II.(f)  Inadequate Budgetary Allocations to the Water and Sanitation Development Facility of South Western Uganda (WSDF-SW)The committee recommends that the Government prioritises funding for water and sanitation facilities in south western by providing an additional Shs 25.2 billion.(g) Restoration of the environment through tree planting and restoration of critical wetlands.The committee recommends that the Government provides a total of Shs 15 billion for the restoration of the environment through tree planting and Shs 10 billion for the restoration of critical wetlands.The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Water and Environment emphasises community tree planting at the expense of other options. (h)  Inner Murchison Bay Clean-up ProjectThe committee recommends that Shs 22.5 billion be provided for this project.(i) Water resources implemented in priority catchmentsThe committee recommends that Shs 20 billion be provided for the implementation of the Catchment Management Plan. 11450THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029V ote 157: National Forestry AuthorityGovernment should provide Shs 1.5 billion for resurveying and demarcation of forest boundaries and Shs 3.1 billion for protection of forests in the coming financial year.Inadequate budget for the provision of tree seedlingsWe have recommended, as a committee, that Shs 5 billion be provided for tree seedlings and Shs 3 billion for industrial forest plantations.  V ote 302: Uganda National Meteorological Authority (UNMA)The committee recommends that the Government should provide Shs 7 billion under UNMA for the unfunded priorities. V ote 013: Ministry of Education and SportsThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits an additional Shs 30.6 billion to the Ministry of Education and Sports for grant-aiding both primary and secondary schools.Finalising the Higher Education PolicyThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development gets an additional Shs 500 million for finalising the Higher Education Policy.Facilitation for Secondary School GamesThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development gives Shs 23.304 billion to facilitate secondary school games.Higher Education Students Financing Board (HESFB)Mr Speaker, we know how you are passionate about education in Uganda and equity. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides an additional Shs 6.75 billion to provide loans for a total of 6,180 students on top of the Shs 21 billion provided for.Mr Speaker, this was your passion with what you did in this Parliament recently.V ote 165: Uganda Business and Technical Examinations Board (UBTEB)We have provided money for Uganda Business and Technical Examination Board and money has been provided for the Uganda National Examination Board (UNEB) and an additional Shs 6.5 billion is needed.Conducting Transitional ExaminationsThe committee recommends that Shs 8.6 billion be provided.Securing accommodation for hosting marking and enhancing marking examinations in the new curriculumThe committee recommends that an additional Shs 6.5 billion be given to UNEB.Enhancing marking fees for examinationsThe committee recommends that another Shs 4.6 billion be given.The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits additional Shs 8.5 billion to cater for travel in-land and Shs 2.9 billion to provide extra security for examinations.V ote 166: National Council of SportsThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits Shs 380 billion for the construction of Hoima Stadium - Shs 180 billion; Akii Bua Stadium, Shs 100 billion; and Buhinga Stadium, Shs 100 billion. That is the split and recommendation of the committee for the construction of all those beautiful stadia – Akii Bua, Buhinga, and Hoima. Therefore, Shs 380 billion will be split. (Applause)[Mr Achia]11451THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 25 JANUARY 2024Construction of 1l Training Grounds for AFCON 2027The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides Shs 20 billion to the National Council of Sports for the construction of 11 training grounds for the African Cup of Nations 2027.National Anti-Doping Organisation (NADO)The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides Shs 3 billion to the National Council of Sports as a subvention to this organisation.V ote 132: Education Service CommissionThis has been provided for.V ote 111: National Curriculum Development Centre (NCDC)The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides Shs 1 billion for the review of the Advanced Level curriculum. We have been told that under the new curriculum, our students are sitting this year, but the A’ level curriculum has not been reviewed. Therefore, we need money to review it because after the Senior Fours sit their examinations, where will they go?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Mr Chairperson, read the report.MR ACHIA: Okay, thank you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)  V ote 309: Gulu University The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits a total of Shs 5.6 billion for salary harmonisation; Shs 2 billion for degazettement of Gulu Central Forest Reserve and Shs 3.36 billion to the Karamoja University for the preparation of architectural and engineering designs and production of Bills of Quantities for the proposed Constituent College of Gulu in Karamoja.V ote 306: Muni UniversityThe committee recommends that Shs 2.7 billion be provided for the renovation and expansion of Madi-Okollo farm.V ote 310:  Lira UniversityThe committee recommends that Shs 9 billion be provided to complete the main administration block.V ote 313: Mountains of the Moon UniversityThe committee provides Shs 5 billion for the construction of the Faculty of Science and Technology.V ote 004: Ministry of Defence and Veteran AffairsLand AcquisitionThe committee recommends that UPDF be provided with Shs 157.3 billion to compensate for all claims brought against it.V ote145: Uganda Prisons Services (UPS)The committee recommends that an additional Shs 5 billion for the implementation of Phase II of the Prisons Information Management System be provided for.Relocation of Prison’s Headquarters The committee recommends Shs 3 billion for rent during the Financial Year 2024/2025 and Shs 40 billion over the medium term for UPS to procure new premises for its headquarters.Prisoners feedingThe committee recommends that the provision of Shs 79.973 billion budget be provided to pay for the outstanding arrears for prisoners feeding during the Financial Year 2023/2024.Land Surveying and Boundary OpeningThe committee recommends a provision of Shs 2 billion in Financial Years 2023/2024 11452THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029and 2024/2025 to survey the un-surveyed five pieces of land of Uganda Prison Service. Staff UniformsThe committee recommends that the provision of additional staff uniforms be prioritised over the medium term. The committee recommends that an additional Shs 5.685 billion be provided to procure prisoners’ uniforms.V ote 135 - Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory (DGAL) The committee recommends that an additional Shs 34.3 billion be provided to DGAL to undertake phase 2 of the DNA data bank construction and the rest be provided over the medium term.Operationalisation of Government Analytical Laboratory Regional Laboratories The committee recommends an additional Shs 12.4 billion to operationalise the regional forensic labs during the FY 2024/2025.Acquisition of Modern Scientific EquipmentThe committee recommends an additional provision of Shs 4 billion for the procurement of modern scientific equipment to provide independent scientific forensic analytical services as well as aiding the administration of justice, public health and safety during the FY 2024/2025.V ote 020: Ministry of Information and Communication Technology and National GuidanceStrengthening of Communication of Government Programmes and National OutreachThe committee recommends that the Government allocates Shs 23.7 billion for strengthening communication of Government programmes and national guidance outreach for FY 2024/2025 as well as the creation of employment opportunities for the skilled population by leveraging on business processing outsourcing and innovation.The committee recommends that the Government allocates Shs 5.9 billion for our young people for the creation of employment opportunities for the skilled population by leveraging on BPO&I. Support the Integration of e-Government SystemsThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance provides Shs 4.5 billion for the integration of all e-government systems in Uganda instead of different institution budgeting.Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC)Electricity for Signet Network for transmission sites and broadcasting stations - We are going for AFCON.The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development allocates Shs 3.36 billion for power payment by the UBC.Annual satellite fees for content distribution to direct free digital-to-air for the people of Uganda to enjoy the AFCON.The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development allocates Shs 1.542 billion to cover the annual satellite fees.Procurement of an outside broadcasting van for TV and simpler OB kits for each radio bandThe committee also recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides Shs 6 billion for the procurement of the outside broadcasting van and kits for each radio brand.Uganda Institute of Information and Communication Technology (UICT)[Mr Achia]11453THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 25 JANUARY 2024Insufficient Staff Levels and Wage BillThe committee recommends that Shs 5.394 billion be provided to UICT to enhance its wage bill affecting the staffing levels.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  We are capturing the whole report on the Hansard  and we have four days of reading this report. Just conclude.MR ACHIA:  Thank you. There is a vote on Posta Uganda Limited, which is provided for.Vision GroupWe have provided Shs 2.9 billion to revive vernacular newspapers namely Orumuri, Etop  and Rupiny .Uganda Media CentreWe have provided Shs 134 million towards the recurrent expenditure for the things that they do not have.The Committee on Public Service and the Local Government Finance Commission - we have provided some money.V ote 014: Committee on the Ministry of Health The committee recommends that Shs 3 billion be provided for setting up the Organ Transplant Council.Inadequate funding for regional equipment maintenance workshops - Shs 12.3 billionInadequate Funding to support the Renovation and Equipment of HospitalsThe committee recommends that an additional Shs 16.2 billion be provided in the Financial Year 2024/2025 to facilitate the renovation and equipment of hospitals and health facilities, Shs 16.61 to upgrade health centres IIIs to health centres IV and health centres II to health centres IIIs and the renovation of existing ones and Shs 7.7 billion for completion of CT-Scan housing, as had been planned.The other provisions were provided to the Ministry of Health on the commitment of non-functional ambulances. We have recommended that Shs 54.69 billion be provided for procuring 157 ambulances for the remaining constituencies. ( Applause)Primary Care ServicesMoney has been provided on human resources for health. We recommend that the Government should lift the stay-onrecruitment moratorium imposed on waiver on the recruitment of critical human resources, especially for heath.Government should continue with building houses for health workers.Government should ensure that adequate financing is provided to fill the vacant positions in all health facilities at least to the level of 70 per cent.Uganda Red Cross applied for money for that -Uganda Cancer Institute money has been provided.An additional Shs 8 billion was provided for medicines and sundries. Shs 12 billion for the functioning of the regional centres in Gulu, an additional Shs 3.16 billion for cancer prevention and detection and Shs 20 billion for establishment of a nuclear medicine facility/PET centre.Uganda Heart Institute - money was provided. An additional Shs 51 billion be provided for the establishment of four regional cardiac centres.National Medical Stores There are a number of recommendations here - Mr Speaker, the country may need to know.An additional Shs 435.7 billion be given to National Medical Stores to boost the supplies of essential medicines and health supplies in a phased manner starting with Shs 87 billion in the coming financial year.11454THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029The committee retreats its earlier recommendation that an additional Shs 4 billion be provided to NMS for procurement of a kit of glucometers, BP machines and thermometers for 3000 health workers across the country.Uganda Virus Research Institute - money has been provided to a tune of Shs 2.6 billion.Health Service Commission for recruitment – Shs 500 million, Uganda Blood Transfusion Shs 2.4 billion - we need blood in this country.Kawempe Regional Referral Hospital requested an additional Shs 6.1 billion for the recruitment of additional staff and also a funding gap of 0.87 be provided to Kawempe for maintenance of equipment.Kiruddu Hospital funds have been provided and the details are in the report.Mulago National Referral Hospital money was provided.Mr Speaker, generally, all the hospitals’ money was provided for including all the regional referral hospitals of Soroti, Jinja, Masaka, Fort Portal, Hoima, Mubende, Lira, Entebbe, Naguru, Kawempe, Yumbe, Kiruddu and Moroto. All these have been provided for, Mr Speaker. Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, page 180 The committee recommends that the Government should expedite the appointment of the Uganda Export Promotion Board (UEPB) and allocate an additional budget of Shs 9.4 billion to develop exports and discover new markets for Uganda in view of the worsening trading imbalances recently noticed after AGOA. Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) should be supported to support our export sector with an additional resource. In conclusion, Mr Speaker, we have Annex 2, which provides a summary of the funding requirements to cater for critical Government programmes. Therefore, in accordance with Section 9(8) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and Rule 145 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the committee recommends that the proposed National Budget Framework Paper of the Financial Year 2024/2025 to the Financial Year 2028/2029 be approved by this Parliament with amendments as per the committee’s recommendations. I beg to report, Mr Speaker. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable chairperson and the committee. The shadow minister, do you have a minority report? 4.50THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This minority report has been signed by me, Hon. Yusuf Nsibambi, Hon. Nkunyingi Muwadda, Hon. Ronald Kanyike, Hon. Allan Ssewanyana, and Hon. John Baptist Nambeshe – (Interjection) – Hon. Silwany, when you are a commissioner, you do not heckle. Mr Speaker, we will restrict ourselves to major issues on the National Budget Framework Paper and the areas of disagreement. The first area is non-compliance of the National Budget Framework Paper with the law. The second area of disagreement is the suspicious domestic revenue figures. The third area is the conflicting public debt figures. The fourth one is reckless borrowing and wastefulness. The first issue, on non-compliance with the law, processing of the National Budget Framework Paper is the most important stage in the formulation of Uganda’s National Budget. Framework, in ordinary terms, means foundation. If you are to compare a budget to a building, the components you can talk about are the foundation, walls, beams, columns and the roof. [Mr Achia]11455THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 25 JANUARY 2024The materials required for the construction of the National Budget Framework Paper are outlined in Schedule 3 of the Public Finance Management Act and they include a statement of revenue for the annual budget for the next financial year. This is a statement of the resources to be approved by Parliament and used by the ministry in preparation of the budget for the next financial year. This statement, according to the law, Schedule 3, must indicate the following:1. The ceiling of the expenditure of Government in the financial year; 2. The flow of the investment of Government in the financial year, and 3. The ceiling on total budget funding from the petroleum revenue holding account in the financial year. The National Budget Framework Paper referred to the Committee on Budget had two ceilings. The first ceiling appears on page 18 and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, casually describes it as a preliminary resource envelope for the financial year and they say it is projected -(Dr Baryomunsi rose_)  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure? DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rarely interrupt honourable colleagues on matters of procedure or order. Sorry, Hon. Ssemujju. I have heard the grounds the honourable member is raising and I seek procedural guidance from you, Mr Speaker, because my understanding of a minority report is that members of a committee disagree with a decision taken by the majority members, not an opinion that one holds, say on the debt: GDP ratio of what Finance is presenting. My understanding is that a committee sits, takes a decision, but you defer from the majority. If I can read rule 205(1) about minority report, “A Member or Members dissenting from the opinion of a majority of a committee may state, in writing, the reasons for his or her or their dissent. The statements of reasons shall be appended to the report of the committee.”  Therefore, what I expected was for Hon. Ssemujju to say, “the majority of the Members said this, but for us we differ in this way.” However, this is not what I pick from Hon. Ssemujju. May I be guided on whether the report he is presenting is in compliance with what the rules expect? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. To begin with, these are not Hon. Ssemujju’s words. They are for the Members who signed the report. Secondly, in the introduction part of the report, he states that “this is where they dissent from the majority report.” This is because these issues, which were presented in the National Budget Framework Paper - He felt the majority or the committee should have disagreed with what the ministry proposed. However, the committee agreed with some and disagreed with others. This is where the discretion will be on the Members to either agree with the assessment of the minority report or not, when we reach the adoption stage. Usually, it is very difficult to deny Members a chance on the minority report. We might not be satisfied with the level of content therein, but it is difficult. It is a very thin line for the Presiding Officer. Therefore, let us listen to him and then during the debate, this is where we shall focus, Hon. Baryomunsi. I am happy that Hon. Ssemujju has come back with a smile. (Laughter)  I have a new requirement from Hon. Baryomunsi. MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I only want to ask Hon. Baryomunsi to be patient. I am giving you the frame then at the conclusion, I will tell you why we disagreed. Otherwise, it would have been a one-sentence report, that “we disagreed on this” and then I would have sat down. The National Budget Framework Paper referred to the Committee on Budget, as I said, had two ceilings. The first ceiling is Shs 52.7 trillion. The second ceiling is Shs 54.5 trillion, appearing on page 342. When this matter was brought to the attention of the honourable 11456THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029minister Musasizi, who is strangely doing the work of his boss these days, and is the one who has carried the National Budget Framework Paper –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Can you read the report, Hon. Ssemujju? (Laughter)MR SSEMUJJU: This is in the report, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)  The chairperson of the committee, Hon. Patrick Opolot-Isiagi, suspended proceedings of the committee to allow the minister and his team to look for a solution when the matter of two ceilings, which is a matter of law, was brought to their attention.They congregated in the corner of a committee room and, after a lengthy discussion conducted while standing, returned to announce that they were now reducing the allocation of the Shs 54.5 trillion by Shs 1.8 trillion. This is the drama that you missed, honourable colleagues, who are not members of this committee. (Laughter)Mr Speaker, Hon. Musasizi told the committee that the Shs 1.8 trillion was being removed from V ote 130: Treasury Operations – which is debt servicing and management that is allocated Shs 21 trillion, nearly 40 per cent of the entire budget.Hon. Musasizi, however, noted that this V ote meant to service our public debt is Statutory and I think he would later look into the Budget with a view to re-instating the money he was removing just to allow the process to continue.Mr Speaker, this Parliament is not allowed to raise the ceiling of the Budget. Parliament is limited to reallocating smaller percentages because the biggest amount in the Budget is Statutory. Once the Government has presented a National Budget Framework Paper containing the ceiling of expenditure for the next financial year, even the Government is not allowed to casually and unnecessarily tamper with it. That is why it is in the law. That is why section 13(6) makes it a requirement that the Budget must be consistent with the National Budget Framework Paper.It is, therefore, our contention – now, Hon. Baryomunsi can listen – Mr Speaker, that on this account alone – this level of fidgeting – the National Budget Framework Paper did not meet the legal requirement – and even the committee said so – to be approved by Parliament as instructed by section 9(8) of the Public Finance Management Act. What we are asking is simple: let the Government withdraw this framework and return, formally, with one that conforms to the law. It should conform to section 9(4) and schedule 3, which requires the inclusion of a statement indicating the Government’s expenditure ceiling for the upcoming financial year. This statement is supposed to be approved by Parliament and used by the ministry when preparing the Budget.Therefore, our disagreement is that the committee said: “The person is dead, but do not bury because he has children.” We are saying: “The body must be buried.”2. Suspicious domestic revenue figuresThe main reason the total budget is reducing by Shs 1.4 billion from Shs 52.736 trillion to Shs 52.72 trillion is because domestic revenue will grow just by Shs 285 billion, which is 0.9 per cent and the second reason is that donors are reducing budget support from Shs 2.7 trillion to a mere Shs 28.9 billion.Mr Speaker, we must be told what has happened to our economy. Domestic revenue, both tax and NTR, last financial year, grew by Shs 4.3 trillion, from Shs 25.3 trillion to Shs 29.9 trillion, which is 17.3 per cent. The previous year, domestic revenue had grown by Shs 3.4 trillion, from Shs 21.8 trillion to Shs 25 trillion. Even during the lockdown period caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, domestic revenue grew by at least Shs 2.1 trillion, which is 10 per cent, from Shs 19.6 trillion to Shs 21.8 trillion.[Mr Ssemujju]11457THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 25 JANUARY 2024It is not possible that an economy whose GDP is projected to grow from 5.2 to six per cent will have its revenue grow by less than one per cent. There is something that the Government is hiding from this Parliament. Either all the previous figures about domestic revenue growth were “cooked” and they are now telling us the truth or they want to do something fishy with our money.The table below illustrates the growth of revenue over a period of three years. What is possible is that they are deliberately hiding Shs 3 to 4 trillion, which they will later introduce as a corrigendum and distribute it the way they like. They did it last financial year. As the Budget Committee was about to present a report on annual estimates, Hon. Musasizi came running with documents that he had identified new money and even allocated it. This renders the budget process useless. First, they present you with a budget that is fully encumbered, because of Statutory obligations such as public debt, wages and other essential recurrent expenditures and then leave you with just about Shs 1 trillion to adjust. When you are done with the adjustment, they run to Parliament with corrigenda.The intention is to defeat section 9 and Schedule 3 of the Public Finance Management Act. This must be rejected and the finance ministry must be warned never to do it again. The ceiling they gave us today must remain the same ceiling throughout the Budget process, once it is approved.Assuming revenue figures were to be correct, then this Parliament must also ask: if our revenue is going to grow by just Shs 286 billion, why and who is the Government exempting from taxes?The Auditor-General, in his December 2023 report on page 178, queried tax exemptions amounting to Shs 1.4 trillion granted to various companies. The stated purpose for these exemptions, the Auditor-General says, is even not met, yet the practice continues.The Auditor-General also reports taxes amounting to $ 14 million, equivalent to Shs 52.2 billion, not collected from refined gold exports.A total of 70,830 kilogrammes of refined gold was exported and with $200 per kilogramme, the Government was supposed to realise at least Shs 52 billion in taxes. The reason, in our view, is because the people involved in gold exports are close to the President. Their businesses cannot be closed down by Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) the same way it is done to other businesses.The Auditor-General further discovered that tax on 22 mineral categories, worth Shs 72.4 billion of export, was not levied by URA because there are no tax assessments and payment on the export of certain minerals.This Parliament also needs to examine reports of numerous business closures over taxation and declining aggregate demand in the economy, the most recent being Biyinzika Poultry International Ltd, Shoprite, Uchumi, Game Stores, Nakumat, Picfare, Nytil, Dei and Biopharm that have all closed shop.The Uganda Registration Services Bureau (URSB) recently struck off the Government register 186,000 companies because they had not filed returns for five years.This, coupled with the closure of several medium and small size businesses downtown should worry this Parliament.All this may have impacted our revenue collection, but not to this tune that Hon. Musasizi is reporting. Parliament is being taken for a blind date, which it must flatly reject.The National Budget Framework Paper must be withdrawn and a new believable one introduced. If this Parliament is inclined and wants to approve it, at least, it must insist that the finance ministry does not return here with a corrigendum in the short time. (Applause)11458THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/20293. Conflicting figures on public debtMr Speaker, the Government, in the National Budget Framework Paper, projects to collect Shs 29.9 trillion, which is 56 per cent, to finance next year’s budget. The rest of the money, about Shs 22 trillion, will be raised through borrowing – internally and externally. When you approve the National Budget Framework Paper and later the annual Budget, it means Parliament has given the Government advanced permission to borrow. They have told you “this is how we will finance the Budget”, so, they will come here waving loan requests, saying “but you approved the Budget”.Unfortunately, at this stage, Mr Speaker, the Government is deliberately not disclosing all of the sources from which it will borrow. However, immediately the Budget is passed, this NRM group will be in the domestic market looking for someone who can lend it Shs 9.455 trillion to finance 17 per cent of the Budget. That is how they had shamelessly ended up at the doorstep of Amarog Capital Limited, the Kenyan money lender last financial year. It is this Parliament that stopped this embarrassment. They will return to the same market to look for Shs 4.116 trillion, representing 7.8 per cent. They will also borrow another Shs 8.876 trillion from external sources to finance 16.8 per cent of the Budget, bringing the total borrowing or debt to manage to about Shs 22 trillion, representing about 43.2 per cent budget financing. It is, therefore, important for Parliament to know the status of public debt and our ability to repay before you approve borrowing as one of the sources of funding the budget. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development puts the public debt at Shs 86.7 trillion while the Auditor-General, in his report to Parliament, says the public debt is Shs 97.499 trillion and the Bank of Uganda puts it at Shs 88.8 trillion. To arrive at the figure of Shs 97.4 trillion, the Auditor-General reports that debt stock has increased by 111 per cent in the last five years, from Shs 46 trillion in 2018 to Shs 97 trillion by 2023. This financial year alone, we have so far grown the public debt by Shs 9.3 trillion, which is 10 per cent because in June 2022, it was Shs 86.8 trillion. Growing the public debt burden is one area where the NRM has excelled and registered unenviable and disputable growth. Sometimes, honourable members, you need to know that this Government borrows for fun. For example, the Auditor-General, on page 45 of his report, says the Shs 14.5 trillion loans borrowed remained unutilised. The explanation given to the Auditor-General by the Secretary to the Treasury is the unreadiness of projects at the loan/grant contracting stage, delays in fulfilling both disbursement and effectiveness conditions, poor project management, absence of counterpart funds, and slow land acquisition. Before they do this, they are in the market borrowing. For God’s sake, if your project is not designed, why do you borrow money? Can you imagine, we have been fined Shs 5.5 billion for cancelling a loan we picked from AFD and KFW to finance the Musizi Hydro Power Plant. It is our considered opinion that before you approve the National Budget Framework Paper, you need to know the total amount we owe our lenders. (Applause)Domestic arrears There is a tendency to exclude money owed to local suppliers of goods and services to the Government from the total public debt. I think the intention is to make it look smaller. The Auditor-General puts the total domestic arrears to Shs 5.9 trillion. Minister Musasizi, in the National Budget Framework Paper, puts it at Shs 2.7 trillion. This is the money the Government owes its suppliers of goods and services. This amount increased by 31 per cent from Shs 4.5 trillion in the last financial year to Shs 5.9 trillion, according to the Auditor-General. [Mr Ssemujju]11459THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 25 JANUARY 2024Shockingly, only Shs 217 billion is being provided in the next financial year’s budget to clear domestic areas. As the Civil Society put it, it will take this Government, which will not be there, by the way, 35 years to clear domestic arrears without having to incur new ones. Like what has befallen many NRM promises, even the commitment control system, which means you contract only what you have been given, has collapsed. With all this revelation, you can hear ministers and their technical staff declaring that the debt is sustainable. You owe local suppliers Shs 5.7 trillion, you are budgeting Shs 200 billion and you are celebrating that the debt is sustainable. You cannot pay suppliers, you cannot pay all of the interests, you cannot repay external debt and for them, the economy is doing well. We are lucky, Mr Speaker and honourable members, that our President is guarded by thousands of Special Forces. One of these days, debtors would have handcuffed him and taken him to Kitalya Prison as the CEO of a company that has failed to pay them. Debt repayment burden The biggest burden the country faces is interest payment, especially on domestic debt. Imagine 14.5 per cent of our Budget, equivalent to Shs 7.6 trillion, will be used to pay interest on loans next financial year. In the Financial Year 2022/2023, according to the Bank of Uganda, we even failed to pay all accumulated interest. That is why the money required to pay interest rose from Shs 4.6 trillion to Shs 6 trillion this year that we are in, to now Shs 7.6 trillion. Bank of Uganda, in its December 2023 State of the Economy report, says, interest payments and principal payments are exerting elevated pressure on tax revenue to the extent that for every Shs 100 collected, Shs 32 is used for debt repayment. The Auditor-General notes, on page 43 of his report, that, interest to revenue benchmark has been overwhelmingly breached as evidenced above. It has been noted that 25 per cent of the revenue collected is used to service just the interest alone – 25 per cent of the revenue collected - not the principal.  Last financial year, we failed to service our external debt and as a result, the Bank of Uganda encroached on our reserves, reducing them from $4.463 million to $3.628.8 million. The Bank of Uganda is demanding about Shs 1.5 trillion to restock the reserves, which Hon. Musasizi will present as recapitalisation. They know the good language. This financial year, the demand was Shs 1.5 trillion. It is a vicious cycle that every year, you cannot pay, the Bank of Uganda comes to pick money. We are so burdened that the Government has put aside a whole Shs 20 trillion, which is about 40 per cent of the total Budget, for debt servicing and management. Even if the total Budget does not grow, the debt continues soaring. This year, the requirement for debt servicing is about Shs 16.5 trillion, which is growing to Shs 20 trillion. The withholding of donor funding because of human rights abuses is rendering the country vulnerable resulting to non-concessional loans for recurrent expenditure. In the past, we have been borrowing to fund major infrastructure, but we are now borrowing for all sorts of things, including wedding anniversaries for our revolutionary leaders. Last financial year, we borrowed $739.8 million from Stanbic Bank (Uganda) Ltd and Standard Chartered Bank at non-concessional terms to fund expenditures such as wage and administrative activities at high-interest rates, whose repayments are in the short term, according to the Auditor-General.Wasteful and avoidable expenditure The colleagues, with whom we have signed this paper and the others we represent, are also uncomfortable with the resource allocation. The budget for health, agriculture and education has been reduced. At the very minimum, at least, it 11460THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029must be maintained by making deductions in areas where a lot of wastage takes place, such as the State House and the President’s Office. Flawed allocation of the little resources the country has is what we must collectively and carefully, as a Parliament, seek to address when processing the National Budget Framework Paper. There are people in this Parliament who claim to love Mr Museveni more than Dr Besigye who treated him when they were fighting in Luwero. Even if you are one of them, you cannot justify the President keeping 266 vehicles at his residence, State House, and 400 vehicles under his office, yet the total number of ambulances in public facilities is just 178. The convoy of the President alone has 69 vehicles, as the table below shows. I do not have to go through this list; it is provided in the Presidency Budget Framework Paper. You can see 69 vehicles for our revolutionary leader, leading a country that has no ambulances.Mr Speaker, can you justify the President employing 761 staff in his office and 996 staff at his residence? Our leader employs, at his residence, at the taxpayers’ expense, 51 cleaners, 62 cooks/catering officers, 80 gardeners, 29 housekeepers, 10 dhobi and laundry attendants, 106 private secretaries, 14 room attendants, 22 presidential assistants, 59 waitresses/waiters and at his residence, he has 14 presidential advisors. He also has another 86 in his office. You can look at that list of all names; that they are advising the President. As I conclude, look at the staffing levels; we have provided a table there of Mulago. Mulago Intensive Care Unit (ICU) requires – and this is just a sample – 82 ICU critical care nurses; they have only nine. The President has 59 waiters and waitresses.The ICU Unit requires 45 nursing officers; they have only four. The President has 106 private secretaries. The ICU Unit at Mulago requires 28 specialist doctors; it has only three. Our President has 22 presidential assistants. As a result, at the Intensive Care Unit at Mulago with a 28 bed-capacity, only 14 are functional due to lack of adequate staff.Consequence of flawed resource allocation For 38 years - which we have been told in this Parliament will be celebrated - we have remained one of the leading exporters of maids to the Middle East. Why? It is because of the casual and leisurely way in which this Government has been handling our economy. Can you imagine we have not had a Governor for the Central Bank for two years? The consequence of the NRM’s flawed expenditure priority is the widespread poverty in the country. In its 2022 Multi-dimensional Poverty Report, the Uganda Bureau of Statistics put poverty levels (headcount) in the country at 42.1 per cent. The highest concentration of poor people is in Northern Uganda, according to UBOS reports, at 63 percent. The North is followed by the east at 45.7 per cent. In the North, the Karamoja Subregion, whose mabaati  were stolen by NRM ministers, is at the top with 85 per cent concentration of poverty, Acholi Subregion is at 64 per cent, West Nile is at 59 per cent, Lango at 57 per cent, Teso at 57 per cent, Buganda North is at 30 per cent, Buganda South at 18 per cent, Kampala is at 0.4 per cent – (Interjection) - I am concluding – (Interruption)DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, the reason why I am raising a procedural point – and I respect your guidance – is that the public is watching us. People now know what our rules speak about.I am not disputing whatever he is raising, but for clarity, some of us have been in this House for some time. What is envisaged under a minority report is that the minority members respond to what the majority members have raised. We listened attentively to the report of the majority; those lists of vehicles and issues of State House were not there.Mr Speaker, isn’t it procedurally correct that even when we want to please our voters by [Mr Ssemujju]11461THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 25 JANUARY 2024raising political sentiments, we stick to what the rules require us to present in this House? (Applause)  That is the procedural guidance I would like.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I needed to be guided - because we are handling the National Budget Framework Paper – on where this information on these issues was provided for under the National Budget Framework Paper that you are going to fund all this and that. If I can get guidance, then it will help me – (Mr Ssemujju rose_) - No, from the Minister of Finance, not the shadow minister. He is the substantive Minister of Finance.MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, all the information regarding this process is contained in the book, which I laid here. I would like him to confirm whether – (Interjection) - No, I know what I am saying. We should ask him to confirm the page –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is an honourable colleague.MR MUSASIZI: Hon. Ssemujju can tell us the page and make reference to the book where he is extracting information from.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju – and smile. (Laughter)MR SSEMUJJU: I am surprised, Mr Speaker, that Hon. Musasizi who prepared this document wants to disown it. He is now asking me to show him where the money is. If you want, go to the Security and Governance Programme; you will see in this report the sectors that are there and the money that you have provided yourself. If you can allow me a second to conclude – because I am concluding – I will give you the specific pages. I do not want to disrupt the flow of my reading, but in five minutes, I will show you, in this book, where you have allocated money to the Presidency and State House.Mr Speaker, this new report by the Uganda Bureau of Statistics looks at poverty not just in terms of the ability to access basic needs, but also access to other social needs such as education, health and building materials. Programmes to get people out of poverty are what we must concentrate on, as Parliament, instead of concentrating on fighting for the little that is available. We must immediately change expenditure priorities. The minister now disowns that there are expenditure priorities in this book.In conclusion, the National Budget Framework Paper raises significant concerns and violates section 9(4) of the Public Finance Management Act by omitting a budget ceiling, as required. The National Budget Framework Paper for Financial Year 2024/2025 further presents conflicting resource envelope figures, undermining its credibility. The lack of accurate revenue projections, conflicting public debt figures and extravagant public spending, as highlighted by the excessive use of vehicles by the President, reflect a broader issue of transparency and accountability within the Government. The recommendation to reject the 2024/2025 National Budget Framework Paper and demand a corrected version with a budget ceiling is justified, as it aligns with the need for accurate financial information and responsible fiscal management.Additionally, addressing the disparities in public administration and prioritising essential services over lavish expenditure is crucial for the well-being of the country and its citizens. Mr Speaker, I thank you. If you allow me five minutes, I am going to peruse the report and show the Minister before I leave here. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Dr Chris Baryomunsi raises a very important issue because the source of information is important. I would like to know the document that has the licence plates of the President’s vehicles. 11462THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FY s 2024/2025 - 2028/2029Secondly, on the list of presidential advisors, we have Ms Betty Bigombe, who is an ambassador; I do not know if she is still earning as a presidential advisor. Mr John Nagenda died; Ms Judth Nsababera is our ambassador in Guangzhou; Mr Yoasi Makaaru from Sheema died a long time ago - I do not know whether they are still earning as presidential advisors.This is a worry in terms of source of information, therefore, Hon. Ssemujju, it will be good to qualify the source of information and whether it is current. MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, this information is contained in the policy statement of the Presidency. Maybe the one thing I need to help colleagues to understand is, the National Budget Framework Paper looks at the previous financial year, the present financial year, and three financial years ahead. If you restrict yourself to what you think is in this financial year, you are making a very big mistake. That is why, when you are looking at it, you need to go back. These lists - I could never have edited them. I know that Mr John Nagenda died, but that is how they appear. Therefore, there is no way I would go and edit them.Under the NRM, we have had dead soldiers who earn a salary, we have generals of the military who are dead, but they are still, by law, members of the Uganda People’s Defence Force (UPDF) historical High Command. These things happen under NRM, but if I am given time, even on Tuesday, I will come here with specific pages where this information appears and encourage colleagues to read policy statements when they are brought here such that you do not look at this information as if it has come from Mars. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Ssemujju. Colleagues, we shall have a debate on the NBFP on Tuesday. Therefore, Government, you have time to prepare a response and clarify where someone has given wrong information. We shall give you a chance on Tuesday to clarify on these issues, but also, what I like about our laws is that they require full disclosure. Parliament passed a very good law in terms of disclosure. Therefore, we shall have a debate on this matter on Tuesday and Hon. Ssemujju has made it very clear that the NBFP is looking at many financial years. Now, I do not know whether he is saying that we throw it out; how shall we throw it out when it is even looking at other financial years? He has now made our work very easy. It is a document we are stuck with because there are financial years- even the financial year we are in is part of this NBFP, so, how are we going to throw it out? However, we can improve and I want us to have a well-structured debate. Honourable colleagues, I do not want to limit you on Tuesday in terms of time, but it will be a debate that will be informed by research, good reading and thinking; not quarrels and constituency issues, but a national picture. Number two, we have said, “Give money, give money”. I will be interested in knowing where this money can come from, if we can also look at it. I do not want us to accuse the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development next time by saying, “No, we told you to give this one money when we approved the NBFP and you never gave it.” We should also look at the sources of financing this Budget as we have proposed to look for money everywhere we are going. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, do you have an update for us on the issue of Njeru Stock Farm? 5.33THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama ): Mr Speaker, the update I have regarding the issue of Hon. Otafiire and the Government farm is that the manager was released immediately. She is out on police bond and she is right now in charge of the farm because people had fears that [The Deputy Speaker]11463THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 25 JANUARY 2024these animals feed every day; so, who would take care of them since you had given us two weeks? Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: House adjourned to Tuesday, 30 January 2024 at 2.00 p.m. (The House rose at 5.34 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 30 January 2024 at 2.00 p.m.)  