

Tuesday, 21 January 2020

Parliament met at 3.02 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting and I wish you a happy new year. I welcome the new faces on the Front Bench and those who have joined the Back Bench. They are all welcome. 

Honourable members, colleagues who were in the Ninth Parliament will recall hon. Gertrude Nakabira, Member of Parliament for Lwengo, who died during the weekend. As you know, she is not a Member of Parliament so it is not automatic that we bring her here. 

However, I would like to inform you about her death. I do not know when she will be buried but I thought I should let you know. I would like to invite you to stand up for a minute of silence. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hope that the Government will bring a motion later so that tribute can be paid to her. 

I have a few matters to raise. The first concerns the Copyrights and Neighbouring Rights Act which was enacted in 2005. At that time, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs was required to consult with the Registrar General of Companies to establish a Collecting Society.

Since that time, the society has not been established and the failure by Government to establish this society has occasioned grave injury to the performing arts, the designers, the authors, the playwrights and the musicians. Piracy in the industry has gone to impossible levels. The actors in the industry have suffered a lot of loss over time. 

On more than two occasions, I have spoken from this Chair and appealed to the Government to establish this society or in any other way to ensure that the law is being implemented. 

I was in Ottawa last week where I attended the meeting of Speakers and presiding officers. One of the Ugandans, a young man who produced the film on Kony, and I think I also informed you about that, met me there and said nothing has happened in relation to making this law. 

Musicians and actors continue to come to me. Everybody has come on board to petition but nothing has happened, yet the President spends a lot of time with comedians and musicians. Nonetheless, their industry is not being protected. 

I would now like to know from the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; when will you activate Section 82 of the Copyright and Neighbourhood Rights Act? It is very important. I have asked this question and I am giving you one week to come back to this House and inform the country. When will this law come into effect? When will you establish the Collecting Society so that the artists and innovators can be protected?

Honourable members, the second matter has to do with the Enguli (Manufacture and Licensing) Act. The object of this legislation was to regulate the manufacture, licensing and sale of “enguli.” You may be aware that the sugarcane growers will be allowed to add value to sugarcane and it might involve jaggery. 

Section 13 of the Enguli (Manufacture and Licensing) Act reads, “…unless one has been licensed by the minister, it is an offence to manufacture jaggery.” Such a license must be issued through an area licensing board. I would like to know whether we still have area licensing boards throughout the country. The license they give you must specify the maximum quantity that you are allowed to manufacture. It also requires you to make returns to the minister; how much jaggery you have manufactured. You can imagine.

Therefore, I would like to know from the minister whether the Enguli (Manufacture and Licensing) Act is still in force. If it is, can the minister tell us where the area licensing boards are so that the people of Uganda can know that they still have to go and get a license to manufacture jaggery? 

Also, in this era of liberalisation, should the jaggery industry really be regulated by the Government? Honourable minister, I am also giving you one week to come back and give us a response to that issue. 

The third one is to alert Members and the country about the numerous Ponzi schemes, where people tell you that you put in money for one week and earn double; the following week you earn triple. 

In the last two weeks, I have received petitions of people who have lost over Shs 20 billion. There is one group in Kampala. The Arua people who lost Shs 10 billion have also just left my office. There are so many responsible people that have also lost money.

Unfortunately, when I called the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – because you people got a license from the Microfinance Regulatory Authority, which licenses non-deposit taking; but now, they are collecting money, doing additional agreements and they really took very serious money. 

I would like to warn Members to, please, alert themselves and their electorate. Anyone who says they will give you a lot of interest very quickly – that should really raise questions in your mind that there is a problem with that scheme. 

Please, honourable members, be careful and inform your constituents so that they are not fleeced. It is really sad. There is a young man who came; he is going to get married. He came with his license from All Saints Church and a clearance from the medical that he has no HIV/AIDS and neither does his wife. He put in Shs 59 million and is getting married in March.

Another one, a retired police officer put in all his benefits of Shs 140 million. He was crying in my office. Another one put in Shs 200 million. There was another one of Shs 500 million - I did not want to hear any more. Therefore, honourable members, please, we have to really be cautious. 

Honourable members, finally, in our Meeting of Speakers in Canada, one of the things we discussed to improve legislation is the Bills Digest. For some time, I have not seen a Bills Digest in this House. It is a brief statement about a particular Bill to help members when they are contributing in the House. 

Therefore, I am directing the Clerk to start presenting a Bills Digest. It can be put on the members’ iPads so that they are able to get a quick summary of what the Bills are about.

For now, that is what I had to communicate. There are some matters of public concern. 

3.14
MR HILLARY LOKWANG (NRM, Ik County, Kaabong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on matters of national concern regarding the procurement of tractors by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

The smaller tractors were taken to Karamoja and the big ones to other regions. In Karamoja, they gave us tractors with 45 horsepower that can only carry two discs. The ones for weeding look like calves when you look at them. When you go to other regions, you see big tractors of between 85 and 90 horsepower that can carry three to four discs. The minister should come here to explain how they arrived at that. 

Secondly, regarding the issue of quarantine in Karamoja and other regions, the ministry directed that areas, which had a problem with animal diseases, should have their markets closed. When you go to Karamoja, they have closed all the cattle markets. Schools are opening soon but we cannot sell or slaughter any animal. We cannot even drink milk. The ministry has never provided drugs to treat the animals. Now, the little food that people have is being sold off in order to treat the animals.

The minister should come here and explain all these issues. Thank you very much.

3.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate what my brother has just put across on issues related to the horsepower of tractors. We shall verify what he has just stated here and come back and report. 

However, I would like to say this; tractors are designed to work in certain conditions of soils. The soils in far eastern Uganda and northern Uganda are light soils. Therefore, you may find that our agriculture engineers could have found it fitting that tractors of horse power kind are the ones that can suit that kind of soil –(Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you asked the minister to explain and that is what he is doing. Please, first listen. 

MR BAGIIRE: We are going to establish and find out why the tractors in Karamoja have a lower horse power and we shall come back and explain as to why the technical people took that kind of decision.

In relation to diseases and quarantine, of course, it is known that whenever there is an outbreak of a disease in a given area, more especially diseases that are contagious, quarantine is slapped on that particular area. 

After a review of the status, if the disease challenge has gone down, the quarantine can be removed. This is another matter that we are going to review and report back to this august House. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, before you come back on the review, it is becoming customary to put quarantine in particular areas of the country towards the end of the year. How can it be that Government does not know that there is going to be an outbreak? Why don’t we vaccinate? Every Christmas, there is a quarantine. 

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Speaker, we take that concern seriously and we are going to discuss it at the ministry and find out why quarantines are slapped around that period of time. We shall come back and tell this august House. Thank you.

MS RWAKOOJO: Madam Speaker, last year, we were discussing the issue of Foot and Mouth Disease in the cattle corridor and in Gomba in particular. We ended on a note where we did not find out whether Government was going to provide vaccines or acaricides. If we could have a nationwide exercise for this in areas that are affected, it would help us. 

MR JOHN BAPTIST LOKII: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think the issue of placing quarantine on areas affected by Foot and Mouth Disease is becoming common in the country. There are districts in Uganda, especially in the cattle corridor, which have had quarantine for more than 10 years. A district like Isingiro has had 17 years of quarantine. This is unprofessional. What is guiding this? You are slapping quarantine in an area and you are not carrying out vaccination. 

Recently, there was a vaccine procured by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries but it was found to be fake. How do you expect Uganda to effectively control the epidemic of Foot and Mouth Disease? 

In the whole of East Africa, it is Uganda, which is doing poorly in terms of livestock diseases control. What is the country doing? We give money every year to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries but we keep seeing outbreaks of cattle disease and there are quarantines slapped every other time. 

Now, even in areas where there is quarantine, you find that one or two people who are highly placed are selling their livestock at the expense of other farmers. That is very bad. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Interruption)

MS BANGIRANA KAWOOYA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving me way. Madam Speaker, as you may be aware, last week one of our colleagues, hon. Ssekikubo, was harassed on the same issue by interested parties. Lwemiyaga is not listed anywhere for having Foot and Mouth Disease but because of personal business interests and to subject the people of Lwemiyaga to economic hardships. That is what happened. I have seen that hon. Ssekikubo is going to make a statement but this problem concerns all the districts that are in the Cattle Corridor. We would wish to discuss it as a major issue that is on the Order Paper. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you, on behalf of the people of Lwemiyaga, for the support you have given hon. Ssekikubo to explain the issue. He even had a petition before this House. I pray, on behalf of my other colleagues and the Cattle Corridor districts, that we are given a priority to present the issues that concern us. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance to direct the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to come and give a comprehensive report on all the quarantines since 1987. The other time, the Member for Kazo organised his people to carry spears and go to the Resident District Commissioner’s office. He said the RDC conspired with some Generals and declared certain districts to be having Foot and Mouth Disease so that they sell their cows during the festive period.

Every year, in the entire north and parts of eastern Uganda, when it is time for Christmas, Independence or Tarehe Sita, they declare Foot and Mouth Disease and put guns on the roads so people cannot sell beef. They leave the beef business to a few Generals. When the festive season is over, they lift the quarantine.

Madam Speaker, I request you to direct that we have a comprehensive statement in the House on all the quarantines from 1987 up to today, so that we know these people who are doing business using their positions in Government. I have some names that I would like to mention to this House at an appropriate time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said, I find it unacceptable that people in this country can be condemned to poverty year after year. Where would the cattle keepers earn money to pay school fees? Honourable minister, we want a comprehensive statement on the quarantine and we also want to know why you have failed to vaccinate the animals in this country.

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Speaker, I think this should not only concern the minister. This is a concern brought by Parliament. The ministers know about this and they have known about this for long. I pray that you direct the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to come up with a report – (Interjections) - I do not care whether it is a select committee but a committee of Parliament should carry out a thorough investigation and bring out all these issues for us to debate and make conclusive decisions. It should not be a minister. 

3.27
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I remember when I was the vice-chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries in the Financial Year 2017/2018, we raised this same issue and we even noted that there is more vaccination of stray dogs than cows. Actually, these stray dogs are vaccinated and released back to the streets to wait for another vaccination.

The ministry needs to brief Parliament on what they are doing. These issues were already reported by the committee. The committee reported that there is need for vaccinations. In fact, even if it is not free, we recommend that there should be availability. Even if you have money, you cannot access these vaccines. The issue is not that people are not able. Even those who are able cannot get the vaccines. The ministry should explain why they are more interested in stray dogs than cows.

THE SPEAKER: Let the minister bring a statement and after debating, we will take a decision on whether to do more work with the committee. Minister, you know you are violating Article 40 of the Constitution – the rights to have an economic activity. Can we give you one week to report back to us?

3.29
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. If you may allow, I would like to add to the directive you have given. When the Member for Iki-Iki raised the issue of the tractors, I sat here wondering why in some parts of the country, we are not even aware that there are ongoing distributions of tractors, cows, hoes and all these other things by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. There is selective distribution of items across the country.

I, therefore, request that the minister comes with a comprehensive statement to this House covering even the issue of the tractors, hoes and cows and detailing where they are being distributed and who are benefiting as well as the quantity being given out. Some of us sit here and we just hear that things have gone, yet, we are all Members of Parliament and our people equally want these services.

Let the minister come here with a comprehensive statement stating all these items being distributed. Who are these who benefit and who are we who do not benefit? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, there have been complaints about the hoes and there are now complaints about the tractors and other things that you are distributing selectively.

3.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Again, I seek for some time to go and extract all the information that colleagues have requested for and we come here to explain.

3.31
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, in the 1980s, our Government carried out privatisation of companies and one of the major companies that we had in the eastern part of this country was Uganda Grain Milling Company, which was company was employing more than 600 people. After the privatisation and their termination, these people have never got their benefits. 

This has been done with a lot of effort from the union to the extent that they wrote to you, Madam Speaker. They also wrote to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as well as His Excellency, the President of this country who cleared them through the Attorney-General and the Solicitor-General and directed the ministry to pay.

I am happy that some of them are here with us today. As you seeing their age, honourable members? Some are in a very bad ailing condition. 

I have a prayer that Government  and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes and lets the country know why, up to now, these people have not been paid their terminal benefits yet beneficiaries in other companies and parastatals were paid.

At the same time, we have people who helped Government during the Lakwena war. These people worked hard during that war in Bukedi and Busoga sub regions and Government promised to compensate them. However, as I speak, nobody has been compensated, yet, Government has a list. It is therefore, my prayer –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is that a drone? Sergeant, please grab that thing and take it out. Honourable members, I understand that the contractor is doing some work underground; it is not in the Chamber. I will send someone to check.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, with the level of poverty in Bukedi and Busoga, I suggest that Government should come out with a special project, like it has done in other regions of this country, to at least elevate our people to the status of people in other areas.

I was not shocked when hon. Nyakecho said that the cows and hoes keep passing by but hon. Nyakecho, you even saw the ministers pass. Bukedi never got any minister; Busoga never got any new person. So, some of us believe the dining table is bent and we need Bukedi to be included so that we have new people on the table. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here. Hon. Ajedra, the issue of the Uganda Grain Milling Company is such an old matter. I have written letters to the minister and the President. You know, I am even afraid to sit with people in Jinja because each time I go, people want to know something about their benefits yet, I am not the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

3.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This matter has been brought to the attention of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It has been due to lack of funding that we have not been able to consider it.

Now that the matter has been raised again by my colleague, I promise to take it up with Principal Secretary to the Treasury and report next week on Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: We expect a report net week? Thank you.

3.38
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke County South, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The people of Nakaseke wish you and honourable colleagues, a prosperous new year. I rise on a matter of national importance. Since September 2019, Nakaseke Main Hospital has not received any medical supplies yet this hospital caters for eight districts. So, since that time, patients come but are referred to private clinics outside the hospital.  Nothing is being done by Government to ensure its cradle land is being catered for, in terms of medical supplies.

I wonder whether National Medical Stores does not have transport for the drugs to Nakaseke Hospital. If that is the case, I can provide a truck to take the drugs to Nakaseke Main Hospital.

There should be quick or very urgent Government intervention to ensure that medical supplies are delivered to Nakaseke Main Hospital. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: The former Minister of State for Health is here but there is also the new Minister of State for the same sector. I do not know whether anyone can help us on the issue of Nakaseke not receiving drugs. Yes, hon. Nabbanja.

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Thank you very much. Nakaseke Hospital is one of those hospitals that are under my jurisdiction. I would like to pledge that in a week’s time, I will report not only on Nakaseke but on other hospitals as well.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. 

3.41
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I raise the matter of national importance, allow me to first welcome back our colleague, hon. Nantaba, who has not been here for a while. She is seated next to me. I welcome you back. Thank you.

Last year, there was tension between Rwanda and Uganda. That tension led to the closure of various border posts resulting into huge loses. Last week, I visited two border posts, Bunagana and Mirama Hills in Kisoro. Up to now, these border points are still closed and there is no business taking place there. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, my question to the Government is; what is the fate of the trade relations between Rwanda and Uganda, since the borders have remained closed? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister in charge of East African Community Affairs but I see the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. I do not know whether Government can tell us something.

3.43
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Kaginda has specifically raised issues of trade. However, there are reports in newspapers, of Ugandans being killed in Rwanda. Government should tell us. Rwanda was bold to tell its citizens not to travel to Uganda. As you come to respond to trade issues, you should also advise Ugandans not to travel to Rwanda.

3.43
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and happy new year to all of you, honourable colleagues. The issue of our relations with our neighbours is very key because I know that peace is elusive. There are many meetings that have been going on, including a meeting that took place in Munyonyo, where we had a delegation from Rwanda. 

The Minister of Foreign Affairs was instructed by His Excellency the President to be in those meetings. There is a lot that is being done. Like I told you, peace is elusive. If you handle it anyhow, any slight careless statement made can take us back to square one.

I would like to request Parliament to give the Government of Uganda chance to conclude the process of making sure that we get back to the good relationship which we had before. You cannot sit here and instruct that “let the border be opened” and you think this instruction will make the border open. You have to negotiate – and the negotiations are in progress. 

I would like to be on record that something is being done. I am requesting for time so that we conclude our interaction with our sisters and brothers.

THE SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, I hope we are not saying that we should keep quiet and do not say anything, until the Government has concluded negotiations. Even if they hit somebody, I should not say anything? People are dying; people cannot trade.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Of course, I have no mandate to instruct this august House or Ugandans not to say something. My work is to give you information that we cannot sit and do nothing when the relationship is souring with our neighbours. Great work is being done; meetings have been held. 

I do not know whether this august House has a solution now that we can apply, so that we see the border opened tomorrow.  (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I thought if someone volunteers to be the Leader of Government Business, that person would mentally prepare to represent Government. There are Ugandans who are being killed in Rwanda. The minister is feeling very sweet, yet, she is giving no answer.

This Parliament has directed Government to make statements on many other issues. Not only is she feeling very sweet but she is even defying the Chair. 

Is the minister, therefore, in order to avoid supplying the country with basic information about our current problems with Rwanda, as we continue receiving and reading stories in the newspapers of Ugandans being killed in Rwanda? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what the citizens are saying is that for the last four months, people have not been able to trade. They live on trade but have not been trading for the last four months. They would like to get an assurance. Is it going to be possible or they should forget about trading with Rwanda?

People have been killed and so, they want to know whether they should go or remain on their side of the lane. That is what they want to know. Should we go there or not?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, let me repeat that numerous meetings have taken place. Without the two countries meeting, you cannot solve the current problem without losing more lives. In order –(Interjections)– I am speaking from the background of –(Interruption)

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, when we sit here, we owe the citizens of Uganda a lot of respect. As we sit here, we owe a lot of responsibility to Ugandans. Above all, if you look at Rwanda and Uganda, the people have been living in harmony.

I sat here listening to a mother trying to say that Ugandans should die in the process of peace, when in other countries like America, one citizen matters a lot. I thought a mother who has children would mind about giving birth and would not make that kind of statement.

Is it in order for the honourable minister, who has a responsibility to this country, to stand here and say, “In the process of peace talks, people will continue to die”? Is it in order for her to arrogantly make that statement, Madam Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: No, she is not in order. Minister, is the Government of Uganda going to issue a travel advisory? That is what we want to know. Is the Government going to issue an advisory so that citizens know that they should remain on their side and not try to go there?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, we need one another. I do not think we can stand here and say, “Remain where you are and we remain in Uganda”. We would like to resolve the problem without casualties. I regret and pay sincere condolences to the Ugandans who have died in this process.

However, we do not want more people to die. That is why we started with talking to one another. The Minister of Foreign Affairs will be instructed to come here when they have at least concluded the incoming meeting and assure us that the good relationship will be reinstated without people losing more lives.

3.51
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, what is wrong with cautioning our people right now to know that it is dangerous to go to Rwanda and that they should not go there? If there is any problem to do with business, let them do the businesses only in Uganda until those peace issues are resolved. Without the resolutions, we shall continue hearing of more Ugandans being killed in Rwanda. 

What is wrong? Are you a Leader of Government Business? Why do you fear to make that simple statement –(Interruption)

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, the Government of Rwanda informed its citizens that it is not safe for them to come to Uganda to the extent that even if there is a family that is split between Rwanda and Uganda, they do not allow a Rwandan to cross over to Uganda to visit the other part of the family. We have been requesting Government to give advice to Ugandans on what to do in the situation. 

The information I wanted to give the Leader of the Opposition is that the minister who was here is not aware of what is going on at the borders. If this House can only allow the Minister for Foreign Affairs to come here and address us with clear information, we will be in a position to handle this matter. Thank you very much.

MR BARYAYANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. For those of us who come from the border, this is not only about trade. It is true we have lost a lot in terms of trade because most institutions like Kabale University and other universities there have lost over 2,000 students who did not return because the Rwandan students were not allowed to come back. 

More so, we have relatives across the border. In Rwanda, there is a place called Bukiga where the Bakiga come from. One of the Presidents of Rwanda, Habyarimana, was a Mukiga. Therefore, we kind of interact a lot with them.

It has gone to the extent that much as Ugandans are being allowed to cross to Rwanda, Rwandese are not allowed to come back. Should a Ugandan cross to Rwanda to see a relative with some food, he or she will not make it there and yet the relatives in Rwanda are starving because their main source of food was Uganda. Their food was coming from Kabale, Rukungiri and Kanungu. 

Should a relative from Uganda be caught crossing to Rwanda to take some posho, he or she will not make it there. They will kill him or her. Two days ago, they killed three Ugandans just because they had gone across to see their relatives. 

The people at the border areas are now saying when they get any Rwandese who is not their relative; they may also reciprocate the act and kill them. So, the situation is going to get out of hands. You may think it is simple but it is going to be more of genocide without soldiers in it. 

I am calling upon Government, let the big ego get out of the way very fast. Otherwise, something very bad is going to happen to this country. 

THE SPEAKER: Members of the Government, we appreciate that you are talking. You do the talking. You have an obligation, however, to advise the Ugandans whether they should go to Rwanda or not. In some countries, a small quarrel would compel the Government to say, “If it is not necessary, do not travel there.” In Uganda, we are unbothered and yet people are being shot and we just read about it.

Can you issue a travel advice so that Ugandans know whether they should take posho to Rwanda? 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to thank colleagues who have given us information. I am going to forward the information about cautioning Ugandans from traveling across to Rwanda so that the relevant minister, having consulted with the National Security Committee, takes a decision and inform Ugandans. 

Secondly, I would like to most sincerely thank hon. Baryayanga for his information. Madam Speaker, Uganda is not hostile to Rwanda –(Interruption)– from hon. Patrick Nsamba’s information; I wanted to put my response on record. We have been living together in harmony and we would like that to continue. 

Therefore, we would like to solve this current problem once and for all. The minister in charge will come here and tell us if the National Security Committee has accepted to advise Ugandans on whether to continue moving to Rwanda or stop completely. Thank you. 

MS CECILIA ATIM: Madam Speaker, the Government Chief Whip is really struggling. She is trying her best as you have seen. Some of us who know her personally are at pain to see her struggling to convince people on what she knows she cannot do. (Laughter) 

This Parliament approves the appointment of all ministers. When they are appointed, they pledge to serve the people of Uganda. For the years I have been in this Parliament, I have not seen the substantive Minister of Foreign Affairs consistently and regularly attending Parliament. Has the minister got special privileges that this Parliament cannot call him to order so that he comes and explains to us such a sensitive matter, which is giving us pain? As a result, our children are dying in Rwanda for nothing and nobody is answering.

We want the substantive minister to come here and respect the institution and talk to us about the relationship between Uganda and Rwanda. We do not even see the junior minister coming regularly and even if he comes, I am not so sure whether he will do better than the Government Chief Whip. (Laughter)

The procedural matter I would like you to guide us on is that from this debate, we demand that the Minister of Foreign Affairs must come and face this institution and explain to us this painful issue of the relationship between Rwanda and Uganda. You can imagine Air Rwanda cannot fly to Uganda anymore, which is the nearest neighbour. That is a very serious matter. Thank you.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I saw my sister hon. Cecilia Ogwal really struggling to explain who Ruth Nankabirwa is and I wondered. (Laughter) Yet she knows that I sit in Cabinet regularly. Cabinet is chaired by the Commander-in-Chief and it is there that he briefs us about the security situation of this country and in the region.

I sit in the Central Executive Committee and I stand here with ease to tell you what I am supposed to tell you. Where I feel I am not in position to do so, I refer the matter to the relevant authority. Sincerely, she was struggling to explain the character of Ruth Nankabirwa yet, I was speaking with ease and there was no struggle.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you may recall that towards the end of November, when we were preparing for the celebrations for the East African Community, a statement was brought here encouraging us to celebrate the East African cooperation. You may recall the difficulty that the minister had in concentrating on the celebrations when Members were insisting on knowing the deeper relations in the East African Community and implications of what was happening. 

That matter has not been answered. Therefore, the Foreign Affairs Minister should come here and explain to us the relationship between Uganda and Rwanda and tell citizens what to do. It remains outstanding since November but let us hear from the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives.

4.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I think the Leader of Government Business has said it all. However, I would like to clarify that Air Rwanda comes to Entebbe but as my senior colleague was saying, since these issues are cross cutting - it involves security, trade and foreign affairs - we pray that you give us time to come back here -
The Minister of Foreign Affairs is going to consult all of us from the different perspectives of trade and security. He will then be able to give a comprehensive report. Therefore, we pray that you give us some time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, this matter, as I have told you, has been outstanding since the end of November. That debate has been in this House and the country and you cannot ask us for more time. The Minister of Foreign Affairs should come and brief us on what is happening on Tuesday next week.

MS AOL: Madam Speaker, if we do not give an ultimatum to these people, we are going to keep losing Ugandans. Just three days ago, we lost some Ugandans in Rwanda. Can we ask them to give us the statement tomorrow? We cannot continue to wait -(Interjection)- the Speaker has ruled but I am asking for clarification. We do not want to continue hearing that Ugandans are killed in Rwanda without coming to a successful conclusion. 

While you are talking and doing things like peace talks or whatever you people are doing, something should be done to stop Ugandans from going to Rwanda. Whether you have relatives there or not, if you go, it should be at your own risk. At the very least, a warning should be given to Ugandans. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I have given them an ultimatum. We want the statement on Tuesday next week without fail.

4.06
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. The Ministry of Education and Sports is rolling out a new curriculum and it has started training trainers who are going to train teachers of Government institutions.

Within two weeks, the senior ones will be reporting to school and this curriculum is supposed to start with senior one. Private institutions have not seen or received any communication from Government in respect to this new curriculum and yet, they are being told to implement the new curriculum.

Madam Speaker, I would like the Minister of Education and Sports to come up with a statement on how it is going to implement this new curriculum and when private school owners or institutions will be brought on board in respect to this new curriculum. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister of Education and Sports. Is there any information from the Government side?

4.07
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, we need this information urgently and I would like to suggest that the Ministry of Education and Sports briefs us on Thursday about the new curricular. (Interjections) I would like to direct the Minister of Education and Sports to come and brief us on the new curriculum on Thursday.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter is serious. Schools are opening in a short while and it is important that the country is briefed on this matter. The Ministry of Education and Sports will update us about the new curriculum on Thursday.

4.08
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli County Island, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have continuously brought this issue on the Floor of this Parliament. In my constituency, there is a place called Lolwe islands. It takes four hours to travel from the mainland to Lolwe. Lolwe has over eight primary schools. We have pleaded with the Government to fulfil the policy of providing a secondary school to the people of Lolwe and Bukana Islands.

Since 2017, the answer from the ministry is, we have not got the finances. Students are at home and they are missing school. After primary seven, they either get married or go fishing.

It is my appeal that the Ministry of Education and Sports gives us a clear answer of what is going to happen to these students of Lolwe who complete primary school and cannot continue with their education.

Whenever we raise this issue here, I do not know whether the ministers are not assertive and aware of what to answer because they will tell you, we are going to follow it up. I have written many times and now the issue is, parents are saying there is no need of taking their children to school after primary seven.

It is, therefore, my humble appeal that one, the Ministry of Education and Sports should come and explain why they are refusing to give the people of Lolwe and Bukana islands a secondary school.

Secondly, why can’t they grant aid to some of these community schools that have started to become Government primary and secondary schools so that our people can go and learn where they want? That is my prayer.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are talking about Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the minister has left. How will the children of Lolwe and Bukana fit in with the SDGs? Last financial year, I had instructed the committees to have a special part in their reports about island constituencies and districts.

Therefore, Committee on Education and Sports, when you are reporting on the Budget Framework Paper, we would like to see what you have said about schools and health centres in those areas. We had also talked about very small communities. Anyhow, before they finish the report, the Ministry of Education and Sports should come and explain to us when the children of those islands will have secondary schools.

First of all, they have no transport and their boats have been broken. They cannot move. Anyway, there is nowhere to move because there is no secondary school. Therefore, when the minister comes to talk about the curriculum, she should also report on the situation in these islands, about the seed schools. Thank you.

4.11
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker and happy New Year to you, colleagues. World Bank and the Government of Uganda funded Kahengye Water Gravity Scheme in Rukungiri District with Shs 44 billion. We were happy that our people would be served with safe water.

The project was supposed to be completed in September 2017. However, since that time, the contractor has not been on site and neither has anyone else. We have been waiting for a communication from either the Ministry of Water and Environment or the contractor but it is not available.

You know that water-related problems mostly affect women and children but these people are suffering in the district. This project was supposed to benefit 120,000 people in Rukungiri and Ntungamo. Can the ministry communicate to the people of Rukungiri when the project will be completed so that these people get a service?  Thank you.

The Speaker: The Minister of Water and Environment is directed to come and report to this House before the closure of the week – on Thursday – about Kahengye water project and its status.

Is the minister here – the new Minister of State for Water and Environment? Would you like to say something?

4.13
The minister of State for Water and Environment (Environment) (Ms Beatrice Anywar):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand with my colleague on the concern she raised in the House. As a ministry, we shall come, like you have directed, and brief the House on Thursday.  Thank you.

4.14
Ms franca akello (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the House and especially the Minister of Internal Affairs that the Jie that have always disturbed our people have started again by stealing our animals and food, especially cassava, from the gardens.

Madam Speaker, because of the limited time, I am unable to list all the cases of havoc the Karamojong have done since 3rd January to-date. However, I will give you highlights.

On the 3rd, they raided and took six cows and bulls from Amyel, which is in Lapono sub-county. They also took some animals from Omiya Pacwa and Ocoyolamero in Lapono sub-county, six animals from Lira Kato sub-county and two from Oburgulu, which is also in Lira Kato sub-county.

This is a very serious case because the Karamojong are being sighted with guns again, threatening the lives of our people. Therefore, we at the border sub-counties, especially Kolomor, Adilang, Lira Kato and Lapono; Laperebong, Lokole, Omiya-Pacwa and Paimol live in fear because the Karamojong move in broad daylight with guns again.

The question is – (Interruption)

Mr makmot: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. What the Woman Member of Parliament for Agago says is very alarming. It is putting a lot of pressure on us, the Members of Parliament, who come from the area.

In addition to the areas my sister mentioned, I also have information indicating that animals were stolen from a place called Kilokotio in Laperebong Sub-county. Seven heads of cattle were recovered in a place near Adoma Hills. That was about the 5th January.

In Labwor, we have been informed that about 20 cows were taken and they were yet to be recovered. I was also informed that in Alerek, they sighted about eight of these herdsmen moving with about four guns. This is causing a lot of fear. Many people now find it very difficult. Previously, we heard of people being killed in the area, which was a matter we discussed.

Ms franca akello:  Thank you, hon. Makmot, for the additional information. As I earlier said, the list is long.

My prayer and that of the people of Agago is that let 2020 be a year of production on our side. Every year, from around this time up to the month of June, we are not at peace and we are unable to sleep in our houses safely. We are not able to peacefully eat the food that we have harvested because we are sharing it with the neighbours who did not work for it.

Therefore, it is not fair and we are also –(Member timed out.)

The Speaker: Minister of Internal Affairs and Minister of Karamoja Affairs, I do not know whether that is stock theft. This is a serious issue. We are hearing more and more that guns are back in the region.

6.19
The Minister of state for Internal Affairs (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, happy New Year. I hope we will overcome some of the difficulties that we faced at the beginning. 

Having said that, I would like to inform the House that it is true there is both increased cross-border and internal insecurity in our area of northern and north eastern Uganda, including Agago. Many of our people have suffered and lost property. 

This matter has been noticed. Part of the problem has been the scanty deployment we earlier on had in the area. Through meetings with the National Security Council, we have now come up with a strategy in which joint operations, both internal and up to the borders, will in the shortest possible time be launched. By “shortest possible time,” I am talking of less than a week. It will be launched so that we contain this menace, which has been happening every year. It will involve the Minister of State for Inter-Security Forces.

It will not only be a matter for the internal security organs but also include all our security machinery so that we are able to contain the situation. This is because of the spread and the nature of the arms that are at times used in these criminal activities.

Therefore, we think that the best way will be a joint security operation, which will be tabled. I will get the information –(Interruption)

Ms franca akello: Honourable minister, I would like to seek clarification from you on the actions you have indicated to carry out - we need to focus on the matter of recovering the lost animals. 

Secondly, we need full time security along the borders to the sub counties that I have mentioned. This time we really would like to sleep in our houses in peace. 

Therefore, kindly indicate to us and if it were possible, Madam Speaker, he would come back to this House with a comprehensive report immediately after one week since he just said that the operation will take place in a week’s time. That report must have the design of the steps you are going to take especially - Madam Speaker, we are interested in the issues of recovery of the animals that have been lost.

MR TERRENCE ACHIA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Upon what my elder, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs has mentioned, I remember very well that on 17th December, while in this very House, I clarified that some bad elements within the Karamoja Community have re-armed themselves. The Turkana have taken cows and so far, those taken from Napak District are 400. People have been killed and road ambushes have started again.

Now the minister has just told us - and I even met him that same day and he said that they were going to do their best to deploy very fast. However, to date, no deployment has taken place. It is now a month and so, what he is telling us here is funny.

Just yesterday, at Lwatone, four cattle rustlers where killed –(Interruption)

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker, I know on the Order Paper, we already have an item that requires the minster to give a statement in as far as the security in Karamoja is concerned. Yet my colleague is already delving into what is about to come in a few minutes. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to wait for the statement of the minister before we bring specific issues concerning the insecurity in the Karamoja Region? Thank you.

MR TERRENCE ACHIA: I was giving information because the reality I am talking about - 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, there is a matter under 3(d) on the spike in cattle raids and thefts in Karamoja sub region. Now this matter came from Agago.

MR TERRENCE ACHIA: I was only giving information to clarify that what the minister said is not in consonance with what he spoke on 17th.  He promised on 17th that they are going to deploy but now he is saying they are going to sit down.

THE SPEAKER: So, they have not deployed?

MR TERRENCE ACHIA: They have not deployed.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, what you said on 17th has not been implemented.

MR AYEPA: Madam Speaker, I am the Member of Parliament for Labwor County in Abim District. My constituency shares a border with Agago. Actually, what the woman representative for Agago and my brother have said is true.

Madam Speaker, in Abim District, by 8 o’clock, people must already be inside their Houses; it is the same with Agago. Madam Speaker, what saved us before the disarmament of the Karimojong took place was that the Government gave some guns to each village. For example, in Abim District, three guns were given out to each village. However, during disarmament, these guns were withdrawn by Government yet at that time, they helped our people.

The main problem now is that Karimojong have started rearming themselves, Madam Speaker. This is because we have nothing to defend ourselves with. I want to confirm to you that these Karimojong have already rearmed themselves. 

The history of rearmament started like this. While the Karimojong were disarmed, Madam Speaker, the Turkana of Kenya were not disarmed. Therefore, because of that, the Karimojong were attacked by the Turkana. When they were attacked -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall discuss the issue of Karamoja under 3(d); we are dealing with Agago.

MR AYEPA: Therefore, Madam Speaker, I beg that people in Abim and Agago districts be given guns to protect themselves -(Interjection)- yes, we need to deploy.

THE SPEAKER: I am sure the minister has heard and that they are to sit in a security committee and decide how to protect you. Order! I think I have to separate some of the Karimojong; I may have to remove some of them from this side. (Laughter)

MR OBIGA KANIA: Madam Speaker, the recovery of animals and securing people has always been part of operations in that area and they will not be any exception in this, whether in Agago or in the greater Karamoja; it is part of the operations that we continue to undertake.

Having said that, I would like to say that it is not true that in December we did not deploy; we deploy. We did secure the place, after my statement here. However, the only problem is that with the dry season, as usual, the problem escalates and the nature of people from across the border with other guns has aided this situation. Therefore, it needs second thought to approach it but I can assure you that if you give us chance, it will be done.

Thirdly, the issue of arming, at the moment, is not an option. If we ever have to do that, it will have to be done under a very careful arrangement where the people are properly trained, put under proper command and make them accountable to somebody. Otherwise, if we arm people - therefore, I would like colleagues to understand this: that Government at the moment does not have a plan of arming people. 

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether my colleague, the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, has anything to say on the matter. If he has, it is fine. If he does not, this will suffice. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Col. Engola Okello, do you have anything to add to what the Minister of State for Internal Affairs has said?

4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Col (Rtd) Engola Okello Charles): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Happy New Year to everyone. Madam Speaker, Defence has started taking steps on the issues in Karamoja. 

We have tasked the Third Division Commander to make sure the problem in Karamoja stops immediately. As I talk, he is having a meeting with two groups from Matheniko and Jie who have been affected by this problem. 

Now we cannot crash them because they are Ugandans. However, the issue is, we are dialoguing with them. Two days ago, we removed guns from the Matheniko who had attacked the Jie. 

I request the members of Parliament to also help sensitise the people, when they go back home. We cannot provide guns to people or arm them – like he has talked of – to kill each other. 

We are struggling to see that, that kind of issue does not come back again and we are continuing to disarm them; we are going to disarm them of all the guns that have been bought. We are sure that they are buying guns from somewhere. We cannot talk about it here now but we shall make sure that we disarm all those guns. 

We sorted out the issue of the Turkana with the neighbouring country so that they do not come to Uganda to destabilise the people. Madam Speaker, that is what is going on.

THE SPEAKER: The issue of Karamoja is item No.3 (d). Leave the Agago issues. We are not dealing with Agago for now. Hon. Walyomu, please use two minutes. 

4.33
MR MOSES WALYOMU (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning potato pest invasion in Busoga Sub-region, more so in Kagoma. As you are aware, any attack on potatoes in Busoga is like an attack to the Basoga because potatoes or “emboli” is the staple food for the Basoga. 

The potato pests are attacking the potato plantations and eating or consuming the potato leaves, leaving nothing behind. When you try to get the potatoes, in actual sense, you do not get the real potatoes. Instead, you get ash of potatoes. We need something to be done to save the people of Busoga. 

My prayers are: 

    1. There is need for quick intervention by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to save the farmers in Busoga sub-region –(Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, hon. Walyomu. When you talk about potatoes, somebody’s mind will first run to Busoga. The information I would like to give my colleague is that as we discuss, I want to put the Minister of Disaster Preparedness on alert; there is a serious looming famine in Busoga because of the effect of those worms on the sweet potato leaves. 

Madam Speaker, maize was destroyed. We can no longer produce the maize that we used to produce. Potatoes are only grown as food crops; so the moment they are affected, then, there is no food in Busoga. 

I wish to request the Minister for Disaster Preparedness to prepare and also ferry sacks of rice and any other type of food crops that could help the Basoga because the potatoes are destroyed and the people do not have anything to eat. 

MS KATALI: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give is that I have already discussed this with the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, hon. Henry Bagiire. I think he is around. Maybe he should tell us the status. Thank you. 

MR WALYOMU: Thank you, hon. Katali. Madam Speaker, my other prayers are: 

    2. There is need for the technical team to visit the affected areas, more so in Kagoma County. 
    3. There is also need for something to be given in terms of food to the affected individuals within Busoga Sub-region. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: I do not know where the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has gone. I just want to add that I was in Nakato bordering Kagoma County and I also got this information; that there is something eating the potato crops. 

Therefore, hon. Bagiire or the Minister of State for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should come and update the House tomorrow on what they plan to do. I think she has noted it. 

However, on a serious note, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should come and tell us whether he actually knows that this disease is in that area and what his plans are. The Minister of Fisheries can add something. 

4.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Hellen Adoa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Colleagues, I welcome you from the recess and wish you a happy new year. 

As you are aware, I am just a few days old in that office of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. I plan to consult widely and come here in three weeks with a comprehensive – Madam Speaker, give me three weeks to come here with a comprehensive report. 

Meanwhile, I plan to have a workshop with the honourable members that hail from the fishing districts. Therefore, please bear with me and give me three weeks to come back and report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we are just happy to see you. That one you can be sure of. (Laughter)

4.39
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance regarding a seed school, Amuru Hot Spring Seed School, which was given to Amuru Sub-county. It is located in Acodo Village, Okungendi. 

This school was given to a contractor called Dove Rich Company Uganda Limited and the MoU was signed in July. As I speak, I visited the school but there is no sign of work. 

I was also reliably informed that this very contractor has about 35 different contracts. Therefore, when there is pressure in one district, he leaves what he is doing and goes where the pressure is. The worry of the community is that the Shs 1.7 billion that was given for this project will eventually go back to the Consolidated Fund and there will be no school, yet this is the only opportunity for the people of Amuru Sub-county to get a secondary school. 

Before I give my prayers, allow me let my colleague also give some information in one minute. 

MS ADONG: Thank you, hon. Lucy Akello. Just a quick one; the information I would like to give you is that the same contractor is also constructing a secondary school in Nwoya District; that is Lungulu Seed Secondary School. For the last one year, he has not even put a slab. 

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving us information. Madam Speaker that is how serious the situation is. When I went to the community, they were very worried and they thought that this is just something which in Acholi we would say, “let the child sleep” latin nin. It is just to cover their face and it is not a reality. 

My prayer to the Minister of Education and Sports is urgent intervention. They should go on the ground and see what is happening because the people of Amuru are not happy. We really want this school up. The money that has been allocated must not go back to the consolidated fund because it is not the mistake of the district but rather the contractor. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: I was worried when hon. Lucy Akello said that for six months nothing has happened but I am now alarmed that the honourable member for Nwoya is saying that for one year, the same contractor has done nothing. And we are here in Kampala thinking that we gave money for the school and we are waiting for the seed school. This is unacceptable!

Honourable members, Dove Rich Company, which is said to have many contracts in Uganda; who is responsible for these contracts? 

Can the minister of education come and explain to us who this company is? And how they were able to secure so many contracts? Explain to us why for one year they have done nothing in Nwoya. Explain why for the last six months nothing has been done in Amuru by this same company. 

We want answers very urgently because soon the year will end and money will go back.

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, there were many seed schools which were planned to be done. We have just received testimonies from two or three MPs. 

I would like to suggest that we bring a report on the progress of all the seed schools where we provided money because there were timeframes given. 

We need to do an evaluation and where possible, contracts must be cancelled so that we award contracts to companies which are able to produce work in the given time. This is what I request. There are many more seed schools which could be having such problems. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have just reminded me. I think I have a seed school that has not started in a place called Nakimegere in Kamuli. This is a serious matter.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, that seed school is in my constituency, in my parish and village. 

What those people did was to pick some timber and put it somewhere around. They dug a foundation and put some bricks. They put some wood somewhere and they picked some students from the nearby secondary school called St Andrew and they said the school had begun.       

When the RDC went with the DISO to inspect, the contractor and team abused them so that they leave frustrated and they do not go back there. So there is nothing. It is the same frustration. It is very disappointing, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is really sad. This House has been demanding that the Government provides seed schools throughout the country. The Government provided the money and now people are playing with the money. 

We are giving the Minister of Education and Sports a fortnight to compile a report countrywide about the status of all the seed schools that were supposed to have been constructed in this financial year.

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to bring to the House in regard to the current seed schools that we are talking about – I know that Ngora is one of the beneficiaries of the seed schools. 

There is no coordination between the team at the national and the team at the district. The school is attached to a particular district and procurement of contractors is done at the national level. It becomes very hard for the district to coordinate and manage a contractor whom they have not hired. That is the challenge everywhere.

If those schools are to serve the purpose and if they are to be completed without issues or problems, there must be a coordinating body – there should be a linkage between the ministry of education and the district local governments where those schools are located. Otherwise, the contractors behave terribly to the district; they are accountable only to the ministry of education.

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give on the seed schools is that my constituency and the district got four seed schools. However, when the minister of education was giving the contracts, all the four contracts were given to one contractor. 

The contractor brought sand and some bricks and tried to do a foundation. Then they disappeared. They put a signpost that construction of this seed school is going to be going on between this time and that time. Then they disappear. The sites have now become grazing areas for cows and everything is destroyed. When we look for the contractors, they no longer pick out calls. 

Madam Speaker, this needs immediate intervention. The ministry of education has to take immediate action so that taxpayers benefit from these schools because we made a sacrifice. We made a decision as Parliament to provide this money. Ugandans must benefit so that children can go to school. 

THE SPEAKER: Judging by the number of members who want to contribute, it is a national problem. I have already directed that the minister of education is given just a fortnight to bring us a countrywide report on the state of each of these schools and we must discuss it.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This matter is very important. 

You remember, two years ago, the honourable minister stopped the USE programme in private schools on claims that within one year, the Government shall have put up seed schools in all the sub counties across the country. 

Right now, some of the pupils who were under USE in private schools have dropped out of schools because there is no more USE in private schools. 

Currently, in a district like Amuru where the private school was helping our pupils under USE, most of those students are staying home. We need to take this matter very seriously. 

Let the contractors that were given contracts to put up seed schools across the country be followed, monitored, investigated and let serious action be taken. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have already ruled that the minister should bring us a report on each school. We want to know the school, the contractor and how much has been done.

MS CHEKAMONDO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is to inform you that when this money is sent to support the seed schools, two things happen. When a contractor is got, he comes and does a little work, gets the money and fixes it on an account. If the money delays and it is in the district, the district diverts the money, which was supposed to be for the seed schools and uses it for other things. It is a very serious matter and something must be done. Thank you.

MR KAHIMA: Madam Speaker, I would like to confirm what my colleague has said. When the contractor is given the contract and the site, he just picks 20 per cent advance payment and abandons the site. Let me give the scenario of Ntungamo. The money that was supposed to be given to the contractor as advance payment has already been diverted to another project. Therefore, it is important that this matter is treated with the utmost attention that it deserves. The entire project is being mismanaged by contractors.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have already made a ruling. Honourable Minister of Education and Sports, we are giving you a fortnight to give us a countrywide report on all the seed schools, explaining who the contractors are and what the status of construction is.

4.53
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I equally raise a matter of urgent public importance pertaining to the bridge that links north Busoga to Bukedi at a place called Saaka. This bridge was completed about four years ago. However, I would like to report that last week, vehicles plunged into the river as they attempted to cross from Pallisa to Kaliro and some people died.

Madam Speaker, there seems to be no quick fix by the Ministry of Works and Transport. The road is impassable and for somebody to move from Kaliro or Kamuli to Pallisa, Kumi or Soroti, they have to travel an extra 50 to 60 kilometres because of the condition of this road.

It is, therefore, my prayer that the minister comes and explains to the House and the people of Busoga and eastern Uganda what is being done to fix this problem. This road remains impassable and it seems the ministry is not doing much to find a solution. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Saaka Bridge was a long standing demand by the people of Busoga and Pallisa. If it has broken down, the minister needs to come and update us urgently on the plans that the Ministry of Works and Transport has to rectify that situation. It is urgent because people are falling into the river. Give us a response next Tuesday.

4.55
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This Parliament approved a loan amounting to billions of shillings in 2017 for the rural electrification project under the Rural Electrification Agency (REA). This project was to be concluded by August, 2020.

Madam Speaker, we have heard about the conflicts in REA and there is no progress on the project. When I approached the people who were concerned in some sub-counties, one whispered to me, “I left a long time ago because there is too much conflict.”

Madam Speaker, this money was supposed to serve 32 sub-counties who were not accessing power. As we speak, nine managers of that project have left and it is completely abandoned. At the same time, the minister who we would have asked to come and explain was also sent home because she was not a Member of Parliament. I do not know how we can consult her. 

Moreover, the interest accumulated on that loan is in billions of shillings. We tried to get the actual figure but the chairperson of the committee delayed a bit. We are paying a loan for two and a half years when we are not benefiting.

Madam Speaker, is this not the right time for us to start evaluating the performance of loans? We have been acquiring many loans but the performance is poor. As we speak, you hear conflicts in Prime Minister’s office over loans that we acquired for the refugees. 

My prayer is that you instruct the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to come up with a report concerning that loan money and the project of the 32 sub-counties. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I see the new minister in charge of minerals, I do not know whether she has a comment on this matter.

4.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker and a happy new year to my colleagues. Madam Speaker, I moved with my energy from the Ministry of Health to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. It is true and we have also been reading about these conflicts. I would like to assure colleagues that we will definitely handle them.

Madam Speaker, allow me to come back with a statement on this matter next week. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, remember that time is of essence. The sub-counties of Uganda were promised power. Therefore, it is bigger than the 32 sub-counties; it is countrywide.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, we are handling the matter and that is why I requested you to give us one week so that I come with a comprehensive statement next week.

4.59
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. During my nationwide tour –(Laughter)- Madam Speaker, protect me from the members.

During my nationwide tour on mobilisation and seeing the impact of the reshuffle, I went on radio in Mbale, eastern Uganda on Saturday. When people from Sironko and Bududa heard that Waluswaka was going to be on the radio, they came to meet me. When I finished the radio programme, I met a mammoth crowd of voters and they were complaining that after the landslides, the Government promised the people who lost their lives Shs 500,000 per family. However, those families had not got even a single coin. The orphans who survived narrowly expected to at least celebrate Christmas but nothing happened. It was pathetic-

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers, hon. Waluswaka?

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, the area Member wants to give me critical information. I beg your indulgence.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way; the information I would like to give to hon. Waluswaka is that the Shs 500,000 was not meant for Christmas but for funeral expenses for the bodies that had been retrieved from the rubble; for at least a decent burial but the truth is that this money has never been realised.

Even the funds which were meant for fuel for the excavator was borrowed, some of it was solicited from “Good Samaritans” and the district has not yet paid that debt.

The excavator was taken back because of shortage of fuel before they excavated the bodies that were still missing. Worst of it all was that even the mass grave which was eventually declared after the effort to exhume the bodies had failed; the usual facilitation from the line ministry could not come by.

Therefore, the dead were punished twice; the survivors, widows, orphans are traumatised; even those hosting them are also affected by this trauma. I think that the prayer hon. Waluswaka should make is that there should be some form of psychosocial support accorded to these survivors.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The money which this House laboured to appropriate for the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness; Government made us to supply air, Disaster Preparedness and Ministry of Works has not got this money. Right now as I speak - (Interruption)

MR PETER LOKII: Thank you, Madam Speaker, I am getting lost and constrained to listen to my colleague who went touring the whole country. Is the honourable Member in order to tell us that he toured the country without telling us in which capacity he toured? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, although hon. Waluswaka is elected form Butaleja, he is an MP of Uganda; so he can go to Kitgum, Kisoro and check what is happening and come and report here; he is in order, but make your prayers.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker but I think the Government Chief Whip will come on; I was appointed overall Whip for the NRM in this country. There is even a letter to that effect. The Government Chief Whip can lay it on the Table.

The issues we are bringing are not a laughing subject; as we speak, even the Speaker cannot access her constituency from Kayunga. The road was cut off and we expected it at least to be handled.

My prayer is that Government fulfils its pledge to the people who were affected in Bulambuli and Bundibugyo. Government should release money, which we appropriated to the Ministries of Works and Disaster Preparedness. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Government Chief Whip, and the Office of the Prime Minister, where is the money for the funerals in Bududa and Bundibugyo?

5.06
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, allow me consult the Leader of Government Business; this matter was discussed on Monday in Cabinet but I was not present. I am asking for time to consult on the decision that Cabinet took.

THE SPEAKER: As you are consulting, the people of Budiope suffered a disaster and were supposed to be given some money. We had complained that Shs 500,000 was not enough and the President had said that he was going to give them more. The “little” did not arrive and even the “more” has not arrived.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Like I said, yesterday, I was with you in the Charity Walk and I missed Cabinet; I sincerely need time. I will include that reminder in my discussion with the Leader of Government Business.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

5.07
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a serious matter of national importance in my constituency. I got reports around last October that one of the liquor-producing companies in my constituency called “Premier Distillers” was dumping their waste directly into River Kafu.

Fortunately, I live almost at the banks of that river; so I saw it for myself. The water smelt bad, the cattle and human beings could no longer use it and even the fish was dying.

In October, I wrote to the Executive Director of NEMA and requested him to send a team of experts to see what was happening. I even went ahead and gave him contacts of the local leadership to work with but up to-date I have not received any response from NEMA.

I got another report early this month that the same company after hearing a cry about Kafu decided to start pouring their waste at the edge of their sugarcane plantation where they share the boundary with the community.

Unfortunately, they are in a raised area; so all this liquid waste was sweeping through people’s gardens. All the gardens along where the waste was flowing rotted. People no longer have any crop there, ranging from maize.

THE SPEAKER: Can we ask the Minister for Environment to urgently go to Butemba County of Kyankwanzi to establish the impact of the waste; first at the River Kafu and the parishes of Kiryandongo, Kisoro and Umanya so that our people get some relief?

MR KAMUSIIME: Madam Speaker, I believe a committee would do a better job because they would have ample time to equally look at what is happening and interact with the community and make a substantial report to this House which it would deliver justice. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Government is responsible for licensing these factories so they must also answer for the impact. Let them come first and then we hand it to the committee. So Minister for Environment this is very urgent; it is affecting productivity and the lives of the people. We are giving you one week to give us an answer.

5.10
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to present a matter of national importance. Some time back, the Electoral Commission issued a roadmap, as we move towards elections in 2021. Subsequently, various political parties have come up with roadmaps on how they intend to prepare for the 2021 general elections.

The Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) is one of those very political parties, which have come out to take stock of what they have been doing as a party, refill structures and identify candidates. However, as that is going on, the police have decided not to allow any political parties to go on with their roadmaps. 

Yesterday, the FDC party was supposed to be in nine districts to refill structures and identify candidates in Jinja, Buikwe, Iganga, Bugiri, Soroti, Mbale, Tororo, Kumi and Budaka. Police came and said, “You have not moved with ambulances. You do not have mobile toilets.” There are not very many people in this country who move with mobile toilets; they are very few.

Secondly, they were saying since we wrote to the IGP and he has not yet responded - is it the IGP who is going to allow political parties to refill their structures? The response was the same in all the other districts.

Madam Speaker, our concern is that if we are going to have elections in 2021 and political parties are not being allowed by police to recruit, refill structures and identifying candidates, what type of election are we going to have?

Therefore, I would like the Minister of Internal Affairs to tell us where they get the mandate to run political parties. Secondly, is it now going to be the duty of the IGP and police to determine which activities political parties are going to engage in? 

For now, you may look at opposition parties but for us who are going to get involved as candidates; you will go for nomination and police will tell you that you cannot be nominated and that you cannot move to collect signatures. It is beginning with political parties but it will soon come to us as candidates.

I would like the minister to tell us how we shall move forward, as we head for the 2021 elections.

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, allow me – in a way of giving information to my brother – to inform the House that police has now issued a directive that politicians cannot entertain more than two guests. As long as you are three people, they cannot allow you to have any meeting in your homes.

Towards Christmas, I had a press conference at my home. However, Police came, besieged my home for the whole day and dispersed the people who were coming in, including media reporters. If we have reached the extent that a person cannot even entertain more than three visitors in their home, where else can we now meet our people like other MPs do?

At every other time, your constituents will turn up at your home but police now says if you are to receive guests in your homes, you must first get clearance from the IGP.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I want serious answers from the Government. In 2005, and I was with hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, we were sent to consult about whether we should go multiparty or not. I went with her to Kasese, Bushenyi and Kasensero. Do you remember? The people there were sceptical. They said, “Why don’t we remain in the Movement?” but we came back here and said, “No, let us go to parties” and we agreed as a country to go to political parties.

This House appropriates money to political parties to do their work but now if they cannot meet, what are they going to do? The Electoral Commission has issued a programme with dates for nominations and parties are organising. I really want some answers.  What do you want us to do with these parties; what do we do? We agreed to go multiparty.

5.16
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, even the current Chairman of the Inter Party Organisation Dialogue (IPOD), who is our party president, was also arrested under similar circumstances. Yesterday, I was in Bugiri to rescue Dr Kizza Besigye who had been arrested and detained in Nalufenya. Can you imagine –(Interjections)– in Nalufenya in Jinja. They said it was preventive arrest. 

Why do you arrest people who go for mobilisation? We had gone to celebrate with our people the 15 years of existence. Even when it is very hard for the Forum for Democratic Change to operate, it is still the best party. It is very democratic internally yet it struggles. Some people do not like the word “struggle” but we are struggling as if we are not Ugandans.

Uganda is for all of us and there is enough space for all of us and for parties. Why do we have to go in for – is it – national dialogue, when we are actually being pushed too much against the wall? Why do we have to participate in IPOD when we are being pushed to the wall? Going to the bush is not a solution because people who went to the bush are worse off than those who never went there.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know. Can the Minister of Internal Affairs tell us why political parties were not allowed to congregate?

5.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, in November last year, the Forum for Democratic Change political party informed the police about their celebrations of the 15th year of their existence. They had different interpretations of the Public Order Management Act. Later on, the two parties agreed on the minimum positions and as a result, the FDC had successful meetings in Namboole Stadium on 15 and 16 December. 

The party led by hon. (Rtd) Gen. Muntu has been doing consultations all over the country successfully. Hon. Sseggona had a successful one at his home last year. I am quoting this example to show – and dispel right from the beginning the allegation that the police have decided that people will not hold meetings at their homes and that they do not want other political parties to hold meetings. This is not true and it is not proved by facts as we have stated here. Some of the participants in these meetings are here. 

Having said that –(Interjections)– Give me a chance to answer. When you were making the statements, I was very polite. You can mark my points, which you think are wrong and you will respond to them. That is how a good debate should be. 

In the recent rallies of FDC, especially those that were carried out over the weekend, according to the information and letters we have, the party wrote to the police on only one meeting, which was supposed to be in Luweero on Saturday. There was nobody at that meeting. On the contrary, they dispersed teams to various parts of the country to hold meetings. 

It should also be appreciated in this House that following the meeting which was supposed to be held by hon. Robert Kyagulanyi, which flopped for the same reason of misinterpreting the regulations of the Public Order Management Act by both sides, the Electoral Commission called the two teams and had extensive consultations not only with hon. Kyagulanyi but with three other people who are aspiring to be presidential candidates. 

They agreed on the minimums –(Interjections)– other Members can give classification to others but we respect every Ugandan. We think that should be the standard of a leader instead of calling them “comedians” and so forth. It is very un-parliamentary.

They agreed that the parties organising the meetings would write to the police and the police will respond immediately. If they have any objection, they should do so in writing. If they did not, then they should say; “We are not allowing the meeting.” 

In the absence of the police receiving a letter – Remember, this is an election period in which there are very many meetings which could collide; people need to be secured. It is only logical and civil that you expect the police to receive letters and hold discussions with them.

I can quote an example of the meeting which took place in Namboole. The honourable Member of Parliament for Nakawa wrote to the police and the police were delaying to answer. We asked the police to answer Kabaziguruka’s team. We also asked the police to have a meeting with them. They held a successful meeting and Kabaziguruka’s meeting went on subsequently and I would like us to go that way. 

In short, there is no police order that people should not have meetings at their homes or people should not have friends at their place –(Interjections)– Please, listen to me – or that people should not have family meetings.

Secondly, the police are not against anybody holding meetings. It is only that all of us are law-abiding citizens and we would like the indulgence of everybody, for the stability and security of this country, to follow the rules which we make in this House. We are the custodians of making the law and others are just implementers. 

This is the statement I thought I should make. Thank you very much. 

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: He has left. (Laughter)

MR CENTENARY: He is still in the House. 

THE SPEAKER: He has left the podium.

MR CENTENARY: He was giving way.

THE SPEAKER: He has finished.

5.26
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. On 19 December 2019, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development laid on the Floor of Parliament the Budget Framework Paper and he directed that the different committees should go ahead with their work. Consequently, we have been doing a lot of work. 

However, I brought to your attention the irregularities that have been detected in the process. Section 9(3) of the Public Finance Management Act states that “The minister shall, for each financial year, prepare a Budget Framework Paper which shall be consistent with the National Development Plan and Charter of Fiscal Responsibility.”

It has also come to our attention that the National Development Plan II is coming to an end in June this year. However, the Budget Framework Paper we are discussing is starting from the 01 July 2020. That, in essence, means the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should have used NDP III to come up with the Budget Framework Paper. 

Section 8(6) of the National Planning Authority Act reads; “A plan formulated by an authority shall be submitted to the minister who shall cause it to be submitted to Parliament for approval and adoption.” I would like to bring to your attention that up to now, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not brought the NDP III for approval to this Parliament. To me, by definition of what we call a budget, it is your plans translated into monetary terms.

The questions I, therefore, ask are:

    1. What documents did the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development use for the preparation of the Budget Framework Paper?
    2. Why wasn’t NDP III brought to Parliament up to when money was appropriated for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for their work?
    3. When will NDP III be laid on the Floor of Parliament for approval? 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to confirm that I have received a written petition from the honourable member stating that we are acting illegally without the NDP III. I do not know whether the minister has something to say about that. 

17.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, we are very much aware of that provision in the law. I would like to report that the draft National Development Plan III has been finalised. Cabinet has been briefed about it and we hope, within a week or two, to lay it here on the Floor of Parliament after consultations. 

MR AKOL: I have been very clear in my statements. The issues are very simple:

    1. What document was used to prepare the Budget Framework Paper?
    2. Why is there no NDPIII? And he is talking about laying it on the Floor of Parliament in two weeks’ time; I do not understand it.
    3. And the third issue was when will it be laid on the Floor? I do not think he is being comprehensive enough.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the question you have to answer is how we shall complete the process of the Budget Framework Paper without the NDPIII; that is what we need to answer. Hon. Bahati was here but I do not know what has happened.

MR AJEDRA: We work together. Madam Speaker, the process of developing the National Development Plan is very tedious and requires a lot of consultations and that is what has delayed the process. However, as I said, I am happy to report that the draft report is ready and has been passed by Cabinet. And as soon as the necessary consultations are finished, we will be ready to lay it on the Floor of Parliament within two weeks –(Interruption)

MS BETTY AOL:  Madam Speaker, when we plan and budget, it must be based on plan. The honourable minister is saying that making plans is tedious. Is it in order for the honourable minister to come and give us a Budget Framework Paper, which is not based on any plan? So are you not going to make any plans because planning is tedious? Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the honourable member is not just wishing to have an NDPIII. It is a requirement of the Public Finance Management Act. Bring the Budget Framework Paper and also show where it is anchored. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Speaker, as we wait for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Attorney-General who is the chief legal advisor to Government is seated here. And what the honourable member is raising is that a provision of the law has been violated and he sits in Cabinet. 

We are now headed for a problem even at the committee levels, all the ministers that appeared we asked them, but they could not answer this specific question and they were referring us to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Attorney-General.

Therefore, would the Attorney-General find in his space to guide us at the moment so that we can proceed. If he guides, we can then proceed from there this being a legal matter that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will not be able to handle. 

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, I have just consulted my colleague who is in charge of planning and he says the document will be here in Parliament tomorrow. So hopefully it will be laid here by tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Will you bring the NDP tomorrow?

MR AJEDRA: Yes, Madam Speaker. It will be laid here on the Floor of Parliament tomorrow for consideration and approval.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members this House will be sitting tomorrow. Therefore, please ensure that the NDPIII is here tomorrow.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, I thank you so much for this opportunity and I thank the minister for the information that the NDPIII is to be presented tomorrow for approval.

The procedural matter I am raising is that Parliament already received the Budget Framework Paper. And that Budget Framework Paper must be drawn basing on the approved National Development Plan. Can the minister come here and clarify on what we will do with the Budget Framework Paper, which was already presented to Parliament before the NDPIII approval. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank the committees for moving forward with deliberations on the Budget Framework Paper in their sectors. And I would like them to bear with the minister. You bring that document tomorrow because they have done a lot of work.

I called off the Plenary so that members could concentrate on the Budget Framework Paper.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, it is very unfortunate that every time we are handling the Budget we have to ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to apologise for failures to do certain things. Now, in this particular case, I personally wrote to you and I had anticipated that the ministry should have started the process earlier because even the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility should be accompanying it, yet they do have it.

There are so many errors and we are breaching so many laws which we have made. The public outside there will say that Parliament is not sensitive; it is like it is our weakness, yet it is not. 

Therefore, we would like the ministry to be guided. Madam Speaker, you normally train Members of Parliament when we have just joined here; there is a special induction course that we go through. I think we need induction courses and intensive training for the ministers so that they understand what they are supposed to do. We love them and want to work with them in collaboration but it is like we are always fighting.

Madam Speaker, I am here to request that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development must apologise and if possible put it in writing so that they do not do it again next year. They have been doing it every year. I demand that the minister apologises and even then, we are going to process this thing with a lot of error because it is now upside down.

It should start with the National Development Plan, and then we come to the Budget Framework Paper. However, it is now the other way round though we are willing to move with it like that. It is all our error maybe we should have alerted them earlier.

Madam Speaker, the minister must apologise and assure this House that we are not going to come back again and deal with such errors. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, first I would like to say Happy New Year to all of us. Secondly, I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for organising an ecumenical service today where Father Raymond Kalanzi spoke to us about peace.

It is in the spirit of peace that hon. Cecilia Ogwal is raising this matter. One of the key things that Father Raymond said is that the key pillar of peace is reconciliation and forgiveness. I would like to say that we should have brought this plan before the Budget Framework Paper but there were quite a number of challenges. 

However, the plan is going to be ready tomorrow. We do apologise for the delay. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, for the future, even for you to bring the NDPIII, we ought to have discussed it and approved it before you use it. Therefore, we are really lagging behind.

5.40
Mr muhammad MUWANGA kivumbi (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence. The law requires that by 29th February, we should have passed the Budget Framework Paper. The ministry should come with three things to do and not only the Budget Framework Paper because we are still going to be held back. 

They have deviated from the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility in the Budget Framework Paper that we have. The Public Finance Management Act requires them to still come to Parliament and seek permission while preparing a Budget Framework Paper if they wish to deviate from the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility.

Therefore, even if they overcome the hurdle of the Budget Framework Paper, they will still come back here - we do not want to raise these issues and hold up the process – and seek permission to deviate from the charter. In this Budget Framework Paper, they have articulated that they have deviated from it.

Secondly, they have also deviated from another condition of the Public Finance Management Act on interest rates. The law requires that our interest rate should be a ratio of our debt collection, which is put at 12.5 per cent. In what they have presented, the ratio is 16.5 per cent.

Therefore, as the minister comes with the Budget Framework Paper, he should, at the same time, come to seek permission to deviate from the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and our debt revenue collection ratio. These are clearly stipulated. The word used in the Public Finance Management Act is “shall”, which calls for the competence of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

These are things that are predictable and well-articulated in the law. Why do we have to remind them of what they should do under the law at the last minute?

My humble appeal is, as they come tomorrow, they should explain why they have deviated from the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and why they are moving away from our interest rate debt collection ratio. These are matters of law. I beg to move.

The Speaker: Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, this showdown between the back bench and your ministry over this issue is almost an annual event. 

I would like to appeal to you that your technocrats should assist you. You have got very highly educated people who are well paid. They should assist you to organise so that you do not have to come and battle with hon. Ogwal over the charter and hon. so and so over National Development Plan (NDP). Do the needful tomorrow.

For the future, please start now so that there are no skirmishes during the next budget. We were told to reconcile and transform.

5.44
Ms Cecilia ogwal (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, based on the message of reconciliation, I think the minister is correct. I must also say that when he was asked to read from the book of Isaiah 10, whoever asked him to read that scripture was very wise. He was told, “Woe to those who make unjust laws, to those who issue oppressive decrees.” 

This message cannot pass unnoticed and I believe that when the minister read that scripture, he understood the implication of reading Isaiah 10, which bars this institution from making a bad law. Now he is forcing us to act contrary to the law. I thank the organisers who made him the very person to read that particular scripture. Thank you.
 
5.45
Ms elizabeth karungi (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance.

Since the end of the last quarter, our roads in Kanungu had been constructed but because of the rains of November and December, they became so bad. As I speak, they are extremely bad and impassable, especially those belonging to Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), to the extent that because of the poor roads, we have so far lost six people in accidents.

The one we buried last week was on a truck. When it hit a pothole, he jumped off and fell, hitting the back of his head. He died instantly.

Today, we are burying the LC1 Chairman of Nyanga village, Nyanga Parish in Nyanga sub-county, Mr Bitarabeho Bernard because of the same issue of accidents.

For those of us who come from mountainous areas, when it rains heavily, trenches form in the middle of the roads. You find a trench stretching from a hill downwards and three more on a small road. As a result, vehicles have nowhere to pass and boda bodas get serious problems. Even this morning, as my personal assistant was going to bury the LC1 chairperson, he also got an accident and sustained a fracture on the left arm.

This is a serious issue in Kanungu. We have been trying to communicate with UNRA but they are telling us that they do not have money. However, the lives of our people are also very important.

Therefore, my prayer is that this Parliament directs UNRA to hurry to Kanungu and look at our roads, especially where trenches have formed in the middle of the roads, and work on them immediately.

We have lost many bridges; about four of them are broken. Our children are going back to school but I do not know what the situation will be like. I pray that something is done immediately in Kanungu because it has gone beyond our management.  Thank you.
 
The Speaker: Honourable members, the Ministry of Works and Transport is required to urgently address the situation in Kanungu and come back and give us a report within a fortnight so that our friends can move.

Honourable members, because we have been on recess, I allowed 17 members to raise matters of national importance. However, I think the Minister in charge of General Duties would like to say something about the ponzi scheme before we get back to the Order Paper.

5.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Cabinet is very aware of this issue of ponzi schemes that are rampant in the country. His Excellency the President brought it to the attention of Cabinet and requested the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to prepare a Cabinet paper.

The ministry presented the paper, which was discussed extensively and we were directed to give a statement, which was ably done by my senior colleague at the media centre, warning Ugandans about the dangers of ponzi schemes.

There are genuine crypto currencies in the world but there are also very many ponzi schemes. Ponzi schemes are schemes where people are promised 30 or 40 per cent returns. 

There are two types of currencies; those, which are for investment and those that are for trade. You have to do your research before you get involved in it.

I would like to declare my interest first –(Interruption)

Mr centenary: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think that Government is duty-bound to secure the interest and welfare of its citizens. I know that most of these agencies are even licensed by Government. I think the ministry of finance has abdicated its duties of supervising some of these people that come in - the so-called investors. 

Is it in order for a supervising agency to now push the role of investigating and researching to the citizens who are already victims? I mean these people do not even operate in hiding. They have very posh offices - they are even on the high street - and then the minister just simply tells Ugandans to go and do research? 

Isn’t it in order that the same minister actually should be the first one to close - not even license but close - those that they suspect to be fleecing people because they are known?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, arising from a petition that came to my office from the victims of one of these ponzi schemes, I invited the Prime Minister, the Minister of Finance, the Minister of State for Finance, the Bank of Uganda and the Uganda Micro Finance Regulatory Authority. We discovered that they gave a licence to that company - Dunamiscoins. However, the licence was for non-deposit taking. But how can someone from Kigezi know that “non-deposit taking” means you cannot put money there? Yet the certificate is in the office with a seal of the Government of Uganda. We also discovered that there had been no supervision for over a year.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, this matter was extensively discussed even with Bank of Uganda and it is doing research on this matter.

Secondly, what complicates the problem is many of these ponzi schemes are actually registered by the Uganda Registration Services Bureau without our knowledge as the ministry of finance. It is because we are not the ones responsible for registration of companies.

Therefore, we had a meeting between URSB, FIA, Ministry of Finance and Bank of Uganda to see how we can address this particular problem including doing investigations by FIA on most of these ponzi schemes so that Government can then be able to take action and close most of them.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Honourable minister, the responsibility of licensing of these crypto currencies and all these ponzi schemes should have been your interest that when we pass this policy, with all the agencies, you should have sat even before. It is now almost five to seven years down the road. The malpractices are too many.

You could have come out openly and pronounced yourselves against these illegal actions. When people are called to recruit and get deposits, they do not know whether they are dealing with the right people or the wrong ones. The ministry of finance has not issued any statement and now you have left it “To Whom It May Concern” but that is your responsibility.

These people are eroding the capital base of our economy; what do we do? People are making money and running away. Recently I got a complaint; they had opened an office. They said, “When you bring Shs 2 million, you get Shs 3 million.” When they got about Shs 5 billion, they closed and ran away - they disappeared. However, this is your responsibility as the ministry of finance.

Now these people are just getting money from poor people because they think that what these people are doing is the correct thing. The ministry of finance has never come out for the last five years. What do you want the public to do? What is your interest?

I thought it would have been your keen interest with technocrats to come out publicly - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: But in addition to the ministry supervision, in that meeting, we discovered that Centenary Bank and Stanbic Bank had been receiving a lot of money every day and it was going out the same day. Really, for the whole year, you could not notice this account? Too much money is moving out as it comes, until November - even the banks are accomplices.

5.56
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think it is only in this country where saga after saga is a normal practice.

This issue has persisted for a long time. My district was a victim about four months ago. An organisation came, robbed the local people of the little income that they had earned. If it was not the intervention of the RDC to arrest the ringleaders and recovered some little money, those ones would have also fallen victims.

Madam Speaker, something very interesting here; you talked about the banks. They are part and parcel of this and they are facilitating it. In addition, most of the members who are active in it reside within the bank. So, I am wondering what the Financial Intelligence Authority is doing. What is Bank of Uganda doing? Fine, about two months ago, there was a word from the Governor Bank of Uganda and he said he is not sure about this crypto currency issues. 

Madam speaker, these people operate with impunity. They are on radios convincing people and mobilising and exciting people and innocently fall victims. Ministry of finance, please wake up; where is the problem? You are not doing what you are supposed to do. You are leaving Ugandans perpetually in the hands of thieves who are coming to rob and go away. These are poor people already; you are talking about bringing them to the money economy, and yet the little they are getting is being swept. What do you expect Ugandans to do? I think it is very wrong. You should clamp down on these people –(Member timed out.)

5.58
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I remember some time back, I raised the issue of D9 when it had not closed and I got confirmation from the then minister - hon. Anite - who said that there was some money they had recovered and they were going to pay back some of the people.

If Members of Parliament can be duped, what do you expect of a common woman and man who live in Amuru to do? The minister said that people have to watch out and do research; how many of us can actually research?

Madam Speaker, when D9 was launching, it was very powerful; I remember it was even live on one of the national televisions. Therefore, if people are watching and seeing a fleet of vehicles and hearing that, “These are vehicles you are going to receive”, it is very enticing.

Therefore, even UCC and the media are helping in some of these things because they promote them. However, the media people will promote basing on what you have licensed. If you have given them the leeway to operate in Uganda, they will get the money and broadcast. These peopled have money.

Madam Speaker, they will use big names. I remember D9 in Kitintale put the photo of President Museveni. Therefore, all the people who love President Museveni will definitely go for it and that is how people have been duped. They put there a big signpost.

Unfortunately, like the former speaker has just said, why does it take so long for us as a country to realise that this is –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Actually, this group cheated by Dunamiscoins said that they saw the President commissioning that company in Sheraton. They said that even our President knows. They told us, “Our President was present; we saw him and that is why we believed that it is a good thing.” 

Honourable members, why aren’t these RDCs monitoring? You know, these people can rent a house for one month and then close. No one is doing research on who is renting this building. What is the background of that company? You find that within a month, they have closed but taken people’s money. 

6. 00
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Colleagues, Happy New Year to you.

Madam Speaker, there is something that we need to rectify, as Government. There is a laissez faire attitude and until we address that – Madam Speaker, when you raised this matter this afternoon, it reminded me about the motion that was brought here by the youth Member of Parliament for Western Uganda. We debated that motion and took a decision. And so, I personally expect my Government and the responsible minister to give us updates about the actions taken because it is no different from what we discussed during our debate on that motion. 

The RDCs are small leaders in local governments. If my minister, at this level, cannot give a directive and if my Government has not given a directive about what is consuming these Ugandans, what will the RDC do? 

I think we should start work from the national level so that our local governments can emulate, act and save our people. Thank you so much. 

MR GABRIEL AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, it is not that Government is not taking action. I know of a number of places where the RDCs were directed to go and close those ponzi scheme offices. I think the challenge that the police had was that yes, some of these ponzi schemes were –(Interruption) 

MS NAMBOOZE: Point of procedure.

THE SPEAKER: No, why can’t you let him finish his presentation? You can make your point after because I do not know what he is going to say. Why are anticipating?

MS NAMBOOZE: This is about what he has already said.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, go on.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. A while ago, before the minister was interrupted, he was about to give this House a very important message. I was seated here listening very attentively when the minister said that before he proceeded, he wanted to declare his interests. That word is on the Hansard. He has not declared his interests. Maybe when he declares the interests, this House will be in position to know why we have all these challenges around that matter. 

Madam Speaker, isn’t it procedurally okay for the minister, now that he has nobody interrupting him, to declare his interests in this matter once and for all? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The minister should declare the interests he was about to say. However, I just want to correct - I told you that the citizens told me that the President launched at Imperial Royale – that is where they saw him and they believed he knew about this and so it was good.  

MR AJEDRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I was saying, the challenge that the police had was the fact that many of these ponzi schemes had been actually registered by Government, specifically Uganda Registration Services Bureau (URSB). It was until some of them started to fail that people filed formal complaints with the police. That is when the Government now started to act. Therefore, it is not true that we are not acting; we are.

The reason I said I have particular interests is the fact that we are in the fourth industrial revolution. Most of these ponzi schemes and crypto currencies are underpinned by the technology called the block chain. Block Chain has lot more benefits than what – 

THE SPEAKER: What did you say? 

MR AJEDRA: Block chain technology. It underpins crypto currencies. Most of the crypto currencies run on block chains. The ponzi schemes, as I said, are just, as the name implies, were started by a gentleman called Ponzi. It was a pyramid scheme where people brought in money, he paid off those who joined earlier and then ran away with the money of those who joined late. That is how the name Ponzi scheme came about. 

I have done a lot of research on the ponzi schemes, the crypto currencies as well as the block chain. That is why I said there are those which are genuine and those which are nothing but a ponzi scheme. 

However, Madam Speaker, I will be more than happy to bring a report here on the status of these ponzi schemes but also on the potential benefits, which are on the block chain technology side, and inform Parliament, in terms of what actions Government is taking on these ponzi schemes. I will be more than happy to bring that report next week.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I really wish you people could be more proactive because – he has not declared. 

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, as I said, there are some genuine crypto currencies in the world. One of them, I can tell you, is Bitcoin. As we speak right now, there are over 1,500 crypto currencies in the world. Most of them are for investment and others are for trading.

Therefore, I, for one, am one of those who invested in the crypto currencies, not in the ponzi scheme; crypto currency underpinned by block chain technology and it is operational and working worldwide and that is the interest I wanted to declare.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, as a ministry, have you come to this House to explain the block chain and crypto currency? You have not. I think you should come and explain to us so that the country also knows. Otherwise, people are really being swindled. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I wish the honourable minister could clarify further because he said he has invested in one. I wish he could tell us here such that we can join that one, where he is benefiting. Can you declare to us which one you have invested in so that we go there and invest in it too? You should also tell us the fake ones. 

THE SPEAKER: No, do not recruit members from here. 

MR OKUPA: There is a reason we are putting it to him, Madam Speaker, because he said he was supposed to declare interest.

THE SPEAKER: Let him bring the report. We shall discuss it and members will make their own choices. I do not want him to recruit members from here. 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, before he brings the report, I think, according to the laws we passed in this House, I do not think  - maybe I need to be corrected – but crypto currency in this world or country, Uganda, has a legal framework and I want to know that law. Once you bring a report – 

THE SPEAKER: That is why I have asked him to brief the House and the country on the block chain and the crypto currency.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: On which law? 

THE SPEAKER: That is why I want him to come and tell us how he has done it. Come and report to this House.

6.09
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to raise a very serious matter involving attempted assassination of a Member of Parliament and aggravated robbery.

On 13 January 2020, hon. Katusabe, while in his area, got into problems in the evening at about 7.00, when he was stopped by some people who were later on known. If they were not known, it would be a little bit okay. They put him down at gun point when he was with three other people. He was with his two political assistants – one who works in Kampala and the other one who works in the constituency and another person. 

These other people – who are known to be UPDF soldiers and Uganda Police Force officers – later tried to put guns on him and decided to search his vehicle. 

They took off with $91,000 which he had prepared to go away with to his family in the US. This is political persecution. (Interjections) Well, he has another family in the US. (Laughter) He has his children in the US. 

On the 17th, we had a press conference with him and we said that if Parliament opens – it is very difficult for us to go and demand from out. I said that I would bring it before this House that police and UPDF should stop harassing us. The humiliation my colleague faced must be stopped. 

Also, that these people are known, why can’t they be arrested? To-date, nothing has been done. 

If nothing is done at all, we have decided that for all of us Members of Parliament, even if people condemn us that we care more for ourselves – but we care also for our people, we cannot go to demonstrate out – we are going to demonstrate in this Parliament. 

After adjournment, we are going to remain here in Parliament in the House until tomorrow, if we cannot be given an answer by the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Security. 

They should explain to us why this OC of Bwera is going scot-free when he was the one instructing and deploying his people. Even the DPC and the RDC of Bwera should be brought to book. 

They even said that hon. Katusabe would not be the first MP to die. In this Parliament we lost an MP in very unclear circumstances. If he is not going to be the first to die, that means that they are responsible for the death of our colleague. 

Dear Members of Parliament, if you care about human rights – 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the matter raised by the Leader of the Opposition is a very serious one. In this House, the person she is talking about is here. Is it procedurally right for him not to present his case as a personal statement? 

Since the Minister of Defence is also in the House we should be able to sort this matter before we start getting ultimatums. Is it right for us to proceed when the person who was directly affected is here and can speak to the matter? He knows the people well. He knows whether they are UPDF or police officers and he would be able to know and tell us. 

The Minister of Internal Affairs is here and he should be able to respond to this matter. It is a serious matter because it is a matter that affects the life of one of our colleagues. Is it procedurally right for us to proceed that way?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Leader of the Opposition represents that party. I think she has a right to complain on behalf of the member. He can give information but he is sitting there and is listening. She is speaking on behalf of that side.

MS BETTY AOL: Madam Speaker, when the honourable member came to my office, he cried. He is emotionally affected and traumatised. That is why for me, as the Leader of the Opposition, it is right to stand here and listen from the ministries of defence, internal affairs and security. 

If you are not going to take action on this DPC who deployed the people who robbed and put our colleague at gun point, then we are going to sleep here tonight. Those who care about human life will sleep here; if you do not care you go. 

This reminds us of the late hon. Abiriga who was killed. How could they remind us about that? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Internal Affairs, have you received a report concerning the attack on hon. Atkins Katusabe which occurred on 13 January 2020? 

MS NANTABA: Madam Speaker, before he comes, can you allow me to give information?

THE SPEAKER: Is it on this matter?

MS NANTABA: Not on this one.

THE SPEAKER: Let us finish this one and I will call you. I have asked the minister whether he is aware of that, let him tell us. 

6.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had the courtesy of receiving the statement by the Leader of the Opposition this afternoon here in the House. This is the statement, I think, from which she is summarising. I do not know whether I can use it to quote. If she owns it, then I can quote it.

Yes, earlier on I had got some newspaper reports about the press conference the Leader of the Opposition addressed regarding the incident that happened on the 13th of January. 

I consulted verbally with my police authorities in Kasese and the summary of the events that I got differs significantly from what has been said here in this statement. 

According to the information that I gathered from the verbal briefing, the hon. Atkins Katusabe was reported to have been addressing a rally at a place in his constituency on 13 January 2020 at 8.50 p.m. which is about 10 minutes to 9.00 p.m. at night at a place called Karukumiza village, Kamasasa Parish, Karambi Sub-county, Kasese District. 

When the OC of Karambi Sub-county received that information, he proceeded to that village together with some members of the LDU, because this was to them, as security people, a strange meeting of about 300 people – a public rally taking place at night and we all know the sensitivity of the security issues along the border.

The first person to proceed was the Officer in Charge (OC) Karambi Sub county, with that team. When they arrived there, indeed, they found the rally was taking place. When the rest of the population noticed that these people were coming, they took off. The person who remained was hon. Atkins Katusabe, together with his management. He asked these people why they were interrupting his rally. Their response was that: they did not know; this was a rally at night, and it was dangerous not only for himself but also for the security of the area. 

Therefore, they proceeded to ring the OC of Bwera Police Station, a one Ayesiga. They called him on phone, explaining where they were and the circumstances in which they found themselves. Ayesiga, in turn contacted the Regional Police Commander Rwenzori East, a one Samuel Asiimwe, for guidance. 

According to the information that I have got, the RPC Asiimwe asked Ayesiga to give his phone to hon. Atkins so that he could talk to the honourable. He talked to him and advised that the meeting should not take place and the honourable should move to his safety. That is what happened. According to the report I got, there was no resistance from the honourable member. He behaved honourably, moved to safety and the incident ended. 

There has been no police report up to now. I have asked Bwera, I have asked the OC Karambi Subcounty and the RPC Rwenzori for any statement from the member on this assassination attempt and any money which has been stolen from him. This is a statement which, naturally, I would have expected to have been made in that region. 

Not only that, this morning we had a different meeting with the leadership of the police – involving the Inspector General of Police himself, his deputy, the human resource director and my senior minister – and we took opportunity to ask whether they checked in all the police stations in the whole of Uganda and found any statement made by the honourable member about the attempted assassination or what he described here as “active assassination attempt” but there is no statement.

Madam Speaker, the member could have grounds or different facts. However, in the absence of the statement of that nature anywhere, the police and we who are in charge of police and defence – because the LDUs were involved – would find it extremely difficult to proceed and arrest any individual just because it has been said by an honourable Member of Parliament. We wouldn’t do that because it would not be within the law.

My advice is that it is not yet very late. Since, according to the Leader of the Opposition the honourable member is very traumatised, after getting time and rest, he should proceed to a police station, make a candid statement and we shall follow it up. First of all, assassination is criminal. Theft is criminal. The statement will guide us in the action we shall take.

Finally, as for sleeping here in Parliament, Madam Speaker, this Parliament is guarded by the Uganda Police under the Government of Uganda. It is secure. If for any reason somebody feels that tonight or even the following night he should have a comfortable night in here, that is at their discretion. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us ask hon. Katusabe to tell us his side.

6.26
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the opportunity. I also thank the Leader of the Opposition for the statement.

Madam Speaker, I would like to believe that we are a country that is anchored on a legal and constitutional system. If that were to be the case, my honourable brother, Obiga Kania, is unfit to serve this country –(Interjection)- I am coming; just hold on a little bit. The reason why I am saying he is unfit is because he claims to have had a meeting with the police leadership –[Ms Kamateeka: “Order!”]- This is about my life, please!

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please calm down. Let us hear from the complainant. 

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, the reason why I am saying my brother is unfit is that after I had  a meeting in your office and the Leader of the Opposition, I went to the CIID Headquarters in Kibuli and I recorded a statement together with the three political assistants that I survived death with. The reference number is CID HQRS GEF: 066/2020. It is right here. That is the reason why I am saying my brother is unfit to hold that office. GF01/2020

Madam Speaker, nothing of what he has said borders on the truth. This is an assassination attempt that literally shook the entire district and it should worry everybody. We are a country that has a bitter and painful history. It wouldn’t have been the Tenth Parliament when we had our own – my elder brother, hon. Abiriga (RIP) – who was assassinated.

Madam Speaker, I was in my car, I was not at a rally. I was pulled out of the car and the thing that I did, as a civilised person, was to pull out my card. I said, “I am Atkins Katusabe, Member of Parliament in this community.”
	
As soon as I flashed the card, I was put on gun point; one gun to my head and another to my chest. It was like I had said, “Look, you have been looking for the deputy commander of Joseph Kony, here I am.” It was as if I said, “You have been looking for the Chief of Defence Forces in the ADF, here I am.” The only crime I committed was to flash this card, which I believe is a property of Government.

My political assistants were all seated on the ground and they wanted me to sit on the ground; I struggled. Here I was among my constituents, the people that call me their leader and they were looking at me in tears. With a gun to my head and a gun to my chest, they said, sit down. I told them, if you want to shoot me, shoot me. How could I sit down when I had identified myself?

They forced me on the ground and removed my shoes. At first when I squatted, they said that they wanted me to sit down. I sat on the ground; they removed my shoes and threw them three metres away. I was at gun point, in my constituency, after identifying myself.

After this submission, I will deposit this card back to the Clerk of Parliament. Until this card recovers its dignity, I will not have it again. I have other identifications and I can identify myself by other means but not with this card. I was put on gunpoint because of this card and this Government has got to explain why.

When I sat down embarrassed, humiliated, dehumanised, cursing the day I was born and why I ever ran for the office of Member of Parliament, these officers said that they were looking for the driver who was still in the car. I said, but you pulled me out of my car and I was the one driving. You cannot be asking for a driver when the driver is on gunpoint seated here. 

They went and searched the car. Immediately after searching the car, the four men that went to my car then went and whispered to the commander. The commander said, I order you to leave this place as soon as now and should you still hold up here, I will arrest you because I am going to follow you.

Madam Speaker, I had no option. I put on my shoes, dusted off myself and entered the car. I told these people, you have the freedom to choose your actions but you will not have the same freedom to choose the consequences of your actions.

Madam Speaker, injustice anywhere is injustice everywhere. For evil to thrive or flourish, you need only one ingredient; for good people to do nothing. I come from a community that has never recovered. When they saw their leader going through this, everybody said, “What crime did we commit as Bakonzo? Which application did we make for God to create us as Kasese or Bakonzo people”?

Madam Speaker, when I checked the car, it dawned on me that the reason they undertook a search was to look for whatever was valuable in the car and I lost money. You have, in your office, a letter asking for permission to allow me travel for some social obligations. I do not want to take a lot of time but I made fervent prayers.

We are better than this, as a country. We need to bring dignity back to the House. Why should an MP be looked at as an enemy of Government?

In other civilised societies, the moment you hold that office of MP, you are just one inch to either becoming a Prime Minister of that country or a Speaker or even the President. We are not going to allow cover-ups; this is criminality.

If it was not for the grace of God and the Blood of Jesus that covers me all day, I would be dead and it would be my casket right here. The killers are known, the people that robbed me at gun point are known and they are only strengthened by people like hon. Kania Obiga.

As I conclude, while in the Office of the Leader of the Opposition, I broke down because I could not come to terms and I had forgotten my handkerchief. The following day when I came to your office, I ensured that I carried along a handkerchief but good enough, when I came to your office, I did not break down so the handkerchief kept in my pocket.

Madam Speaker, it is either now or never. We have to stand together to save our country. This criminality cannot be tolerated; we can do better than this. I do not want to play primitive politics; I would have gone back to my community and ordered the 90 per cent support that I have to descend on all the police posts in my community but I did not do that. I came to your office. 

I beg to stop here because I know that my colleagues go through the same but I think this is the only opportunity that we have to address these assassination attempts. We claim we do not know who killed so and so and yes, I would like to believe this but if this does not originate from Government, this is the only opportunity that Government has to prove its worth. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Now that the minister has got this information, I do not know whether he will investigate this issue. You have now got the SD number.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: We have similar experiences, Madam Speaker, that we would also like to give.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Idah Nantaba, I will come to you. Let us finish with Kasese.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: We have similar experiences; we should first put them forward.

MR OBIGA KANIA: I have two small points. I am not debating; I am simply putting forward two points. Regarding the file reference which my honourable colleague referred to as GF01/2020; that is a file which was opened by the police on his verbal allegation that his $91,000 had been stolen. I then said he had not made any recent statement.

Two, regarding the assassination; the police opened their own file of inquiry, not on the instructions or a statement from the honourable member. It is CRB –(Interjections)– This is by the police –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, on their own volition, they decided that they should open a case?

MR OBIGA KANIA: No, they have not. What they have said is; this is Reference CRB21/2020 and this is inquiry into the illegal meeting. It is an investigation by the police in their whole initiative, not because they were moved by the honourable member.

As far as the statement is concerned, there is no statement from the honourable member anywhere in the police position. This is what I stand for –(Interruption)

MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a point of procedure. I must say that I am touched by the statement made by my honourable colleague, hon. Atkins Katusabe. However, is it not procedurally right that he makes his statement in writing because accordingly –(Interjection)– I have a point here. Going by his accent and what-have-you, we would have wanted to understand him 100 per cent. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: The Speaker has heard and the Hansard is clear.

MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When hon. Okupa was saying that the Member should come in with a personal statement, I think other people thought he did not want the Leader of the Opposition to be the one to make the statement. However, actually, he wanted people to be in Katusabe’s shoes. Now that you have listened to his story, you feel the magnitude of the matter. You feel how he felt like. 

Early last year, almost the same thing happened to me with my family. People with guns came into our home at 1.00 a.m. When they came to our home, we saw them making lines around the compound. What we did was to ask police – the same police of Bwera – whether they are the ones who had sent security to our home. They said, “No.” We called the police in Kasese. “Are you the ones who have sent security to our home?” They also said, “No.”

We have our system with other neighbours. We send messages in case of anything. We circulated a WhatsApp message to our neighbours that we were surrounded. I even called the police bosses in Kampala that we have a problem in our home. The OC Bwera said, “The team you are telling us about seems to be bigger; we want to get a combined effort.” 

By the time the ones whom we notified at 1.00 a.m. arrived in our house, it was past four. When they arrived, they even came with a siren car. We asked ourselves, “Are these people alerting the criminals or what? Were they aware that these criminals are coming here?”

Madam Speaker, we heard people knocking on our door. We said we were not going to open because we did not know whether we were dealing with the good people or the bad ones. Even if they were the good people and we called them, they should have alerted us that they were now in the compound. We did not open. They went back.

In the morning, the same police officers we gave information that we had been attacked circulated messages that it was a rumour. After all, we were using GPS. “Hon. Bihande and the wife are in Kampala.” They said that the GPS locations tracing us from our phones indicated that we were in Kampala. Shame upon them because very early in the morning at seven o’clock, we addressed a press conference. If we were in Kampala and they were circulating these messages at six o’clock yet at seven, we were addressing a press conference in Kasese, did we fly?

Madam Speaker, I am telling you that we have a problem but have nowhere to run. A member spoke here before this issue came up that even in our homes, we cannot even have visitors. Yesterday, we were travelling from Kasese; someone called my husband and said, “I am calling from internal security. We understand you have a guest in your home. Can you hand over that guest to police?”

We asked, “Which home; is it the Kampala or Kasese home?” We were from Kasese coming to Kampala. Which guest are they talking about? Does it mean we no longer even have a right to host people? You are being monitored. You go to a toilet and you are told you are now in a toilet, “Therefore, do it slowly because we are looking at you.”

Madam Speaker, we are traumatised. The same thing happened when they were going to kill people in Kasese. We called leaders and each leader we called said, “No, it cannot happen. Nobody can do that; do not be alarmists”. It happened.

I do not want us to come here and cry when a member has been gunned down. You will start speaking nice things about the member and become apologetic. Sort issues out before they run out of hand. For our leaders who are holding offices; hold them properly, have some courtesy and respect for humanity.

If a member reports that his or her life is in danger, treat it as a serious matter. When you realise maybe later that it was not as serious as the member alleges, you can come back to him or her and say, “Hey brother/sister, please take it easy. It was not as you suspected.” However, brushing it off like this – hon. Obiga Kania, you are not the one I know.

Madam Speaker, our lives are in danger. We need protection from this House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not want a debate on this issue. This matter should be under investigation. We cannot start discussing the issue now. Honourable members, hon. Katusabe came to my office very unhappy, traumatised and feeling humiliated.

He actually told me that he does not know whether he is worth being called an MP, after being forced to sit down and undressed in front of three people he came with to my office. He said, “These are the men I was with. We were coming from a funeral and then I was stopped.”

That is a matter that has to be investigated. How could he simply report theft of money, from where; from the air? The money came from somewhere. Therefore, honourable minister, we need an investigation on this matter; not simply the disappearance of the money but the conduct, assaults and humiliation towards hon. Katusabe. 

He is not a stranger; he showed his card that he is a Member of Parliament; No.17 in the hierarchy of Uganda, isn’t it and it is not an issue? How do we handle this? We must have an investigation into this issue, hon. Obiga Kania. Soon, another Member of Parliament will be taken and we shall come here complaining. What can you do? We do not need more comments; we need an investigation.

MR OBIGA KANIA: Madam Speaker, I do not have to speak like a Catholic; I speak for all Ugandans. When I spoke here, I ended my statement by saying that now that hon. Katusabe is cooling down, I would like him to make a formal statement at any police station of his choice. That will enable us to start the investigation. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Katusabe, can you make a statement at the Parliamentary Police Station and we start from there?

MR KATUSABE: I do not know where my elder brother, hon. Obiga Kania, is coming from. This is crystal clear. I think this should worry everybody because by the time somebody holds the portfolio of Minister of State for Internal Affairs, he should be well conversant with the basics; this is elementary. 

I have just given a file reference with a recorded statement not only by myself but by my three political assistants. What is the minister talking about? I think he deserves some orientation -(Laughter)- so that he is in a position to appreciate his duties and responsibilities. 

I said they got to do this really fast because I need money recovered from the criminals. It is sad that the criminals who put me at gun point, wanted to assassinate me and robbed me are the same people now he is talking about opening a file on. How sad? We are better than this. The earlier we address this, the better. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from hon. Nantaba, if she has something to say. 

6.52
MS IDAH NANTABA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to extend my sincere appreciation to you for the moral support you have accorded me in the last nine months. Thank you for extending my holiday so that I would heal from the trauma that I have undergone. 

Let me also thank Members of Parliament who stood with me, visited and comforted me and made sure that I go through this hardship. 

I thank the Leader of the Opposition who has found time to raise this matter on the Floor of Parliament on behalf of our brother, hon. Katusabe. I know what it means. I know many of us do not know what it means. 

Last year, surprisingly, I received a phone call from the late Cerinah Nebanda’s mother. She told me, “Hon. Nantaba, you are going to be killed. The very person who killed my daughter is going to kill you.” I was shocked because I did not know where she got my phone number from. I kept listening in and she said, “You have to come to me and I give you information.” I did not take it seriously, but I shared it with somebody who said maybe because she lost her child, she was still going through that trauma. I told her, in response that I would still go to see her to get more information, but the truth is that I did not go to her home; little did I know that she meant what she said. 

Madam Speaker, this Parliament has lost Members to assassination. Many of us who were here witnessed hon. Nebanda’s death. A lot was said. I remember the Inspector General of Police (IGP) then declared Nebanda’s death to have been caused by an overdose of cocaine before even a post-mortem was done. Police was already declaring that she had an overdose of cocaine. 

Hon. Katusabe’s matter touches the security organs of this country, and that is inclusive of the police and the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF). In my matter, as a civilian, I had to run to the police to report a suspect. When I reported the suspect, I was comforted by the DPC of Naggalama who advised that I should stay in her office as she takes on the pursuit of the suspect.

Surprisingly, that morning, the DPC of Kayunga received a phone call –(Interjections)- I am talking about police before I can comment on what hon. Obiga Kania has said. The DPC of Kayunga rang me at 9.30 a.m. and told me that surprisingly, he had been ordered to vacate office. It was a Sunday morning, he had no letter of postage to the next station but he had been told to vacate office that morning at 9.30. I asked him what the reasons were and he could not give me any. 

Later on, he also informed me that the Regional Police Commander had also been ordered by bosses from above to leave office. They were told to vacate on a Sunday morning without letters, reasons or knowing where they were going. I was told by the DPC that morning but I still could not pick the alarm. 

Thirty minutes after I finished talking to the DPC, a patrol vehicle came to my house and parked in my compound uninvited. One of my aides then came running and said, “A police officer has been calling me from 7.00a.m. wondering where you are but now he has parked a police car in your compound saying he wants to see you.” I asked him to let the police officer in. 

I asked this police officer, “How can I help you?” His response was, “We need you to fix our tyres.” Madam Speaker, my house is not a garage, neither is it a shop for tyres. I do not fix police patrol car tyres but here I was being asked by a police officer to fix the tyres of the patrol car. I said, “You have your budget. I do not have a budget for fixing tyres for police cars.” 

Meanwhile, I was sensing that he had something else to tell me because he came uninvited. I waited for this man to tell me what else had brought him to my house but he could not say a word. I told him, “Unfortunately, I can only reach out to your bosses in Kampala but I do not have money to buy you tyres.” Indeed, this man said, “Honourable, that was it” and we left the house because I was heading to Busana to distribute my NAADS’ seeds. This man kept around but I thank God that I changed my plan and route. I changed the route to go now to Kampala. I switched to Kampala instead of going where I was going. I did not know how it happened but that was God’s plan.

Madam Speaker, I ran to the police to report a suspect. The DPC advised me to sit in her office and wait for the suspect. Surprisingly, Naggalama Police Station, where I ran to, was full of UPDF officers, police and patrol vehicles. I did not know for what purpose they were there that day. However, I waited in her office for hours. I was later on told that the suspect had been arrested. I said, “Thank God he has been arrested.” After one hour plus, I was told that the suspect had been gunned down.

Madam Speaker, the honourable member was asking where we should run to. I ran to police like any other civilised person; that is where I was supposed to go. However, police then arrested a suspect – I am told the Naggalama police arrested and handcuffed him, put him on a patrol vehicle and another police van from Kawempe came and got him off the patrol vehicle and killed him. These are two police stations - Naggalama on the way to Kayunga and Kawempe in Kampala; one comes and arrests and the other one comes and kills the suspect.

Madam Speaker, I was told there was an order to kill a suspect. Hon. Obiga Kania, nine months down the road, like we do not have Cerinah Nebanda and Kagezi’s reports about their deaths, where is hon. Abiriga’s report and the suspect who killed him? Where are the suspects that killed Kaweesi, Kiggundu and Kirumira? Where are the reports about these assassinations?

The same minister is coming here to ask a Member of Parliament to make a statement. Even when I made one in my house and Ms Akullo came and took it, they still asked me to go and make another and told the entire country that I had refused to make a statement. That is the police! I will call my minister “heartless”; to me, that is the best description of hon. Obiga Kania – heartless. This is because he would not even prevail over his police that was involved. Why did police kill a suspect after arresting him? Why didn’t they investigate, because they arrested him? Why didn’t they go further with investigations and arraign him before court for trial? Why did they have to silence him immediately?

Madam Speaker, the biggest weapon of these killers who are in our security organs – The killers are in police. They are in our security organs and not anywhere outside. They should even stop talking about the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) because the killers are within. The President said that our Police are kawukuminised – rotten - but because they have media, they play with the minds of Ugandans. 

How police came up with a bag of food for children and said the man was going to school – This man who was on a bike did not have a bag. Where they got a bag with food and say that he was carrying food for his children, where Mr Enanga gets all that rubbish from, I do not know. However, because I was told to be silent in my house and not say anything, for them they were playing with the media to hoodwink the public to think this was an innocent man going to school to visit his children. If he was innocent, why did they kill him after arresting and handcuffing him and putting him on the patrol vehicle? Why did Kawempe police come and kill this man? All this is not told to the public.

The person who ordered the DPC of Kayunga to vacate office that morning is not talked about. The order to kill a suspect in handcuffs is not talked about. Who ordered a police officer in broad daylight? That was a very candid act because no police officer would arrest a suspect in broad daylight, get off the patrol car and then shoot him. Even up to now, he is not appearing in court. Why are they hiding him wherever they are hiding him? 

Madam Speaker, I know Members of Parliament have not gone through this and do not know what it means to survive an assassination. I am just grateful and thankful to the God I worship that I am alive but one day and time when it happens to another person, maybe they will know. However, that is not my prayer because we all need life. 

This honourable House should take it seriously that any time you can be assassinated for whatever reason. I have heard all the rubbish around my assassination attempt and you can name it anything but no one deserves to die; we all deserve to live because we have loved ones, children and other people to look after and a life to lead. Hon. Abiriga died, where is the suspect who killed him? How come hon. Obiga Kania cannot parade the suspect before courts of law?

Madam Speaker, I understand what my brother is going through and only pray that one day he brings a report about the assassination attempt of hon. Idah Nantaba and why police had to silence this man who had been arrested. They have a reason why they silenced him. I had all the means to do what they did but we took the law where it was supposed to be handled. We ran to the police and reported the matter so that we get to understand why this man was trailing us but we never got the answer.

Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for according me this time. I pray that you accord me more time to produce a statement about this matter because the mafia involved are so powerful that they can silence anybody and anything. That is why the country has a different version of the story and I, who was present, have a different version too.

The public has been hoodwinked that you could even hear a Member of Parliament asking, “Why did you make this man die for no reason?” I just could not explain because they do not know. Someone is manning and controlling the media to, like hon. Katusabe has said, embarrass, dehumanise and make you look like you are the culprit here. However, Madam Speaker, the truth is that the killer is within the system and not outside.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

7.08
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. How I wish I was given some more time to speak about this because you never know that some of the statements we make here may look simple but you may be making your last statement.

I would like to state that personally, I have survived three attempts. Those of you who happen to have read newspapers in November, you will have read that I was attacked at my home. Good enough, I had not moved out of the house but my driver was cut. I now find myself with security personnel whom I would not be moving with. That was the third time.

The first time was in 2017. I went to the police and was given two police officers who were demanding Shs 20,000 per night. That means I was paying Shs 60,000 per night. I would not be with them for more than two months.

Allow me to make this statement here. In March, the Committee on Presidential Affairs went to State House. We were discussing matters relating to our budget. When I talked about issues of Kasese, a Member who is very senior in Government told me that they had given up on Kasese. I do not know under what circumstances they had done so. 

You remember that in 2016, we had issues in Kasese. By the moral rules of this House, the House has not given us justice by listening to what happened in Kasese. These memories are still fresh in our minds. At one time, I remember witnessing over 100 dead bodies in Kasese. I was the only Member of Parliament present who acted as a reverend to witness the burial of the bodies - clapping, singing and praying. However, because of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, I have not got an opportunity to speak about them.

On the same day in November when I was attacked, I had a church function in Kahokya Subcounty. When the police realised that the chief guest was a politician and I was speaking to the congregation, the officer-in-charge stood behind and stopped me from speaking. I was speaking in my constituency before a congregation of over 1,000 people.

The next day, I went to the DPC at Katwe-Kabatoro and held a meeting with them. He promised to come and explain to the community what happened. I travelled on the date we had set. When I went back, it had been postponed.

What happened to my colleague, Katusabe, is not the beginning. It has happened before and we are yet to see more. I would like to jog the memories of this House to what happened to Kirumira. He made statements day after day and reached an extent of showing the public where he was going to be buried. Indeed, he was buried.

Today it may be Katusabe, the other day it was Winnie, tomorrow you may be the one. It should not be a surprise that some of us may not come here in the next Parliament. For you who may have the opportunity to come back, people might not be here not because they failed elections but simply because they no longer exist. When you see men crying at funerals, you know that the situation is beyond normal. This is where we are. 

I would like to ask that we give the matter of my brother, hon. Katusabe, the urgency and need it deserves without being defensive. My brother and Mzee, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, take this serious. We were here just a few years back with our brother, Abiriga, from Arua; we are not with him today. We thought he was the safest person by virtue of his dress code. We thought he would be more protected than the others, but where is now? 

I would like to be more specific about us, the Members of Parliament from Kasese, together with the others that you have heard; we are not safe. We do not know where to go now. This House must debate and engage the Executive and other people who are concerned so that we find how we can leverage the situation we are in.  Thank you.

The speaker: Honourable members, the difficulty I have is that I do not know how we shall end this matter. We cannot make a resolution – You are a senior cadre who has gone countrywide.

7.15
Mr Robert migadde (NRM, Buvuma Islands County):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true we have lost colleagues. Before their death, those colleagues indicated to us that something is happening and Government did not take any steps to help.

I remember last year, a letter threatening my life was surprisingly dropped at the DPC’s office. I met the Minister of Internal Affairs. They were investigating it and arrests were made without my knowledge. I, the person they were protecting, was not aware that there were people running after me yet four people were in police cells. There was even a statement made at the Media Centre; the police said, “We have information; there are people we are investigating.” I, the victim, was not aware and I have never been called and told what transpired.

When I talked to the then Minister of Internal Affairs, he told me, “Do not bring it on the Floor of Parliament; we are handling it.” I thought they were handling it but two months later, one of my security dogs was poisoned and it died. I got another one and two months later, it was also poisoned.

In Buvuma, guns are being discovered, with the last being discovered two weeks ago where a person was shot dead at Kiyindi Landing Site. Life seems to be normal; no one is concerned. There is no response mechanism from security teams about what they are doing.

Is the minister always just prepared to brief Parliament when we have lost a colleague? What solution can we provide for these specific issues? It is hurting to always come here and say that this one or the other one is under threat. As Members of Parliament, we cannot keep moving with security personnel everywhere.

I think we need a solution, especially now that we are going into campaigns. Anything can happen for political reasons. Therefore, Madam Speaker, the minister owes us an explanation on how they are planning to cater for the security of Members of Parliament, especially now that we are going through this trying activity. We do not want to witness another Member going through a similar scenario. We do not want to see Parliament requesting for a supplementary for coffins saying, “We never expected five Members to die and we only budgeted for two; therefore, Commission, you must provide for additional three coffins.”

Madam Speaker, we need adequate responses and the time is now, not tomorrow. The responsible officers are available. We do not need to appoint anyone new to provide answers. They are well versed with the sector that they were given and they should give us answers. Thank you.

MS WATONGOLA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If my colleagues and I discuss this matter now, we might dilute the investigations. We expect to get good results arising from what hon. Katusabe has told us because the minister had a contrary statement to that of hon. Katusabe.

Madam Speaker, earlier on you had guided that we wait for an investigation. If we continue discussing this matter, we might even give information to those who are going to investigate. My concern is: Who is going to investigate? Police is going to carry out investigations but are we proceeding well if we allow the police to investigate this matter that concerns itself?

Madam Speaker, I am raising a procedural matter; I pray that you guide on who is going to conduct the investigations. Thereafter, we should stay the discussion until the matter comes back on the Floor of Parliament. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am really constrained because there is an investigation. We are going to touch on the issues and then do not touch on them and so on. 

However, I would like to ask the minister to reconcile his statement with the statement made by hon. Katusabe and in particular, with the information he has brought about a complaint he raised at CID headquarters. If you could come back on Thursday and harmonise for us his statement and your statement, then we would know how to move.

He says he made a statement and you are saying there is no statement, but he has brought the SD number here. Honourable members, we are not going to make a decision on a general debate. The issue is about what happened to hon. Katusabe. If you want a general debate on our security, we can organise one but we are dealing with hon. Katusabe’s issue for now.

7.23
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, according to what the minister articulated here, it looks like they turned it around. You even wonder whether the police will be effective enough in this investigation. We are stuck.

The honourable minister is saying that it is the police, which made a statement to investigate the allegations when truly, it was hon. Katusabe who was put at gunpoint, robbed by the police and UPDF and now you want to defend them. Therefore, my proposal is, if you cannot order the arrest of these people whose names are known, then at least for today we can spend a night here in Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have instructed the minister. On Thursday, I want an explanation to harmonise what the honourable member has said about his complaint and what you have said, that there is no complaint. About sleeping, that is their business.

MR WALUSAWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Leader of the Opposition, you have heard how the House and indeed how the Speaker is sympathetic towards you. I would request that you stay the proposal you had brought that you sleep in her Chambers until Thursday. In good faith, let us wait for the minister’s statement on Thursday. 

People bring petitions to her Chambers. It is my humble request that in case you want to sleep, go to hon. Obiga Kania’s office and stay there. I am just stating my request to the Leader of the Opposition. As a mother, consider your fellow elder, a mother. Why should you sleep in her office when she is not the cause of the trouble? If it is sleeping, I would beg that they either go to police headquarters or the Ministry of Defence but not in your office. (Laughter)

7.26
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, the challenge we have is that the police is supposed to investigate itself. At the same time, from the statement of the minister, the police are also the complainant because they have opened a file against hon. Katusabe. Much as he has also complained, the police also have a file on him.

In this situation, looking at where we are moving, you are saying he should come here to compromise his position. He is a complainant and at the same time, there is a complaint against him. Now, you wonder who should investigate who in this situation.

When the former minister was talking, I got so hurt. On Friday, I interacted with one of the ministers who is no longer in the Cabinet. He told me how he escaped poisoning six times and assassination three times. He said, in the presence of the person who has been nominated as Deputy Attorney-General, “You are better off out of that circle. When you go there, it is almost a death trap.” 

I feel there is something wrong in the country that this House has to investigate and make sure we change because the word “mafia” keeps coming up every time. Where are the mafia from? Today, we are told they are within. The President even says they are within. Who is supposed to deal with the issue? I think we have to take it up. That is my concern.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when the minister came to the Floor, he said hon. Katusabe did not make any complaint to any police station. What he knows is a complaint initiated by the police that hon. Katusabe was holding a public rally at night. That is the complaint they have.

However, hon. Katusabe has come here and said he went to the CIID headquarters. He has given us a reference number where he says he reported what transpired in Bwera as well as the theft of the money. That is what I want the minister to come back and confirm to this House. We want to know what happened to the complaint at Kibuli by hon. Katusabe. If it is not there, let us know, but the reference number is here. 

MR OBIGA KANIA: Madam Speaker, this is an investigation. The guidance I seek from you is: If you wish me to come on Thursday to make a statement, is it about the existence of the files and the statement made by hon. Katusabe or is it the substance? If it is the substance, I cannot make a statement on a matter which is being investigated in Parliament. I cannot.

What I said earlier was that there were two files opened in Kasese by the police because of the general nature of the complaint and the situation that happened there. These were not related to the statements made by hon. Katusabe. If the police are to continue further to investigate, then hon. Katusabe should formally make an accusation at a CIID office where he mentions those officers. Once those officers are mentioned in his statement, it will now be the duty of the investigating officers to summon those people to make counterstatements and from there, to see whether they can be arrested or not. Otherwise, based on the general statements which were made, including what was read here, I cannot give an order that these people be arrested. This is all I am seeking. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we are not saying that you should arrest them. First, we shall want to know who the complainant is in that case where he was addressing a rally. What we want you to explain is if he made a complaint to Kibuli, what has the Uganda Police Force done about it? That is what we want to know. What have you done about his complaint he made at Kibuli on the assault, arrest and the money? What are you doing? That is what we want to hear. 

MR OBIGA KANIA: That is fine. I will bring all those details of the file, reference and the dates when the statements were made and table them here on Thursday. That is where we shall hand over the issues to the investigating officers. That is where we shall stop for the time being because we cannot give an order to the investigating officers. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have spent a lot of time on all these important issues but there were just some two small issues I wanted us to handle. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON TAX EXPENDITURE FOR THE PERIOD OCTOBER TO DECEMBER 2019, FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

7.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Article 152(2) of the Constitution requires me periodically to report to Parliament on the exercise of powers conferred upon me by any law to waive or vary a tax imposed by law.

Additionally, Section 71(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, as amended, requires a person or an authority granted power to exempt the payment or to vary any tax under the Act of Parliament to report the matter to Parliament in each financial year on or before 30th of September, 31st of December, 31st of March and 30th of June. 

Madam Speaker, accordingly, for the purpose of this report to Parliament, during the period of October to December 2019 I have not exercised the powers to grant me to waive or vary any tax.  I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: That is information to the House. 

PETITION BY FORMER EMPLOYEES OF THE UGANDA POSTS AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS CORPORATION (UP&TC) OVER THE PROCESS OF DIVESTITURE OF LAND AND HOUSES AT MPOMA SATELLITE STATION

THE SPEAKER: As you are aware, it is the title and the prayers only. 

7.35
MR WILSON KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a petition that is presented to this House by former employees of Mpoma Satellite Station in Mukono. 

Under rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, I present to this House a petition of the former employees of Uganda Posts and Telecommunications Corporation (UP&TC), who are sitting tenants on UP&TC houses of Mpoma Satellite Station in Mukono, over the process of divesture of land and houses that had been allocated to them at Mpoma Satellite Station. This petition states as follows: 

Your petitioners are former employees of the Uganda Posts and Telecommunications Corporation, who were deployed at Mpoma Satellite Station and they are petitioning Parliament over the process of divesture of land and houses that had been allocated to them at Mpoma Satellite Station in Mukono. 

Your petitioners are sitting tenants on land – 

THE SPEAKER: No, go to the prayers, not the body. 

MR KUMAMA: Their prayers, therefore, are as follows: 

1. 	That Parliament designates its committee to investigate the handling of the divesture of Government pool houses of Uganda Telecom Limited (UTL) at Mpoma Satellite Station, with a view of streamlining the process with the national policy, which seeks to give first priority of purchase to the sitting tenants. 

2. 	That Parliament considers the fate of the petitioners by securing their accommodation at Mpoma Satellite Station, since they have never been paid their terminal benefits and as such have no means to obtain any livelihood, let alone attaining accommodation for themselves. 

3. 	That Parliament ensures that the administrator of UTL pays off the petitioners’ pension in order to enable them pay for the houses in which they are sitting tenants. 

Your petitioners are duty bound and will ever pray. And hereby, eight of them appended their signatures on behalf of 39 affected petitioners.

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Nsamba. The petition is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for expeditious handling and report back. 

NOMINATION OF PARLIAMENTARY COMMISSIONERS IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 11(4) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

7.35
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. 

In accordance with Section 2 (2b) and 6H of the Administration of Parliament Act, 2006 and rule 11 (4) of our Rules of Procedure, I beg to nominate the following Members of Parliament for election as backbench commissioners to replace hon. Peter Ogwang, MP for Usuk County, from the NRM party, who was appointed as a Minister of State for Information Communication Technology; and hon. Robinah Nabanjja, Woman MP for Kakumiro District, who was appointed Minister of State for Health, General Duties: Hon. Solomon Silwany, MP for Bukoli County Central; and hon. Safia Nalule Juuko, PWD, NRM. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to nominate. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the proposal. These are replacements of those Members who were appointed to Cabinet. I put the question that hon. Solomon Silwany and hon. Safia Nalule Juuko be approved as members of the Parliamentary Commission. (Applause)

(Question put and agreed to.)

NOMINATION OF MEMBERS TO THE COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY ASSOCIATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 15(10)(F) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

7.41
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

As you recall, on 13 July 2016, while exercising the authority given to the Government Chief Whip under Section 6H of the Administration of Parliament Act, 2006, I nominated hon. Patrick Oshabe Nsamba, Kassanda County North, from the NRM party, as a member to the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA), representing the Government side on that delegation. 

However, still exercising the same authority, I now move, on behalf of Government, to withdraw hon. Patrick Nsamba Oshabe, MP for Kassanda County North, from Commonwealth Parliamentary Association delegation and replace him with hon. Simeo Nsubuga Muwanga, MP for Kassanda County South, also from the NRM party, to represent the Government side on that delegation. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The 10th Parliament has not yet ended and I am sure hon. Nsamba is still part of the NRM. Is it procedurally correct to withdraw an NRM Member from the CPA delegation without giving justification? The reasons could have been that maybe he is a non-performer. Anyhow, why doesn’t the Government Chief Whip give reasons because when I get the reasons, then our side here might apply the same reasons to deal with the same matter? 

Is it procedurally right for the Government Chief Whip to withdraw a Member without giving reasons and even without apologising to the House that she made a mistake? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Speaker has an advantage that she receives information from all parties. I can confirm that one of the parties also changed their members; it is not new. I put the question that hon. Simeo Nsubuga be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

LAYING OF PAPERS 

7.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Treasury Memorandum on the Report of the Public Accounts Committee (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises) on the closure of commercial banks.

The second report that was requested by Parliament, on the outcome of the investigations into the alleged unauthorised printing of currency and transportation of unauthorised cargo by officials of Bank of Uganda, is not ready. 

As you know, the Treasury Memorandum can only be prepared after the Auditor-General has carried out an audit. So the second report is not available. We shall bring it when it is ready. 

THE SPEAKER: I believe hon. Nambeshe will be happy because he has been asking for this memorandum on the closure of commercial banks.

7.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table, the Annual Report of the Petroleum Fund for the Financial Year 2018/2019. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report on the petroleum fund is going to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back. I also would like to encourage honourable members to read it for your information.

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask Commissioner Bahati to lay on the Table the report of the Auditor-General. 

7.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General before Parliament for the financial year ended 30 June 2019.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises) for perusal and report back.

7.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the annual performance report of the office of the Auditor-General, 2019.

THE SPEAKER: It is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises).

7.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the annual report and audited financial statements of the office of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2018.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises) for perusal and report back.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, there are two extra copies. One is for the annual report and audited financial statements for the year ended 30 June, 2019 and the second one is the management letters for the years ended 30 June 2018 and 30 June 2019. They are both from the Office of the Auditor-General.

THE SPEAKER: They are both sent to the Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises) for perusal and report back.

Honourable members, I would like to thank you for the work done today. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.51 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 22 January 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)
