Thursday, 25 January 2018

The Public Parliament met at 3.36 p.m in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker of the Public Parliament, Mr Kevin Wanjala, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: I would like to congratulate all of you upon your victory as Members of Parliament and welcome you to the second annual Public Parliament. 

In that regard, I take this opportunity to welcome our special guests to this first plenary session of the second Public Parliament. I welcome my colleague and counterpart the Speaker, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga. To my left, the Deputy Speaker, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda and the Leader of Opposition, hon. Winfred Kiiza.

Honourable members, I hereby invite the honourable Leader of the Opposition to come and say a word to you.

3.39
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Mr Speaker of the Public Parliament, the Deputy Speaker, Leader of Government Business, the Leader of the Opposition of the Public Parliament, honourable Members of Parliament, the guests of Parliament, fellow Ugandans. It is a great honour for me to speak before this august House on this second parliamentary week in this second people’s assembly.

I would like to take this opportunity to welcome you to your Parliament (Applause) under the theme “Parliament, the voice of the people” but specifically discussing the impact of the allocation of budget to the living conditions and welfare of our people.

As Members of Parliament and as Ugandans, the budgeting process goes through a cycle and as you may be aware, honourable members, this cycle is supposed to begin from us in our communities and come up here. However, for purposes of Parliament this House where you are as Members of Parliament, we follow a process. This process as provided for by the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, it begins with the laying of the budget framework paper.

When it is laid, indicating the indicative figures under which we are supposed to plan for the financial year, the law still compels the minister of finance to lay together with the Budget Framework Paper, a certificate of gender equity responsiveness and this is sent to the Committee on Budget. 

However, as the leadership of the Opposition, we are mandated by law, under rule 52, to ensure that we scrutinise the compliance levels of the budget process. Therefore, we begin with scrutinizing the Budget Framework Paper and submit our alternative budget proposals about the Budget Framework Paper to the Committee on Budget. 

In addition, all the sectors and the committees of Parliament report to this committee to ensure that all the voices of all Ugandans in regard to the different committees of Government specifically Parliament are represented.

We are expecting to have the Committee on Budget to report to the House and I think this will be soon as Parliament resumes, we shall be discussing this for purposes of enabling the budget process to continue.

Why is this involvement necessary? It is necessary so that we can be able to participate in the budget process and be able to mention all critical issues that are so close to our hearts.

In addition, as people’s representatives, it therefore becomes very important that we even track whether these allocations are meeting the expectations of the population. It is the reason why I am so excited that the Public Parliament is coming to discuss the impact of the allocation to the livelihoods and living conditions of the people of Uganda.

During the process of implementation, you will realize that on many occasions, Government through the different ministries and departments will give assurance and maybe commitments, which are supposed to form part of the budget.

However, sometimes some of these commitments are never met. Those are what they call presidential pledges or Government pledges. We in the opposition, for example, are mandated to ensure that Government fulfils its commitments.

Therefore, Leader of the Opposition, once again, I would like to welcome you to the Public Parliament and pray that you keep Government in check to ensure that the allocation that will be given to the different ministerial departments, Government agencies and Local Government, do exactly reach the population in terms of service delivery, to change the lives of Ugandans.

It is incumbent upon us people’s representatives to ensure that service delivery is felt in our population. The housing population census indicated that poverty levels are increasing. A report that was carried out in 2012-2016 indicated that our poverty levels have increased from 20 percent to 27 percent and it is getting worse in the eastern part of Uganda. 

Therefore as we plan, we better see how we put proper measures to ensure that Ugandans move down again in terms of accessibility to income to avoid a scenario that will put all Ugandans in worse situations. 

I want to thank you for coming to your parliament. I pray that the deliberations from this House will be incorporated in the main debate of the country so as to help us plan better for the nation. 

I can pledge that we shall work together. We shall move this journey together to ensure that proper service is given to our people. Thank you so much, may God bless you, for God and my country.

THE SPEAKER: We are very thankful to you, the Honourable Leader of the Opposition. I take this opportunity to invite the Rt Hon. Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, to come and say a word to us.

3.46
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker of the Public Parliament, the Leader of the Opposition, distinguished officials of Parliament and members of the Public Parliament gathered here. Let me take this opportunity to welcome you all to this important gathering when the voices of the people will be heard by Government and by the legislature of Uganda.

Secondly, let me thank my colleague, the Leader of the Opposition for giving a good and correct picture of the budgeting process in the Parliament of Uganda. Actually, this is where we are now. We are going to open and discuss and finalise budget. 

It is true that the budgeting process starts in Government and it is guided by national priorities, and also guided by the approved critical documents to guide the development of Uganda. In this particular case, the winning party manifesto provides critical guidelines. Secondly, the national development plan; thirdly, Vision 2040 also clearly provide the guidelines of what you should budget for. 

In addition, because Uganda is not in isolation, it is part of the international community, so we are also guided by the SPGs so that our development process is holistic and takes into account local, national and international situations in order to ensure that there is steady progress in the process of development.

Let me now add a few remarks, to the effect that I am indeed pleased to be part of these proceedings. When Parliament, composed of the wanainchi from different walks of life are in Public Parliament for at least one day, you are walking in the shoes of legislators of this country. This is what legislators of this country go through. 

Therefore, as leaders, we will keenly follow this discussion and also note the resolutions coming directly from you, the people of Uganda. I agree with the Leader of the Opposition who said that we are keenly waiting to get your decisions, resolutions and recommendations. 

Not all of you may have the opportunity to speak but none the less, your interest in the parliamentary process and your enthusiastic participation is key for the prosperity of this country. If you don’t say it here, you will say it outside in the countryside, or to the newspapers. 

I commend the leadership of the Parliament of Uganda for coming up with this innovative and exciting idea of bridging the gap between Parliament and the people of Uganda. As the Executive, we shall further study this model which allows ordinary people to experience how Government is indeed run. 

I urge all of you, especially the Leader of Government Business and Leader of the Opposition to take these responsibilities seriously. For the Leader of Government Business, my colleague, I will invite her after you have concluded your session, to come and give me a deeper briefing of the basis of the decisions that you have taken and recommendations that you have made and we discuss on how best Government can take on these ideas, both within Government and also proceed to present the same to the Parliament of Uganda. 

I wish you all every success and good deliberations. The people of Uganda are watching and are waiting for your recommendations and your resolutions. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We are very thankful to you the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for the noble words. We also take this opportunity to invite the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, the only post that has not been taken. Therefore you are very sure that you are not vied and ousted. You are welcome.

3.53
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA (Mr Jacob Oulanyah): Mr Speaker, sir, I am delighted to be here this afternoon. I thank you for the opportunity. I will be remaining with you after to give you preliminary guidance on how you proceed with the House, but let me just say this for now:

Parliament and the other side of the Executive are the two arms of Government involved in what you call the public policy cycle. The Judiciary is not. It is only Parliament and the Executive. 

The public policy cycle has four points. There is policy formulation, policy approval, policy implementation and policy oversight or review. The Executive and Parliament share this responsibility. 

The arm of Government responsible for formulating policy, asking the question, “What is the problem; what is the solution”, is the Executive arm of Government. Once they have asked that question, they will propose the policy recommending solutions on how to deal with the problem. However that policy will not become policy unless it comes to parliament and is approved. 

Therefore from policy formulation, you come to policy approval. When it comes to Parliament, Parliament will not ask the same questions that the Executive asked. The Executive asked, “What is the problem? What is the solution?” Parliament will ask, “Was the problem properly identified? Is the solution recommended the right solution? How will it impact on people, because they are people’s representatives? When they are satisfied and they have made some recommendations and agreed that, that is the way to go, Parliament will approve that policy. It can approve it by approving a law or they can approve by – in this process – approving the budget. 

Once it is approved, it goes to the third stage, that is, back to the Executive to implement what has been agreed. What they proposed, Parliament has approved and it now goes back to the Executive to implement. After implementation, it comes back to Parliament for oversight to ask the question: “Did you do it in accordance with what we agreed? We gave you money to buy water, did you buy beer instead?” 

If you did that then the issue of misappropriating money will arise. We appropriated money to buy water, you have used the money to buy beer, and so you have misappropriated what Parliament had properly appropriated. That is the process we are in now. Government has proposed what the framework of the budget will be for the next financial year and that is what Parliament is interrogating now to see what it is like and make recommendations on how it can be improved and the cycle will continue. 

Therefore, you are now part of it. Today you are supposed to make some approvals. When you approve, it will go back to the Executive for implementation. We will be with you shortly after this particular session. May God bless you. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I am very moved by the words of the Deputy Speaker. I believe we have picked something out of it. We are thankful to you. I hereby take this opportunity to invite the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda, Rebecca Kadaga, to come and speak to us. (Applause)

3.57
THE SPEAKER OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA (Ms Rebecca Kadaga): The Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly, the Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda, the Leader of the Opposition of the National Assembly and distinguished ladies and gentlemen. The Speaker of the Public Parliament, the hon. Leader of Government Business of the Public Parliament, the Leader of the Opposition of the Public Parliament and all of you honourable members of the Public Parliament, congratulations on making it to the plenary today. (Applause)

On behalf of Parliament, I would like to welcome you very warmly to the second annual public debate, which is part of our Parliament Week activities. It is a very important channel of communication between you and us.

In April 2012, the Parliament of Uganda hosted all the parliamentarians of the world here in Kampala and one of the things we discussed and resolved is to get closer to the population. All of us felt that the distance between the elected and the electors is big. As a result, we began by carrying out outreach programmes in different parts of the country with some of the opinion leaders but we felt it was not enough. 

Therefore, we agreed to have the Parliament Week where you the people come for the whole week, study what we are doing, talk to your Members and experience Parliament. That is why you are here and I am happy that you have come.

As Members of Parliament, we have three major responsibilities: one is legislation, that is, making the laws.  However, today there are no Bills and so you are not going to handle any Bill today. The other one is representation. I am sure that today you are going to speak on issues of your constituency. When you debate today you are going to do the representational role of what they have said and want in the budget. 

The third one is oversight – the Deputy Speaker has already explained. This is when you must follow up. We passed the budget and it was for the road to Kitgum, how much money was given? Did it reach the local authority? Was the road done? Have the project affected-persons been paid or we are just building the road and abandoning the population? That is the role of oversight. We expect that with time, you will learn these responsibilities.

Today’s sitting is very important. Last year, the Public Parliament discussed climate change and made a resolution that Government should fast-track environmental protection, reforestation and all the other activities to improve the environment and revive our environmental status. You may be surprised to hear that the forest cover now is about five per cent of what it was 40 years ago. Therefore, we need to do much to make sure that we come back to the level where we were.

Coming to the budget debate, I am really glad that you are here to discuss the budget. The Members of Parliament are discussing the Budget Framework Paper. Normally, they would invite the ministries’ civil servants and only consult those but today your views here are part of the public hearing. You are the part of the budget process of the national assembly of Uganda. Your views are going to be taken up through the Committee on Budget into the plenary of this House. Therefore, I am really glad that you are here at the right time and you will be able to talk about the budget. 

I do not want to take up too much of your time because you need to be able to exchange your views. However, all we are saying is that today you are fulfilling the definition of democracy: the government of the people by the people and for the people. All of them are here in this House.

Mr Speaker, I wish you well and congratulate you. That mace is a symbol of your authority. No one should touch it. If you need help and if there is noise in the House the Clerk will ring a bell to ensure order. You have the full authority. I have surrendered everything to you. Enjoy yourself. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Madam Speaker, I gladly receive the authority. We are very grateful for that speech. We have a great lesson to learn and we are also thankful to you, the special guests, for having hosted us and given us guidance through this.

Upon suspension of the House, the Prime Minister of the Public Parliament is invited to lead the special guests out of the Chambers and we shall reconvene in five minutes.

The House is suspended for five minutes. 

(The House was suspended at 4.03 p.m. for five minutes.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jacob Oulanyah): Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. We have had the preliminary proceedings. Now, we go to actual business. The Order Paper has been circulated. 

Honourable members, as a way of preliminary, I need to guide you on how we deal with matters in this House. What you have in front here those two are called the dispatch boxes. The dispatch box on my right is where the Leader of Government Business speaks from and the dispatch box on my left is where the Leader of the Opposition speaks from.

In the past, that used to be the box where the budget documents and all documents that were going to be brought to Parliament were kept. When you were coming to present them, you would open the box and then you make your presentation. That is why they are called the dispatch boxes.

On my right in front is the front bench of government. Unfortunately, there is no front bench on the left because that constitutes the shadow cabinet, which is constituted by the Opposition.

Behind me, on my left and right, you have what is called the technical benches. That is where assistants to ministers, people from the ministries - when their matters are being handled or the people from First Parliamentary Counsel - when a Bill is being debated sit. They sit there and listen in and take notes on what needs to be done. That is about the structure of this House.

Outside those four doors is what we call the lobby of this Parliament. So, when they say they are going to take a vote by division lobby, all members go into those lobbies and they start voting one by one and they come back inside. 

Rules of Procedure of Parliament; there are five principles that govern the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. So the whole big book here which is the Rules of Procedure of Parliament has five principles only. Once you understand those principles, you will be able to apply the rules even without looking at them.

The first principle states that all members of Parliament are equal. It does not matter whether you come from the Opposition, minority or from the government majority. All members of Parliament have equal rights.

Principle number two is that all prepositions brought before Parliament, whether they be motions or whatever they are, must receive a full debate and a decision. So, we do not come here to spend time here. We come here to receive propositions, debate them and take a decision.

The third principle states that the majority decision will always prevail, but the right of the minority must be observed. In other words, you cannot say, we have the big number so we can do whatever we want. You must observe the right of the minority.

The fourth principle is that each member of this House owes it to the Assembly its dignity. The dignity of the Assembly is the dignity of its Members; so if anything should happen to a Member of Parliament, that member will owe an explanation to the House. He will say well, you saw these things in the newspapers, but they were not correct because when something has happened to a Member of Parliament, it has happened to Parliament. So, you owe it to the House to come and explain why certain things could have happened the way they did.
The fifth principle is that you are a representative Parliament. You act on other people’s behalf and the reason is simple; if Uganda had only 400 people, they would not need a Parliament. All of them would come here and sit and debate. However, because Ugandans are more than 200, they cannot sit here together. They are over 40 million people. They need to select people who will speak for them and take decisions on their behalf. That is why you have representation as a core function of any Parliament. Briefly, that is what we need to know.

In debate, there are rules of debate. There are rules that govern Members who are holding the Floor and there are rules that govern Members who are listening to the debate. You are supposed to listen to a member holding the Floor in absolute silence. 

You are supposed to extend decorum, respect and courtesy to any Member of this House, especially the one holding the Floor. There are also rules of interrupting debate. If a Member holding the Floor is speaking and there is some breach in the procedure, you can interrupt that debate for a point of order, point of procedure or point of information. Those are the main ones. These days there are other creations which are not supported by the rules of this House.

You raise a point of order when something is going wrong with the order of the House and the Member who is holding the Floor will sit and you raise the point. Is it in order for the Member to do one, two, three, and four? Then the Speaker will rule and the Member will be guided on what to do next. If it requires an apology, the Member will give an apology and proceed with the debate.

If there is violation of procedure, you can raise a point of procedure. That is also for the guidance of the Speaker. The Speaker will guide on what should happen once you raise a point of procedure. 

The third one is point of information. When a Member is holding the Floor and another Member rises on a point of information, it is up to the Member holding the Floor to accept that information or not; you cannot force it on the Member holding the Floor. 

If the Member refuses to yield the Floor for you, do not change your order and say, “point of order” – (Laughter) - because you have lost the information now you want to raise a point of order. It happens sometimes but it is not good practice. 

That is how you debate and now you can interrupt debate with dignity and respect, holding the decorum of the House and proceeding properly.

Today’s Order Paper has a few items and you should be exposed to all of them. Let us proceed.

Usually, also – this is just for information - after the communication, like I have finished my communication now, if you have a very urgent matter, this will be the time to raise it. When the Speaker finishes communication, you can rise and raise an urgent matter of public importance. To do that, you needed to have first talked to the Speaker what this matter is and why you think it is urgent. 

Why must you suspend other procedures in the rules and requirements for notice and raise the matter without notice? The qualification is that it must be very urgent like a disease outbreak, floods, accidents and things like that. Then, the Speaker would allow you raise that urgent matter before any business is conducted and that matter would be handled. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO INCREASE FUNDING TO THE HEALTH, EDUCATION AND AGRICULTURE SECTORS

4.15
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Michael Muramira): Mr Speaker, I move a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to increase funding to the health, education and agriculture sectors moved under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

“WHEREAS objectives XVIII, XX and XXII of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy require that the state takes appropriate measures to afford every citizen equal opportunity to attain the highest education standard possible, access basic medical services as well as proper nutrition through the growth and storage of adequate food respectively;

AND WHEREAS Parliament is given the mandate under the Constitution to appropriate funding for the different sectors of the country;

AWARE THAT Uganda ratified a number of international and regional treaties providing for the right to health and education including the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child, the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention Against Discrimination of Education, the Abuja Declaration 2001 and the African Union Maputo Declaration on Agriculture and Food Security in Africa in 2003 among others;

FURTHER AWARE THAT under these international and regional treaties, Uganda is required to ensure that the health and education budget each increased to at least 15 per cent of the state’s annual budget while the agriculture sector should be allocated at least 10 per cent of the state’s annual budget;

CONCERNED THAT the health sector is currently allocated 8.3 per cent, education sector allocated 11.4 per cent while the agriculture sector is allocated 3.8 per cent of the state’s annual budget in the Financial Year 2017/2018;

FURTHER CONCERNED that according to the national Budget Framework Paper for the Financial Year 2018/2019, the health sector shall be allocated 7.4 per cent, the education sector shall be allocated 11.0 per cent while the agriculture sector shall receive 3.8 per cent of the state’s annual budget for Financial Year 2018/2019;

ALARMED THAT the current and proposed allocation for the sectors of health, education and agriculture do not meet the required thresholds set by the international and regional treaties to which Uganda has been a signatory for the last 17 years;

REALISING THAT due to the failure by Government to prioritise the health, education and agriculture sectors which sectors constitute the most vital components of development in all areas of economy, Uganda is likely not to achieve a middle income status by 2020 as projected;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that: 

    1. Government increases funding to the health and education sectors from 8.3 per cent and 11.0 irrespectively to at least 15 per cent each of the national budget as agreed by African leaders at the Abuja African Union Summit and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda;

    2. Government increases funding to the agriculture sector from 3.8 per cent to at least 10 per cent of the national budget as endorsed by all African Heads of States at the Second Assembly of the African Union in July 2003 in Maputo and the African Union Maputo Declaration on Agriculture and Food Security.”

Here is the justification-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jacob Oulanyah): Honourable member, you have not yet moved the motion. Say, “Mr Speaker, I beg to move”.

MR MURAMIRA: Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jacob Oulanyah): Is the motion seconded? Please, state your name for the record. The motion is seconded by Robert Okello, Godfrey Mpanga and Ruth Nansamba. The motion is properly seconded. Honourable member, would you like to justify your motion briefly so that you give time to other members?

MR MURAMIRA: Here is the justification for the motion urging Government to increase funding to the health, education and agriculture sectors.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jacob Oulanyah): Honourable member, if you go through all these, members will not have time to speak. Therefore, speak briefly to justify the motion. 

MR MURAMIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we talk about the agriculture sector, we all know the sector was allocated Shs 828 billion which constitutes only 3.8 per cent of the national budget as indicated in the National Budget Framework Paper of the Financial Year 2018/2019.

Mr Speaker, over time, priority has been given to transport, works and energy and mineral development at the expense of health, education and agriculture yet these are the most important sectors on our journey to attaining the middle income status. 

Government is spending more than 30 per cent of the budget on infrastructure investment with approximately Shs 4.8 trillion on works and transport, rising up from Shs 3.8 trillion in the Financial Year 2016/2017 while the expenditures on energy and mineral development increased from approximately Shs 2.3 trillion to Shs 2.9 trillion.

For this financial year, works and transport sector has been allocated 21.4 per cent and energy and minerals development only 11 per cent. When it comes to education - (Interruption)

MR DAVID MAHULO: Mr Speaker, I would like to inquire whether it is in order for the mover of the motion to continue quoting us figures of other sectors which are not education and health. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jacob Oulanyah): The honourable member is trying to place his argument within the national budget. Therefore, he is justifiable. Proceed!

MR MURAMIRA: When it comes to the education sector, the total budget approved for financial year 2016/2017 was Shs 247.46 billion including external financing of the national budget of Shs 20.430.61 billion translating into 11.98 per cent shared. 

This corresponds to a 0.9 per cent increase in the sector budget share from fiscal year 2015/2016 of 11.08 per cent, where the sector had a budget of Shs 290.7 billion out of the total national budget of Shs 18.311.17 billion.

Despite all this, the Government of Uganda, from 2010 to 2011, the education expenditure increased from 12 to 14.1 per cent which was the highest during the review and from 2011 to 2014, it increased to 12 per cent. Therefore this gap – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jacob Oulanyah): Honourable member, I would like you to wind up your justification so that other members can also debate.

MR MURAMIRA: Similarly, although Government has committed to increasing salaries of doctors in the health sector in all public hospitals, following their strike earlier this year, the wage budget in all public hospitals for the health sector has remained the same, that is, Shs 401 billion. 

Besides, in the National Budget Framework Paper the finance ministry announced that there will be no money for salary enhancement to Government workers in the next financial year.

Overall, Government needs to increase the allocations to all health centres II by 40 per cent, health centres III by 41 per cent, health centres IV by 42 per cent and Government hospital by 25 per cent.

Mr Speaker, on the health scheme, all children and citizens, without discrimination of any form, deserve equal access to quality and adequate feeding, education and health care in order to develop their personalities, abilities and talents to the fullest. This is important if they are to ably participate in the development of our economy.

The three sectors of education, health and agriculture are the core to a self-sustaining society and so funding to them should be increased to meet the thresholds stipulated in the international and regional treaties that Uganda is a signatory to. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jacob Oulanyah): Thank you very much, honourable member, for that motion. Can I have the seconder of the motion to speak to it for exactly three minutes?

4.32
MR TWINSON RUHIIGA (Kinkizi West County, Kanungu): Mr Speaker, I am glad this motion is supported various members of Parliament. My point is that due to alarming situations, I expect everyone to know the situation of rampant strikes in the health and education sector.

I want to say that Government needs to comply with the Abuja Declaration of increasing funding to those sectors to 16 per cent in order to deliver education and health services to our people. The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda gives each Ugandan the right to education. The right to education will not be enjoyed by everyone if we do not give funds to the education sector. We should increase the salary of teachers to make sure they help other people to enjoy the right education.

On the health sector, recently everyone - I hope every Member of Parliament is aware of the anarchy that was caused by the doctors and nurses. Therefore, to save this situation further, we should add more funds to this sector to ensure they deliver services to the people. If we sit here and remain silent yet we have that power conferred upon us by the Constitution under Article 79, we will not be doing our job.

Our job here is to make sure our people get equal services in a better manner. I mean all members of Parliament should stand up and support this motion. We should be equipped with the treaty that was passed in Abuja of 16 per cent to have better services for our country.

Mr Speaker, that is all I had to contribute.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jacob Oulanyah): Thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to increase funding to the health sector, education, agriculture sectors and particularly, that Government increases funding to the health and education sector from 8.3 and 11 per cent respectively to at least 15 per cent each in the national budget as agreed upon by African leaders and the Abuja African Union Summit and Addis Ababa Action Agenda.

Secondly, that Government increases funding to the agriculture sector from 3.8 per cent to at least 10 per cent of the national budget as endorsed by all African heads of State at the Second Ordinary Assembly of the African Union in July 2003 in Maputo under the African Union Maputo Declaration on Agriculture and Food Security. 

Honourable members, that is the motion for your debate and debate starts now with each member taking two minutes. I will start from - yes, please introduce yourself for the record and then proceed.

4.34
MR BONNY MUWANGUZI (Nakawa Division, Kampala): The motion has been presented and justified but I would like to present a deferring idea. I would like to ask, where is the justification of the money allocated to them as per now? We realise there is still – for example, the education sector receives Shs 2.4 trillion including external financing but what they do is pathetic. The schools and everything are pathetic.

Yes, they are moving to increase yet they cannot justify how they are spending what they already have. (Applause) Will the increment cure the problems in a society where it is the same players still in the system? An example is Makerere University where students pay extra money but they are always in a crisis where they cannot even pay lecturers. Of recent the school of law lecturers went on strike over unpaid arrears for teaching evening students yet these people receive money but which probably does not reach to the final beneficiaries.

Therefore, they cannot justify the demand for increased funding when the money they have right now, which I deem to be enough, is not well utilised.

My last question would be: should we increase salary or increase service delivery? (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Your time is up. It is two minutes and it is up. Yes honourable, introduce yourself and proceed.

4.36
MR JOSEPH NUWABAINE (Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the interest of time, I will talk about agriculture and probably education. I think we need to remind ourselves. Whether we support or oppose, we need a paradigm shift in as far as the way we plan our things is concerned. 

You cannot continue allocating such money to the agriculture sector when there is an upward trend in rural-urban migration. You are literary allocating much money to people who are none existent in the villages - (Applause) - unless and until we make sure that there is equitable distribution of national resources in terms of development - everything is here in Kampala, every opportunity - you know money is like a magnet. It keeps on attracting people - health facilities, education etcetera. Therefore, when you talk about agriculture without putting -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, be mindful of time - only two minutes.

MR NUWABAINE: Mr Speaker, with your protection - on the issue of education, it is common knowledge that our education system is producing people who are not only unemployed but also unemployable. (Applause) Is it, therefore, not reasonable for us to continue pumping money in a sector that produces graduates who are not only unemployed but also unemployable? Why not change the curriculum –(Applause)- such that we can put money into something that is reasonable. I propose that we put more emphasis – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Time up! Honourable members, resume your seats. For purposes of the record, I am Kevin Wanjala Ouma, the Speaker of the Second Public Parliament. 

I will request each of you, honourable Members of Parliament, that whenever you stand up, be mindful of the time. Mention your name, your constituency and your party. This is for the record of the Hansard such that the generations after you can have a look at the same. 

I will invite the different sides to at least introduce the Cabinet and the shadow Cabinet. The Prime Minister should take the lead.

4.38 
MS ELIZABETH WANYANA (Workers’ Party, Kamuli Municipality): Good evening, honourable members? I am here to first of all, introduce my executive before I talk about the motion. The first Deputy Prime Minister -

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are only allowed to introduce your Cabinet; you will speak last.

MS WANYAMA: Okay, thank you and much obliged. The second Deputy Prime Minister is hon. Keith Kasiri. (Applause) The Government Chief Whip is hon. Ssegirinya. (Applause) Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I will invite the Leader of the Opposition to also introduce the shadow cabinet.

MR MURAMIRA: Mr Speaker, this was an oversight. I beg that I be forgiven by the House. I am called Michael Muramira Kyakashari, from Rukungiri Municipality. I am the Leader of the Opposition. The Opposition Chief Whip is hon. Ruth Nansamba. The Shadow Minister of Finance is hon. Dr Wasajja. The Shadow Minister of Education is hon. Ashraf Ssenyonjo; the Shadow Minister of Defence is hon. Edward Natamba; the Shadow Minister of Health is hon. Stephen Ssenyonjo and the Shadow Minister of Local Government is hon. Alex Wokona. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: At least, now we know where you fall and your relevant hooks. We should continue with the debate –(Interjections)- I will not allow the procedure - let us continue with the debate and be mindful of the time. 

4.43
MR DEO KAMANZI (Katikamu South, Luweero): Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Point of order; please resume your seat, honourable member.

MR MUPENDI: I rise on a point of order. Tracing back to my roots when I was in primary school, a wanderer is a person who is never settled. I would like to know if it is indeed in order for the Leader of Government Business to introduce to us members on the backbench as ministers. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I rule to the effect that the honourable member did not follow the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament. 

You can only put someone to order when he is actually on the Floor not when they have left. Therefore, please continue and you have one minute to conclude.

MR KAMANZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to make some comments on health. Health has been given 7.4 percent down from 8.3 per cent yet we have seen epidemic diseases such as the Congo Fever emerging, which Uganda has never experienced. Therefore, the decrease in this percentage on the national budget will not cater for such diseases if they attack the people of Uganda. 

On education, there is also a decrease of 0.4 percent and yet, we still have to enhance higher education. For the lower education at least people go up to senior six but then they stop there. Therefore, you need to build more higher education centres and give loans to students as you have done in the past but increase the number of those who access the loan scheme and Government sponsorship.

I would like to propose an increase in the agricultural sector because currently, our currency is affected by inflation. We need more products to export. Therefore, agriculture is the main source of increasing export in the market. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you should be mindful of the fact that we are in a multi-party dispensation. If you belong to the ruling party, you should be seen to be supporting the position of Government and not to submit otherwise. You will defeat the debate. (Members rose_)- Resume your seats, please.

4.46
DR WASSAJA KIWANUKA (Green Party): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am the shadow minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development and I have taken great concern to follow up since the reading of the previous budget. There are specific observations, which I would like to address to this August House today. I note that the growth in agricultural output declined at 1.3 per cent.

We need to note that there is so much that is changing and the nature of drought that we are experiencing due to environmental degradation resulting from destruction of wetlands and deforestation amidst us is undermining food security.

I would like to retaliate the issues of education in a similar way by saying that we have been studying about the so many education commissions reports in the past. Our education system is decaying as we look on. 

Dear members that are here today to represent the people; there is too much that we can say. However, today we need a new education commission to investigate why people are graduating in millions but nobody is getting employment. We need to look into the matter of the so many thousands and millions of pupils that join primary schools but just 6,000 are ready -

Members, we have to be cautious as representatives of the public; nobody is even talking about the youth with disability. Where are their primary schools, universities; what are the constraints in the budget and how can we look into these matters without recommendations? 

There is need to take serious accountability during admission and follow-up to see that at the end of the day, we have substantial figures that are related to what we are planning. I rest my case.

4.49
MS FRANCES NAMULI (Green Party): Batabani bange, abazzukulu, mwebale kunsanyukira. Neyanze nyo. Ngenze okulaba mukulu, ng’obudde bujakuyita ng’ate bantumye abantu b’eRubaga. (Laughter) 

Banesiize bakadde banange, nebagamba nti bakoowa nyo emitwalo ebiri. Gigula omulengo gwa lumonde negigula n’enyaanya. Ssebo twagala mutwongereyo abakulu. Nsaliddwa omukulu oyo okugenda, mukulu Kadaga, naye yandiwulidde nti abakadde batuwa essente entono. Tezigula -(Applause)

Nze Namuli Frances Kawanga owa DP, okufa nga ndi mu DP. Era yenze ssebo mukama wange. Abakulu bebantumye ab’e Rubaga. Ngenze okulaba nga obudde buyita; ojakugamba nti obudde buyise nga situsiza ekiteeso ekyo. Neyanziza nyo, neyanzege. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: We are very appreciative to the honourable member from Rubaga. (Applause) (Members rose_)- If you are over-joyed, stamp. Please, take your seats.

Being that the language of command is English and her submission has been taken on the record of the Hansard, I will accordingly order for a translation so that the House can be able to understand what the honourable member has submitted.

4.52
THE GOVERNMNET CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ali Ssegirinya): Mr Speaker, thank you. The motion presented is to increase the budget funding on education and agricultural sector. Submissions have been made questioning the increase in funding but before that, they have to realise the impact of the first funding by the Government before they raise issues with the increase in funding in both sectors.

In education, where there is urgent need for increase in funding from the figures already laid at the Table to 15 per cent is that if we are to frame the budget at this time and look at where we can facilitate - the justification is that from previous budgets, the Government has already launched Early Childhood Development and Basic Education which has already been incorporated into our system. 

The National Curriculum Development Centre (NCDC) has already reviewed the curriculum to integrate more ICT and some technical skills in the education sector. 

In addition to what has already been provided, we have already incorporated the seed secondary schools per Sub-County in the country. Where they have not yet been realised, it means there was inadequate funding for such sub counties to start having the secondary seed schools. Then - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you can resume your seats. 

MR SSEGIRINYA: My Leader of Government Business will increase support for that.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you for that. Point taken. I would like to invite hon. Edward Natamba. I am mindful of the backbenchers; therefore, we are soon coming to you.

4.55
MR EDWARD NATAMBA (Farmers Party): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Without wasting much time, I would like to stress the point on increase in agriculture funding. I would like to add my voice to my colleague’s, the Leader of Opposition that agriculture is the backbone of our country and therefore, I support that increase.

However, I think there is still a very big challenge in monitoring the funds that are allocated to our local Governments. First, we have the challenge of extension of agriculture. However, little money is sent to Local Governments. We have extension services that are not extended to farmers. We really need to strengthen that even if we increase funding in agriculture without tackling that problem at the grass roots, we will not achieve much.
For instance, an extension agricultural officer in my district at sub county level is paid only Shs 30,000. I wonder how that person will take services to the grassroots to the 98 parishes I have in Ntungamo District.

Secondly, we have the seeds from Operation Wealth Creation programme but most of the seeds we are giving farmers are expired. My point here is that we need to solve that problem. If it means increasing enrolment of district councillors to monitor Government programmes on the grass roots, let us do that. Otherwise, money here at the centre will not solve problems. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Government side, you should heat up the debate. You may talk about the essence of the budget being the way it is. Maybe you are funding defence, as the Opposition hinges on the reason as to why they want -

4.58
MR BENJAMIN RUKUNDO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here to support the motion to increase funding to Health, Education and Agricultural sectors. The reason we have a drop in Education, Agriculture and the Health sectors is that the people who have been employed in these sectors lack motivation. When they lack motivation, the pace at which service delivery is given in those sectors also comes down.

For instance, for the schools that we had, just three years back performing very well at national level - recently, the Lord Mayor said that the KCCA schools, which are acting as UPE schools used to have some of the best students appearing in newspapers. However, for departments that are crucial, their funding has been reduced and instead been given to things that are not vital.

I believe that when funding is increased in these departments, it should not only end at –(Interruption)

MR OSINDE: Mr Speaker, I am a bit disappointed. As a legislator sent to represent the people, I am a bit confused. The Members who are supposed to be proposing are the ones opposing.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, your point is noted. I wish to guide the House. We are debating an issue of national importance; therefore, all these issues are key. Members are submitting in order to improve welfare or otherwise, depending on the justification they give. Therefore, they are in order to debate the way they are debating.

MR RUKUNDO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Because of time, I will be very brief. Let me conclude by saying that when they increase in these three sectors, we shall have motivation coming on the side of the workers who are employed within these departments and also service delivery will fall in that line. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Going forward, if you want to be chosen, in order to catch the Speaker’s eye, you will need to rise up and not your hand. (Interjections) I understand the cause for gender balance.

5.00
MR GEORGE KASAGA: I am very glad to be a Member of Parliament with the people’s mandate. Mr Speaker, I have been crying with information. I would like to bring to the attention of this august House that we have been coming in the morning to get a chance of introducing ourselves. One of our colleagues introduced himself to us as - if you recognise, he was putting on yellow.

I would like to inform you that we did not know how hon. Abiriga was taken out. (Interruption)

MR NATAMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform my colleague that we are now discussing issues of national importance therefore, we cannot afford to lose any minute introducing what is not really necessary here. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The point of order is accepted and honourable members, let us be mindful of the key issues we are here to debate. You have 40 seconds. 

MR GEORGE KASAGA: Mr Speaker, I very much support the increase of the budget to the health sector. I would like for the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister to brief us about why when you go to Government hospitals, you find no medicine, but at the end of the year, you watch on the television and other media that medicines have been burnt. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the interest of gender, allow me – yes, honourable member.

5.05
MS REHEMA NAKIRYOWA (Farmer’s Party, Lugazi Municipality): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For this issue raised in Parliament, I would like to say that agriculture should be given at least a 20 per cent increase. The reason being that the weather we are in, being mostly sunny, with no rainfall, we need to increase this money at least to have irrigation schemes for watering our plants. 

Agriculture is our backbone and it is where we earn more for our living –(HON. MEMBER: “Information”) - not allowed. If this percentage is increased, it would be better if the Government introduced backyard farming so that we do not need to wait for seasons – we can farm at whatever time we want. 

THE SPEAKER: There is a lady there in the corner. You have strictly two minutes. Mention your name, party, constituency and then straight to the point.

5.08
MS ESTHER AMINAH NAKASI (Mukono Constituency): Neyanziza nyo Speaker. Nva Mukono Constituency. Okwawukana ko akatini kukyetubaddeko, nze nyimiridde wano kulwabakozi abakola mu makampuni - abavubbuka, abawala, ba maama era abazadde. Ngamba bo tetuyina kyetubatesezza mumakampuni jjebakola kubanga abamu babonaabona, bakola nyo, ate nga bafuna ssente ntini olusi balemeredwa okuwereera abaana babwe.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please resume your seat. 

MR ISAAC WANJALA (Busiro South): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for the honourable member from Mukono not to go through her translator so that the august House can understand what she is talking about? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: For the purpose of today, being that it is a Public Parliament, we will allow that. We shall cause a transcription to be presented before the House on our next seating so that you may be able to understand what she has said. Please conclude in 40 seconds.

MS NAKASI: Okay. Kyembadde ngamba, nti tetulina kyetuyinza kkolawo nga ku makampuni oba kwaabo ba investor abajjamunno nebakola makampuni, engeli jjebatulugunyamu abaantu baffe ngabakola nyo ate nga babawa omusaala mutini. Olusi nebalemelerwa okweyimirizaawo mubulamu. Kubanga olwalero, buli kyetukwatako kitegeza sente, ebyobulimi bitegeza sente, ne education kitegeza sente. 

Tuyinza kubola tutya kubaganda baffe abo abakola mumakampuni nga bakola nyo ate nga basasulwa obusente butini. Abamu bakola mukampunizi nga zilina chemicals. Balwala, naye bwebalwala tebafiibwako. Bagobebwa bugobebwa nebasigala nga tebayina - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us have the honourable member dressed in a tie with the national flag colours. 

Honourable members, order. Please resume your seats. The Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, resume your seat. You do not need to stand up all at once. You can stand up a few at a time. I will always consider you. Opposition Chief Whip, please take the Floor.

5.13
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ruth Nansamba, Green Party, Kyadondo East): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Realising that the Government has failed to prioritise the health, education and agriculture sectors which constitute the most vital components of development in all areas of our economy, Uganda is likely not to achieve the middle income status by 2020 as projected. 

The wage budget in the health sector has remained the same. Doctors and nurses in public hospitals are striking. I am urging the Government to increase funding in these sectors. In the interest of time, I beg to stop here.

THE SPEAKER: [HON. MEMBER: “Information.”] It is the honourable member to allow to be informed. What do you want to inform him about when he has not yet spoken?

5.15
MR BADAL MUZAMMIL (Yumbe District): Mr Speaker, in the interest of time, I wish to inform this House that for the Speaker to wake up in the morning and come to the Floor of this House, it was only after realising that he is healthy. All honourable members of this Parliament who are seated here did the same. For a teacher and pupil to realise that they could go to class and attend lectures or lessons, it should be after he or she has realised that he is healthy and has eaten and is satisfied. 

Having said that, Mr Speaker, I am raising this point from the importance that we derive from the health sector. We should have discovered ways of increasing funds for this department yesterday not today but because we have been reluctant and not giving consideration to this sector, it has taken us all this time. 

We now have good roads. When you get sick they can rush you to hospitals quickly but getting assistance from a medical officer will take a lot of time. For that matter, therefore, I urge this Second Public Parliament to at least support this motion – (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, would you wish to be informed?

MR MOSES LUBANGA (Nakawa): Mr Speaker, let me inform the Member of Parliament from Yumbe that the “professional” middle name of Uganda’s economy is “Prof. Lack of Resources”. You are saying “let us increase this and this” but you are not giving us the resource base. 

Where is that money going to come from when we increase? You are stretching the Government of Uganda which ratifies treaties which are not functional. Even in this Parliament, we are passing these things but they are not functioning. You cannot stretch from three to 10. It is dysfunctional. Let us not stretch the Government of Uganda with these things because they are ratifying things which are not functional.

MR MUZAMMIL: Honourable member, I would like to rebut your point that the issue in Uganda is not that institutions are not functioning. Institutions are functioning, for your information – (Member timed out.)

5.20
MR JOHN NASASIRA (Green Party, Ruhama County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker – (Interruption). 

MR JOHN SENKUTTU (Rubaga North): Thank you, Mr Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please resume your seat. 

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I did not choose you to speak and neither did I choose you. Therefore, it is just in order that you follow parliamentary decorum and take your seats. In order to speak, you have to catch my eye and have my permission. You do not just speak. You have two minutes strictly. Say your name, constituency, party and get straight to the point. 

To remind all of you, we have close to four other items on the Order Paper. We can discuss these items next time. All of you do not need to speak today. In the interest of time, you can even lend your minutes to another person.

5.22
MR BENSON ASIIMWE (Farmers Party, Busongora North, Kasese): Mr Speaker, the increase of funding for agriculture and the health sectors and education is vital. On a number of issues, we have seen the funding that has been there and it is only that we need that when this funding is done, there needs to be some correction. 

The corrections that need to be done such that we benefit really are that Operation Wealth Creation officers in the army are recruited from defence to come into agriculture and there is no Act of Parliament that has graced that. Therefore, their way of operation is illogical. You cannot understand it because they are doing repetitious work because we already have the National Agricultural Advisory Services, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and other organisations that are doing the same. 

We need to streamline that to ensure that the Operation Wealth Creation officers can go well in the funding. The other issue is that funding should be increased especially in the education sector. We have very many people who are qualified –(Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, would you wish to be informed? Honourable members, please take your seats.

MR BENSON ASIIMWE: There is an issue where we have to look at this. Why there is no employment – am I protected, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: You are protected, honourable member. You have 30 seconds.

MR ASIIMWE: There is a problem in the country. We have so many people who are graduates. The way they graduated - they are just prepared for theory, but there is no skills development. 

If there is funding to improve on the skills development, this one would help. Those graduates at university can use the skills to ensure that they become entrepreneurs and do something for the nation - (Member timed out.)

5.25
MR DAVID MAHULO (Workers Party, Busia Central, Busia): Mr Speaker, I am privileged to be around today. I want to agree with everybody in the House that there is a need to increase funding for health, education and agriculture. 

However, I will emphasise the qualitative part of, especially education. Incidentally, I am from an education background. Uganda, in comparative terms around the region, was formerly the major exporter of skilled men and women. They are known all over Africa and even beyond. In Kenya here, President Mwai Kibaki was from Makerere University. In Tanzania, one of their presidents was from Makerere University.

Now, can we regain this lost glory? I justify the increase in education to produce quality men. In East Africa, we have nothing much comparatively to market when we integrate, but should we produce quality men and women, we shall be selling some services to the neighbours. I justify increase in education budget on that ground. 

Education has stakeholders. We have parents. In primary education, we as Government are finding problems. The parents are not even willing to pack food for the children as part of their contribution. We have a lot of constraints that we may actually need a moral building for our society to work together.

In the interest of time, I would have talked much more but let me finish with one thing. I would like to emphasise this to all members of the House. In education, we have introduced teaching local languages. However, I would like to warn you. When you teach someone in Ateso or Lusoga, you are limiting that person internationally. It is not for business. It is not for interaction. I would like to say if you teach it – (Interruption)– it is true –(Member timed out.)

5.29
MS TASSY TUSIIME (Workers Party, Mukono North): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here like my colleagues with a concern on education. There should not be an increase in the education sector because it is better we first maintain the education structures which we have now. (Applause)

I would like to thank the Government for educating the people about HIV/AIDS. It is for health, but people now know where they stand. If you are sick, people now know their status. Thank you very much.

5.30
MR SADAT KIWEEWA (Green Party, Makindye East, Kampala): Mr Speaker -  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please resume your seats. Please respect the honourable member who is submitting. Please resume your seats. 

MR KIWEEWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. All of that money has been allocated to the education and health ministries. The main problem with these two ministries is their respective monitoring and inspection units. I do not know whether they are monitoring independently or their inspection units are independent.

Mr Speaker, I would like to request you one day to invite here the monitoring and inspection units from the education and health ministries to tell us the way they do their things. When you read the newspapers, you learn that a lot of medicines are not allocated to the hospitals but remain at the National Medical Stores headquarters. I do not know why. That is taxpayers’ money.

I would like you to also invite the Minister of Education and Sports. She is totally scheduled. She is also the First Lady. She should come here and tell us the way she does her duties.

THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ruth Nansamba): This is in respect to - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, resume your seats.

THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ruth Nansamba): This is in respect to my office. Mr Speaker, most especially my people from the Opposition side, I would like for you to respect my office. Not everyone should go straight and speak to the Speaker. It should be through the Leader of the Opposition. 

The second item, Mr Speaker, is that I would like for us to observe gender balance. I have seen women here raising their hands but have not been considered. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I am cognisant of the fact that we need to take into consideration gender sensitivity. 

5.35
MR MARK KASIRIVU (The Farmers Party, Kawempe South, Kampala): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. As we discuss the impact of the budgetary allocations, it is important to remember that over time, Government and Uganda at large put infrastructure first. However, we need to recall that history has kept on repeating itself and we are not moving any further into a middle income status. There are better things we can do to move our country to where we would like it to be. 

Regarding the health sector, you cannot tell me that we are going to move to a middle income status as a country when we have improper health. Our 1995 Constitution stipulates that we have a right to life. It calls for the people’s health to be put first. The Government has overtime not considered people’s way of life. I, therefore, call upon Government to put people’s health first in our country. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Standing up is enough; raising your hands is another thing. Please, put down your hands. 

5.37
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Ms Evelyn Kasiri): I am in support of the motion for the Government to increase funds -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Deputy Prime Minister and honourable members, as our time dwindles, we should focus our debate on the resolutions. Look at the last two paragraphs of the motion and hinge your discussions on them. If you see there is need for an amendment, you can also point to the same. 

MS KASIRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My first point is on positive thinking. Ugandans have a problem of complaining. We complain when things are good and when they are bad. We are always complaining. Let me give an example of health workers. One cannot work well when all the voices around you are negative. We have to start being positive and work to improve what we have. We must work as a team. Every time you oppose what is in place, you will not have a solution. Instead, you will always keep moving up and down.

Secondly, the population of Uganda is increasing day and night. Therefore, if health is not put into consideration, people are going to die day and night. When institutions like Makerere University go on strike, Government is blamed. When Mulago Hospital has issues, Government is blamed. When do you ever sit down and thank Government for the little it has done before you complain? (Applause) Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chief Whip, please do your work; your Members are not in order.

5.41
MR JAMES KAWUKI (The Green Party): I am pursuing a Bachelor’s Degree in Education from Kyambogo University. 

Mr Speaker, without wasting time, allow me to first refer to what one of our great leaders, Nelson Mandela, said. He said that the only tool that will lead us to the promised land is education. Therefore, Members, education must be our first priority. However, health must follow because you cannot do anything when your health is not good.

Another thing – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you wish to be informed?

MR KAWUKI: No information is allowed. Mr Speaker, we are making history right here. Many of us are here because of education. As such, we must prioritise education. When we do that, everything will move forward. When resources are being allocated, let us try to follow what has been allocated to these sectors. In that way, everything will fall into place.
 
MR NANTAMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: You cannot question the Speaker’s power. Please, resume your seats.

MR NANTAMBA: Honourable members, let follow our Rules of Procedure and respect our Speaker according. He has allowed me to raise a point of procedure. 

Members, I would like to urge you not to lament. Let us instead give resolutions and ideas - (Interjections) - Excuse me; am I protected, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you have made your point. Please, resume your seat. Honourable members, please focus your discussions on the resolutions as we are drawing to the end of this session. 

5.44
MR JUVENTINE ATUKU (Workers’ Party, Kawempe Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. According to the discussions we have heard here, I stand to talk about education. 

Why is the quality of education in this country poor? Why do we have very high dropout rates? Why do we have 30 to 40 per cent of children in this country reaching P.7 but they cannot read and write in their mother tongue? Why do we have poor performance in subjects across the country? 

We have not asked ourselves where the 1.1 million children who were registered in 2011 for P.1 went, because only 646,190 registered and sat for P.7. The reasons given were that there were a lot of dropouts, some due to early marriages. Why early marriages?

We need to go back to the drawing board and ask what the problem is, and part of the problem is that we have been taken for a ride. We do not have the right curriculum. We do not have an indigenous curriculum for the languages in this country. We do not have teachers who can teach in our local languages. Therefore, the poor quality of education starts from there. The statistics are there in UNEB and in the newspapers. 

Mr Speaker, we need to go back to the drawing board and get the indigenous curricula for each language, and geography -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, before you leave the Floor, could you remind us of your name, party and the constituency you are representing? It has to go on the Hansard.

MR ATUKU: Okay. I am called Atuku Juventine Patrick, a retired primary head teacher, having taught for 40 years -(Interjections)- I represent Kawempe and the Workers Party.

I was talking about going back to the drawing board. I am cautioning all Members of Parliament here to go back to your constituencies and establish district language boards or regional language boards. They should come together as a team and formulate the curricula for that particular region and tribe and then make up -(Member timed out.)

5.48
MR FRANCIS XAVIER SERUNJONGI (Green Party, Mawokota North County, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. The motion we are discussing is for this country to move from a third world country to a middle class one. 

Mr Speaker, Uganda should utilise her resources, and the major resource of a state is its citizens. I do not know how this House can stand and scrap an increase in education facilities. An ignorant state with ignorant people or a state with unhealthy people will never transform into a middle income status country.

In my view, I stand to say that this Government should consider the youth and provide us with good education and good health facilities. If I were sick, I would not have been here today. 

With that little knowledge and to give other people an opportunity, I will conclude here. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I hope, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that you have taken note of the submissions by the youthful Member of Parliament. We know that the youth form a big percentage.

5.50
SSALONGO WASWA KASOZI (Workers Party, Kawempe Division, Kampala): Owekitibwa Supiika ne ba memba banange mu palimenti, tulina okwogera eniimi enterevu zetumanyi obulungi. Nolwekyo, nze ngamba bwenti: mukole amateeka. Bwemutaakole amateeka gafuga gwanga, temulina kyemujja kukola. Kakati mulabye akantu katono nyoo, mwena mukubye enduulu. Naye kyetagisa mateeka. Kasita munaaba namateeka agafuga engwanga, tujja kuba bulungi nyoo. Naye olabye kantu katono nyoo ffena tubadde wagulu.

Ebyo byona byemwogedde, mwogedde kubintu byesiimbi, ebyokukuza engwanga, naye amateeka ge’gakola ensiimbi ezo zemwogedde. Omuntu okuwebwa esente nagenda azikozesa ekyo kyenyiini ekimugambidwa; ekisudde wano engwanga, muntu kuweebwa sente nagenda akola ebibye nadda mu palimenti nagamba nti sente tezaamala. (Applause)

Lwaki tezamaala? Ffena tuzze wano kutesa; tuteseza nsi yaffe. Atte mwagale engwanga lyamwe. Naye bwemutayagala egwanga lyamwe tuli mumbanga.

Nolwekyo, kyembasaaba mwena abakyala na baami, mukole okwagala egwanga. Tubele kumateeka; omusajja oba omukyala bwaza omusango, bamusibe. Nange kenyiini nga azziza omusango, bansibe. Naye kakati, mu’uganda temuli mateeka. Abantu batta banabwe, bakola buli kintu kyebagala, tebafirwako. Nsigadde ndi Ssalongo Waswa. Sinze nzize okutesa nzeeka.

5.53
MS TEDDY BABIRYE (Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Yes, we have heard very many things during this debate but we are happy that there is an increment in the education, agriculture and health sectors. However, the reason why Government sometimes fails to meet its obligations is because we ourselves fail to follow where the money is spent or its utilisation.

Secondly, if we cannot hold the Government accountable, the Government will make mistakes. For example, there is a certain school here in Kampala, which collapsed because some funds that were given to the school were not used for what they were supposed to be used for. This is because they did not follow the accountability - (Member was timed out).

5.55
THE DEPUTY SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Mr Herbert Ssendagire): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity - 

THE SPEAKER: Stick to the resolution; you have one minute.

MR SSENDAGIRE: I am talking about the issue of Government focusing on minor issues. The Government is spending a lot of money on security and other issues which do not help us as citizens of Uganda. 

The first point that they have to handle is health because without it, no one can stand -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you wish to be informed?

MR SSENDAGIRE: No. As Ugandans, we are not ready for the on-going corruption and embezzlement of our funds. There is the issue of tractors which were given to us for agriculture. They are not functional; they have stayed at the district for years and we cannot use them.

Lastly, -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, your time is up. Resume your seat. 

5.56
MR SWALE GODI (Arua Municipality): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion that the Government should increase funding to the health, education and agricultural sectors.  

Currently, Uganda hosts refugees from all over the region. We have refugees from Southern Sudan, Somalia and Congo all coming to Uganda. As such, Uganda must increase the budget on agriculture to also help the refugees. 

Recently, the United Nations High Commission for Refugees changed the channel of giving relief in terms of food. They are instead giving money to refugees. That, in the long run is affecting - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, as the Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of Government Business prepare, we are about to close the debate and the voting should commence soon.

5.58
MR HAWAD MWESIGWA (Youth Representative, Western Region): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I proceed, I would like to call this House to order. We must realise that the issues at hand are of national importance. Some Members of Parliament are acting like they are not, and that is offensive to the agenda of this Parliament. 

We must realise, as Ugandans, that if this Government has done something that is commendable, it should not only look at Ugandans as puppets or people who cannot discern for themselves or cannot respond. The fact is that our health and education sectors have been neglected, and that is why the budget for health has been reduced from 8.3 per cent that had been allocated to it to 7.4 per cent. 

A kind of Government that seeks to entrench itself in power over time cannot pay attention to the needs of the people but rather to security. I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: In the interest of time, I am allowing only one Member and then we shall have the Leader of the Opposition. 

6.00 
MS PHIONA NAZZIWA (Workers Party, Kira Municipality): Mr Speaker, I strongly support the motion about the health sector; a healthy nation is a wealthy nation. 

For Ugandans to achieve middle income status, stakeholders should strive to improve Uganda’s healthcare system. With a Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of $650, Uganda spends nearly $150 dollars to treat Government officials abroad. Therefore, is it in order to treat those Government officials at the expense of the taxpayers yet the ordinary people –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have made your point.

MS NAZZIWA: We have poor health facilities.

6.02
MS SHARON LUNYA (Workers Party): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here to justify why the Government should actually increase funding to the health, education and agricultural sectors. 

However, I would like to stress that the Government should increase funding to the education sector. This will facilitate extension of education services to the rural areas and we shall have many people access education any time. 

Also, we shall have reduced rates of infant mortality. You realise that deep in the villages, young girls are getting pregnant because they do not have access to education. Therefore, if we improve education by increasing funding to the rural areas, every girl-child will access education. 

I also would like to add that there is need to introduce adult education. This is the core of education. We have to educate everyone, whether young or old. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, resume your seats. We are coming close to the end of the session. I will allow only two speakers and then we shall vote on the resolution. 

6.04
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Michael Muramira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the motion that was tabled here, there were amendments that we wanted Government to respond to. 

It is very important that we all know that agriculture is the backbone of every society. We, therefore, urge Government to look into that and make that increment so that our people out there are able to survive, because they entirely depend on agriculture. 

We also urge Government to set up an education commission to review the curriculum so that they enforce education for the disadvantaged and the disabled.

On health, we urge the Government to look into the resolutions that came out of the strike of the health workers. It seems Government is turning a deaf ear yet that is a very important area. We request Government to increase the salaries of these health workers if we are to have a healthy nation.

Further on education, the issues of the girl child, especially the school dropouts, should be looked into. We should increase this budget to have these children remain in school.

We also identified a problem of corruption. There is a lot of corruption in that area. When money is put there, the technocrats do not budget properly or when they do, the money is misappropriated. Therefore, I urge Government to take serious action on those thieves who steal our money.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, I beg that in your submission, you put the honourable Prime Minister to task to show you how she is fast-tracking the submissions of your colleagues, most especially the points that you have emphasized. 

MR MURAMIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was going to end by asking the Leader of Government Business to table the work plan that the Government has on enhancing the budget for education, agriculture and health.

We want a comprehensive report either now or in the future. This Parliament requires you to table the plans that you have when it comes to these three areas that are very key to the development of our country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you for your submission, honourable Leader of the Opposition. Rt Honourable, are you ready to make your submission? Be mindful of the time. 

6.08
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Elizabeth Wanyana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here to defend the Government over what people have asked on budget allocation to the health, education and agriculture sectors. It is good that we are all aware of the existence of the budget allocations to every sector.

However, take note that there is need to prioritise. That is the reason why we have the National Development Plan, the National Action Plan and a strategic plan to guide us as Government in order to give services to the people. We have done our best as Government to extend funding to health, education and agriculture. However, as Ugandans, we have failed to accept what the Government has so far done. We have failed to change our mind-set. 

Remember, as Government we even have a fully-fledged research department that goes down to the grassroots and brings us feedback on what is on the ground - monitoring our programmes. Thereafter, we internalise, analyse and then make decisions on what should be prioritised. This is why the health sector is going to be prioritised in the other budget but not now because we have facilitated those sectors in the previous budgets, though the funds have been misused. We have to reallocate funds to other sectors.

Infrastructure is very important. You are speaking of agriculture but how will you transfer your goods from Katakwi to Nairobi, from Arua to Kasese? We need to build infrastructure. If we see that our agriculture is not being improved by our people at the grassroots, then we would rather put up infrastructure like roads instead.

Let us look at the example of roads. In Kampala, people complain everyday about how the roads are not in a good condition; they complain of potholes and traffic jam. We need to improve such issues in order for us to also work on some of these sectors.

I urge you to allow Government to move step by step. You cannot start by crawling and then all of a sudden, you jump. You have to crawl, stand and then take one step at a time. (Applause) Government has tried to source for funds internally and externally. We shall continue utilising these funds. Let us source from external donors and internally from our revenue to facilitate what is lacking.

In hospitals, for instance, the Uganda Investment Authority recently had a discussion with the Egyptian group and they plan to build a medical facility which shall have a pharmacy and a training centre. However, when Government invests funds in these sectors, Ugandans instead ask for visas and start working outside even when Government has facilitated them to go for training in most of these Government hospitals or even Government schools. Please, love your country.

On the issue of education, schools have been built. We have created seed schools and even went ahead to inject funds into these schools. We buy scholastic materials and have trained teachers on the ground. However, you people at the grassroots are corrupt and then blame corruption on the Government. When we come down, you do not give us information about the corrupt people. You are hiding the corrupt people like the local council officials and others. Therefore, because of that -

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I suggest that you stick to your intention - the policy that you are intending to push forward in order to cure the predicament that we are faced with. You have already heard all the submissions; close in on the resolutions and avoid attacks because they will not help at the moment.

MS WANYANA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker, although I have not attacked anyone. I was saying that we have Universal Secondary Education (USE) and Universal Primary Education (UPE), but we have abused them. Therefore, I am speaking about the corruption we have at the grassroots that is not being reported to the concerned authorities. When we send out teams and committees to monitor and evaluate Government programmes on the ground, the people at the grassroots are not giving clear information. Therefore, come out and speak.

There is also a Member who said that we should start teaching children in local languages like Ateso and Runyankole. I still insist that Government should put funds towards international languages that are going to market us as Ugandans. We are in the East African Community, for example; therefore, we need Kiswahili. There are also countries with which we have worked hand in hand and they have been our funders and sponsors - We can teach foreign languages like French and German that will expose us to the international market. 

Government will continue to support these sectors as it has always been doing; for example, the girl-child is supported by availing sanitary towels to them. Government will also continue to support teachers and will continue to evaluate the district leadership in the education sector like inspectors of schools and district education officers.

Government will also continue to follow the National Development Plan in order to achieve its objectives and mission. Therefore, please support Government in delivering services to you and appreciate what they have so far done. This is because government is run by people and not God. It is only God who can say, “Let there be…” and it happens there and then. Thank you for listening to me. For God and my Country. God bless you.

THE SPEAKER: We are moving towards voting on the resolution. I will read the suggested resolution to you and those in favour will say “Aye” while those who are not in favour will say, “Nay”. It shall be voice voting. Therefore, if you want to take the lead, you know what to do.

Before that, I have an announcement to make. There is an honourable member - I do not know if it is a Member or someone in the gallery - who picked a key that does not belong to them and they left us with this one. Therefore, please approach the clerk at Table and you will get your key and exchange it with the one that does not belong to you. I believe it was done in good faith and it is not one of those recently branded - I do not know how they call them.

The resolutions are as follows:

“Now, therefore, be it resolved by this Parliament that Government –

i) 	increases funding to the health and education sectors from 8.3 per cent and 11.0 per cent respectively, to at least 15 per cent each, of the national budget as agreed by the African leaders at the Abuja African Union Summit and Addis Ababa Action Agenda.

ii) 	increases funding to the agricultural sector from 3.8 per cent to at least 10 per cent of the national budget as endorsed by all African Union Heads of State at the Second Ordinary Assembly of the African Union in July 2003 in Maputo under the African Union Maputo Declaration on Agriculture and Food Security in Africa, 2003.”  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you should go and traverse your constituencies. We shall soon resume once you have successfully done it. House is adjourned sine die.

(The House rose at 6.23 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 

