


Thursday, 30 January 2020

Parliament met at 10.13 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We agreed that we will start early today and see how much of business we can cover. We have a lot of work; the report on the National Development Plan is ready, the one on the Budget Framework Paper is being worked on. Hopefully, it will also be ready today.

We should have discussed them separately but there were delays; that is why we are going to handle them at the same time. However, we have to finish them as fast as we can. By tomorrow, we should be done with them.

Today, we have these matters that we need to finish. We have a Bill that we should finish and also have two loans. However, there is a motion that has been completed because it affects a whole Karamoja region of this country. Hon. Samson Lokeris is here, the ministers want to participate in this debate and the honourable Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs has an engagement in the afternoon.

I seek the indulgence of Members that we could also bring this motion forward, finish with it and give some relief to the people of Karamoja who are affected by these glossily programmes and also give the minister a chance to participate in the debate before he can go and do that.

Therefore, I do not know whether I should start with that motion straight away. Would it be okay to start with that motion? Then, we will start with that motion, clear it and follow the Order Paper.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO TAKE IMMEDIATE STEPS TO RESTORE PEACE, SECURITY AND STABILITY IN KARAMOJA REGION

10.17
MR SAMSON LOKERIS (NRM, Dodoth County East, Kaabong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the opportunity you gave us to move a motion regarding the current situation in Karamoja.

Mr Speaker, the motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to take immediate steps to restore peace, security and stability in Karamoja region. This motion is moved under rule 55 and 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, under objective 3 of section 1 of the national objectives and directive principles of state policy enjoins all organs of State and the people of Uganda to work towards peace, promotion of national unity, peace and stability;

RECALLING THAT Government carried out a disarmament exercise from the year 2000 to 2010 in Karamoja sub region and successfully recovered our 40,000 illegal guns through voluntary and forceful disarmament for which the people of Karamoja are grateful, for the great contribution of the Government of Uganda, more so, the Uganda People’s Defence Forces and other security organs in Uganda;

RECOGNISING THAT as a result of disarmament exercise, security peace and stability was restored in Karamoja sub-region, which in turn ushered in social-economic transformation in the region;

FURTHER RECOGNISING THAT for nearly 15 years, the people of Karamoja have enjoyed relative peace, stability and tranquillity, a matter that is great plight to the people of Karamoja, Uganda and East Africa generally;

CONCERNED THAT Karamoja has of recent seen a sharp rise in the incidence of insecurity in the region ranging from petty crimes to vicious crimes like cattle rustling, which have resulted in the death of people, destruction of property, which have affected the relative peace, security and stability enjoyed by the people of Karamoja today;

FURTHER CONCERNED THAT the insecurity experience in Karamoja region is as a result of the porous borders the region shares with South Sudan and the Republic of Kenya, which facilitate the cross-border movement of illegal guns and armed groups into the region from the neighbouring countries;

NOTING THAT WHEREAS the Government of Uganda carried out a disarmament exercise in Uganda, the other states that border with Karamoja have not disarmed the armed groups and the tribes in their respective countries; a matter that makes Karamoja region vulnerable to external aggression and has negatively impacted on the security, peace and stability of Karamoja;

FURTHER NOTING THAT during the disarmament exercise, Government pledged to protect Karamoja region, its people and their property from external aggression especially in light of the historical challenges the people of Karamoja had with some tribes in Kenya and South Sudan;

COGNISANT of the threats faced by the people of Karamoja and the need for sustainable peace and stability in Karamoja sub region;

Now, therefore, be it resolved by this Parliament that;

    1. Government urgently deploys security forces to Karamoja region to secure the people and their property.
    2. Government engages Governments of Kenya and South Sudan to develop measures that will ensure peaceful co-existence of communities that share a body with Karamoja region in their respective countries.
    3. Government immediately commences a disarmament exercise in Karamoja sub region to get rid of illegal guns and secure sustainable peace and development in Karamoja.
    4. Government puts in place mechanisms for the recovery of cattle and other livestock lost to cattle rustlers.
    5. Government effectively secures borders of Uganda and protect the Karamojong region from external aggression.
    6. Government puts in place mechanisms to cub the proliferation  of illegal guns into the region from the neighbouring countries and 
    7.  The Minister of Karamoja Affairs should undertake mobilising the people of Karamoja sub region for sustainable peace.”

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) It is seconded by Amuru, Igara, Karenga, Abim, Dokolo, Nakaseke, Manjiya, Workers and the entire House. Would you like to briefly speak to your motion? It is a straightforward motion.

MR SAMSON LOKERIS: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. From 2000-2010, the Government of Uganda undertook a successful disarmament exercise in Karamoja. And when it undertook, there were conditions that were put in place.

    1. Government was supposed to secure the borders from external aggression and deploy UPDF in those areas. Unfortunately, this has not been taken into consideration.

    2.  Government was supposed to ensure that they recruit other forces that would support UPDF in the exercise of providing peace like Local Defence Units (LDU), Anti-Stock Theft Unit (ASTU) and police.

The current situation has come up because of the following: 

One, there has been a pull out of the UPDF from Karamoja region. In Karamoja, you will find a detache of three or four soldiers who are vulnerable to cattle raiders.

Secondly, LDUs were recruited to support the UPDF in the disarmament exercise. Unfortunately, they were integrated into the UPDF leaving a gap. There was never recruitment to replace those who were integrated into the UPDF.

We also had ASTU that was under the Police Force. This unit was recruited but of course, most of those who were deployed in Karamoja had to leave through transfers. That also created another gap.

There are areas, which the army was supposed to occupy but there were no boreholes for these soldiers. Even the few soldiers who are in Karamoja have no transport at all. I can give an example of the commanding officer of the 39th Battalion in Kaabong who uses a motorcycle to monitor the activities of soldiers in that place. It is the same in the whole region.

Mr Speaker, our prayers are:

    1. Government deploys enough UPDF in Karamoja to make sure they are strategically placed along the borders.
    2. We request for more recruitment of LDUs as this is a local force that has been supporting the army and walking around –

The deputy speaker: Please, do not create new prayers. They are in the motion.

Mr Samson lokeris: Thank you. We need recruitment of more LDUs to replace those that have been integrated into the army.

There is the ASTU whose role was to ensure that they track stolen cattle. They were under the police. The recruitment of ASTU became general. It was supposed to be for Karamoja so that they are able to track and recover stolen cattle. However, the type of officers who were recruited were policemen who did not want to track animals because it is a tedious exercise. 

Mr Speaker, we also pray that for the strategic areas where these soldiers will be deployed, there should be boreholes drilled.

Furthermore, there is an issue of security roads. There is no way soldiers can go in pursuit of raiders to Kenya. The problem is, when they reach somewhere, they are unable to proceed. 

We feel that Karamoja region should be the concern of Government. As long as there are people armed in South Sudan and Kenya, we still need UPDF because the police are not able to engage the raiders.

Lastly, the Minister for Karamoja Affairs has been mobilising the communities for peace. We need Government to support the ministry and give it more funds so that mobilisation for peace and sustainable security continues. 

Peace is something that you cannot achieve today. If you do not continue mobilising communities, you will not achieve much. I beg to submit.

The Deputy Speaker:  Thank you. Seconder of the motion -

10.28
Ms JANET okori-moe (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion and I would like to second the motion.

I represent the people of Abim who are in Karamoja sub-region. Karamoja has 11 ethnic groups, which are recognised by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. As long as Karamoja is not peaceful, our country will not be peaceful. The reason we are seated in our offices and smiling in this country is because of Karamoja; you know how we vote. When it comes to voting, we even forget about our ethnicities and unite. However, these are the people who are now dying.

Like the mover of the motion has said, rearmament is real in Karamoja. We would like to thank Government for the disarmament. However, they did not consider that porous borders were left open and people are free to go wherever they get the guns from and they are re-arming.

The major problem the district is facing is that even before insecurity slips to the rest of the districts, Abim cries from January to January because we neighbour Acholi and we are of a different ethnicity. We have had people being killed; this time not only with guns but also with bows and arrows, which have become a very dangerous weapon that Government has to regulate.

We have buried many people who have died as a result of injuries caused by arrows. The entry points of the thugs who are destabilising Abim and the rest of Karamoja are known. We only request Government to ensure there is strategic deployment of the UPDF in these locations. 

Before insecurity slipped into Karamoja again, we used to have UPDF in those strategic locations. Abim is the entry point; when the Jie warriors come, they pass through Abim and go to destabilise Agago, Teso and Lango.

I, therefore, request that this time round, Government should open their ears and listen to the cries of the people of Karamoja. It is not only Abim suffering; the rest of the ethnicities and districts are also suffering. 

There are now clan wars because guns are in the hands of the people. The Turkana are also attacking the Matheniko. The Turkana walk into Kotido and attack the Jie; the Jie transfer their annoyance to Abim and Agago.

I would like to plead with Government that the people you deploy in Karamoja are human beings. Facilitate them. Give them means of transport because apparently, you deploy LDUs or UPDF to walk on foot to follow people who are gifted in walking, moreover without means of transport. For example, Abim does not have a vehicle; not even a motorbike. Do you expect them to follow warriors and thugs?

Other people have also taken advantage of the situation in Karamoja. Recently, a woman from Abim was abducted and she was found in Kitgum. Let us rise to the occasion as the situation is not good in Karamoja. I beg to submit.

The deputy speaker: Thank you. Honourable members, the motion that I propose for your debate is that Parliament adopts this resolution urging Government to take immediate steps to restore peace, security and stability in Karamoja region. The specific prayers are seven and they are contained in this motion, as read.

That is the motion for your debate, which starts now. We are going to restrict the time. Each Member will speak for two minutes. I will give people from the region a little more time and then, we will see how we roll out. 

10.34
MS LILLY AKELLO (NRM, Woman Representative, Karenga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion and your office for allowing us to debate this motion today because it has been a long time coming.

The situation in Karamoja is not what we used to enjoy after disarmament. Currently, the situation is unbearable in a way that it is no longer cattle theft but cattle raids within the ethnic groups in Karamoja; it is spreading externally. 

We have had external raids from South Sudan, the Didinga, the Toposa and the Turkana. This has come up because we have porous borders, especially from South Sudan, the Turkana, from the Ik Constituency and Karenga District.

Mr Speaker, every day, the guns are being brought into the country through Karamoja in the districts of Karenga, Kaabong, Moroto and Amudat. 

Last night, there was a raid in Kawalakol. The previous day, there was a raid in Kaabong in Lokerui sub-county.  Yesterday, there was a raid in Kapedo and all these are happening. It is no longer bows and arrows but it is real guns and exchange of fire.  

The cows in Kaabong were followed as far as Orom. Even in Kitgum District in Orom in Akilok, guns were brought in. We urge Government to deploy in the porous borders so that we can arrest the situation before it goes out of hand. 

You know very well that when Karamoja has guns, other districts will be destabilised. Hence, we urge Government to deploy at the border and give logistics because some of the detaches do not even have vehicles, as my colleague said. They also do not have fuel and it is we, the Members of Parliament, who they call and we give them fuel to go and follow the culprits. 

Mr Speaker, we urge Government to come to our rescue, as Karamojong, because once you do not do it, it will spread to Teso, Acholi and Lango. It will be fire in the house. 

I would like to thank you and we pray that Government takes this as a serious issue. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

10.37
MS MARGARET ALEPER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Personally, I am grateful that this motion has been moved. It will go a long way in restoring sanity in Karamoja. 

The situation in Karamoja, just as my colleagues have alluded to, is very unbearable and pathetic. For the last 15 years, Karamoja has been enjoying the peace that was ushered in by the resettlement exercise, of which I commend the Government very much. 
However, of recent – last year in September – we were disrupted by our neighbours, the Turkana from Kenya. They are the ones who started this insecurity, especially by attacking the Jie.

For the last five months, the Jie have received over 50 attacks from the Turkana with the alliance from the Matheniko of Moroto. When there was an outcry from the Jie, it was somehow downplayed by Government, because they did not respond as immediately as we thought. 

What has given a comfort zone to these attacks is that the forces are very thin on the ground. Kotido alone has only 40 UPDF soldiers, who cannot man the number of animals that the Jie have. When these attackers come, they come in numbers over 200. We are also aware that the Turkana are not disarmed but come with arms. When they come, they overrun the detaches. 

You find a detach of two or five UPDF soldiers is overrun. In these attacks, we have lost soldiers, the civilians and animals. When these Turkana attack the Jie, they commit a lot of atrocities like abduction and sacrificing young children. 

My prayers are: 

    1. That Government increases the Forces on the ground because this is the gap that the attackers have taken advantage of.

    2. That Government increases the quota of the LDUs to the Jie and all the Karamoja districts. 

Others have been given 150 LDUs to move and protect their animals but the Jie have been given only 60 LDUs, who may not be able to protect the animals. Therefore, this exposes the Jie animals to the thieves. 

I would like to thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

10.40
MS CHRISTINE TUBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaabong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to wish you a Happy New Year. 

I thank the mover of this motion. Indeed, we have come a long way, as Karamoja. If we are left like this and people go back where we came from, then, the whole country will be affected – definitely in terms of peace and development.

I would like to mention raise a few issues.  The reason these raids have continued is because there is delayed recovery of the animals and handing over to the owners. You know when something is stolen and is not recovered immediately; those who are hurt go back to raid. 

Originally, we had protected kraals and you would have kraal leaders and the youth. It would be very easy to know who has moved out. At that time, when we had protected kraals, the raids had reduced. I would like to appeal to Government that if it is going to take time to listen to our prayers, then, it is better to reinstate these protected kraals. 

I know most of the LDUs are Karamojong. It is crucial now to deploy them with the UPDF because they are the ones who know the language. You know Karamojong communicate in some way. For example, when they go to raid, on their return, they change their shoes to face the other way round so that tracking becomes difficult. Therefore, it is very important to have many LDUs deployed with the UPDF at the same time.

My other prayer is on mobilisation of kraal leaders. It is these kraal leaders who have command over their sons.  (Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up. 

MS TUBO: As much as we are trying, as Government, to handle the issue of insecurity in Karamoja, it is very important we bring on board the communities. It is also important that we lay ambushes in the night together with the communities. These are the fastest ways we can address these issues, as we wait for Government to come in. 

However, as a Karamojong woman, I thank this Government for what it has done for the people of Karamoja. Thank you. 

10.42
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the mover of the motion. 

While I want to thank Government for what has happened before in the disarmament process, I would like to say that we have spoken here year in, year out and at one point, we had the drought mitigation plan. 

I remember you were the presiding officer when you brought all the relevant ministers here. They came here with plans to deal with the drought, which is one of the reasons why the Karamojong, at a particular time, move away from their area to the neighbourhood. That is why you see all these criminalities getting to another level. This does not usually happen throughout the year. 

It is also true that there is a consensus both from Karamoja and the neighbourhood. We have had meetings and resolutions have been made where even the minister himself has been involved. 

Last year, I even got involved in an accident going for a security meeting, which was in Abim. We had several meetings, year in, year out. Mr Speaker, whatever we are saying today has been stated over and again. 

Right from childhood, as a child growing up in Adilang, we were victimised. I had a situation where even my clothes were removed by some of these herdsmen while I was grazing. 

We have suffered for years, from generation to generation. We have suffered loss of property, loss of lives, destruction of crops among other things. It is causing disunity among the people. 

I know some prayers have been given. Last year, there was a promise of compensation, which have not been dealt with. 

We can talk about these problems but if people are not being compensated, if we keep on losing property and lives like that without being compensated – something needs to be done. What happened to the draught mitigation plan?

I know we have talked of deployment of LDC, the ASTU group among other programmes. There were resolutions, which were given to the minister and yet, this period passes and nothing is done. 

We need something to be done. We are tired of talking. People are going to take the law into their hands. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

10.45
MR OJARA OKIN (Independent, Chua County West, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion and all those who have spoken in support of the motion. I also stand firm to support this motion. 

As you know, Kitgum borders Karamoja sub-region, and therefore, the insecurity in Karamoja means insecurity in Kitgum District. 

If we cast our minds back, what is the cause of this insecurity? Many people think that it is about the absence of the firing of guns. The absence of guns does not necessarily mean there is peace. Peace is a prolonged process. 

I remember very well when insecurity started in Karamoja sub-region. It was a long time ago and a lot of development activities were initiated to address the issue of insecurity in that region. 

We want to understand from the Government the impact of those projects that have been initiated because we have not understood the impact those projects that were initiated purposely to address the issue of insecurity. 

If they are failing to work on the mindset, on the livelihood of communities that are supposed to be transformed, then we need to devise other means of addressing this insecurity. 

Therefore, I would like to urge the Government to stand up and ensure that we look at the mindsets of the people, look at the developmental needs of the people in the sub region and we look at the change of the livelihood of the people. 

10.48
MR PATRICK OPOLOT(NRM, Kachumbala County, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Kachumbala is in Teso sub- region. However, the moment Karamoja sneezes, the whole of Teso, the whole Sebei, parts of Bugisu, Lango and Acholi catch flu straight away. Therefore, the best programme this Government has done for us is the disarmament of the Karamoja region. Since the disarmament took place, we have realised some reasonable peace in that part of the country and that is around 40 per cent of this country because the effects of the East destabilised stretches up to parts of the Central because all our people would have to run this side. 

Therefore, I would like to thank the mover of this motion and urge that Government takes serious action in retaining the peace we have been having in Karamoja which has been making all of us peaceful. 

Even the voting pattern in some of our regions was because of the disarmament. That is why we have been having the NRM Government rising up to 60 or 70 per cent. For Government to maintain the voting pattern, let Karamoja be peaceful. 

10.50
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me thank the mover of this motion. I support it, to urge Government to ensure peace and stability in Karamoja. 

Disarmament did not only bring peace to Karamoja but also partly to Bugisu. 

Taking issue with what the woman Member of Kaabong said, that the LDUs conceal their footsteps when they have raided by changing the shoes the other side – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not the LDUs, it is the raiders.

MR NAMBESHE: I drop that one. 

The challenge of the porous borders notwithstanding, there have been numerous cross-border meetings, even the Head of State, a number of times has met with his counterparts from Kenya. 

One wonders, is it about inadequate funding in the Ministry of Karamoja Affairs? - this ministry of Karamoja Affairs has been special – just like Kampala has two ministers. 

As you recall, at one time when the First Lady was the minister in charge of Karamoja Affairs, there was total peace, stability and security. 

Could we say that the First Lady used her clout of the extra office of being First Lady to bring peace? If it is true, isn’t it also good to have included in the prayers that she is shifted?  (Member timed out.)

10.52
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Mr Speaker, the reason I was interested in speaking about this motion is because I personally experienced the raids of the Karamojong. When I was a young boy, they raided the cattle from me as I was taking care of them. 

When there are problems in Karamoja, there are also problems in Acholi. When I was growing up, there was a saying that we cannot wait for Karamoja to develop. That means governments have not been taking Karamoja seriously, before and even this Government.

When it comes to the issue of planning, it is important that when you are planning for a country to develop, you should never leave any person behind. Even when you look at the budget that they bring on the Floor of Parliament, there is no difference in the budgeting that targets the region of Karamoja. That explains. That explains why when you see the poverty map of the country, Karamoja and the neighbouring communities are all poor. I think this motion has to be taken seriously. If we want the country to develop equally and attain equal distribution of resources, we need to make sure there is peace in Karamoja.

If UPDF can be deployed to other countries and we forget about the peace in this country, I do not think this shows that we are serious. Government must first analyse this issue seriously and make sure that there is peace in Uganda before we deploy our soldiers to fight for other nations.

We are in East Africa – what is happening in the negotiations between Kenya and Uganda to make sure that the Turkana and other tribes on the other side are also disarmed so that the Karamojong can be peaceful? (Member timed out.)

10.54
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a reader of the Bible, the Bible tells me that you reap what you sow. I have noted that for several years and in many elections, Karamoja has faithfully and consistently voted for the NRM. At this time, Karamoja should be celebrating the harvest. They have sown the votes, they have sown support and they should be reaping and harvesting prosperity, wealth and improvement. The Government should take note of the Biblical guidance in the way they treat Karamoja. 

Although it is recorded that there are 11 ethnic groups, we are all aware that there are two competing groups: Jie and Mathiniko. First of all, I think the Karamojong must unite regardless of their ethnicity or other differences. As long as you are going to have some of you teaming up with Kenyans to attack your fellow Karamojong, what do you expect Ugandans to do for you? (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we hear from the ministers and see how to proceed? Let us start with the Minister in charge of Karamoja Affairs and later the one in charge of Defence.

10.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (KARAMOJA AFFAIRS) (Mr Moses Kizige): Mr Speaker, it is important that we understand exactly what has happened and what has caused this problem. Just like other parts of the country, Karamoja has had unprecedented quantities of rains. Never in the history of Karamoja did we have as much rain in October, November and December like we had last year. 

Ordinarily, in October and November, I would be moving in the neighbouring districts negotiating for my herdsmen to be allowed to graze their animals. This time, we had a lot of rains and we still have water and we have restrained people from moving.

As a result, some bad elements took advantage of the heavy rains. Normally, there are no thefts of animals during the rainy seasons as the theft is always during the dry seasons. This time, it started in the rainy season and this has been the cause of the problem. However, as the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs will explain, we have been doing the best we could. 

Frist of all, we have regular cross-border meetings and internal coordination meetings. Last year alone, we had seven meetings and on Saturday, this week, we are going to have a meeting in Moroto, which will be attended by the Commander of Defence Forces and the Deputy Inspector General of Police. Members of Parliament, LC V chairpersons, elders, clan leaders and religious leaders have been invited to see if we can come up with solutions.

Secondly, we have many Protocols with neighbouring countries. Right now, we host the IGAD regional office in Moroto in our Karamoja Affairs offices. We have also signed a memorandum of understanding with Kenya. My senior minister and the Kenyan minister in charge of Devolution and Arid and Semi-Arid Lands signed a memorandum of understanding –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, disarmament was done in Karamoja. Two years ago, the minister reported on the Floor of Parliament that all guns that were in the hands of the community were collected by the Government. We have security along the borders. Where are the guns coming from, yet Government collected all the guns from the Karamoja community? Thank you.

MR KIZIGE: Mr Speaker, if I am allowed to continue with my statement, some of these questions will be answered. Like I was saying, we have signed a memorandum of understanding with Kenya and voluntary disarmament has already started in Turkana and West Pokot counties in Kenya. Even in Karamoja in 2001, we started with voluntary disarmament and the forceful disarmament came in later. 

We have cross-border meetings, which I sometimes chair and my senior colleagues as well as the ministers from Kenya. We also have our Resident District Commissioners meeting with the administrators from the other side and we have very regular meetings. Mobilisation has been going on and you all know that the percentage of people living below the poverty line in Karamoja in 2006 was 86 per cent but we have now improved to 60 per cent because of the mobilisation. We have massive projects there: NUSAF, Development initiative in northern Uganda and many other programmes.

I support the motion because it is true that there is a problem right now, which we are solving. I assure the people of Karamoja and colleague members of Parliament that the situation is under control. If we could, let us allow the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs to expound further.

11.01
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like, from the outset, to commend and salute my colleague, the mover of this motion, for moving a balanced motion. It is balanced in the sense that the motion acknowledges the good job that the Government has done in Karamoja over the years. The motion also presents challenges, which we need to work together as the leadership in the Executive, Parliament, local governments and at the international level to resolve in order to improve the security situation in Karamoja.

In the text of the motion, in the preamble, the mover recognises that Government has carried out disarmament exercise in Karamoja sub-region right from 2000 to 2010 and successfully recovered 40,000 illegal guns through voluntary and forceful disarmament for which the people of Karamoja grateful for the great contribution that the Government of Uganda, more so the UPDF and other security organs has made. I would like to thank the mover for acknowledging this tremendous contribution.

I address myself more specifically to the prayers that the mover has made to this House. On the urgency by Government to deploy security forces to the Karamoja region in order to secure the people and their property, I would like to say that in an effort to improve security in Karamoja region, the force levels of regular units and LDUs have been increased. 

As I speak, we have an additional force – additional to what we had – of a brigade size that has been deployed across the districts of Karamoja, including Kaabong, Kotido, Abim, Moroto, Napak, Nabilatuk, Nakapiripirit, Amudat and Karenga.

The challenge, which the members have presented, is that when peace returned to Karamoja, following disarmament, there was some laxity because some LDUs opted to join UPDF and so, the security personnel in terms of LDUs did not remain on the ground to continue manning security. We are working hard to rectify this, Mr Speaker, because as I said, we are deploying a brigade size force in Karamoja region. 
The second prayer, which concerns security, is the request to commence the disarmament exercise in Karamoja region to get rid of illegal guns and secure sustainable peace and development in the region. I would like to state clearly that the disarmament era in Karamoja - as I said from the beginning and as is stated in the motion - began from 2000 and ended in 2010.

What is required now is that the current UPDF operations be beefed up in order to curb the current wave of criminality that has re-emerged in the Karamoja region. The UPDF operations, which are intelligence and police-led, are basically fighting criminalised rustling by individuals from different clans that come together to raid livestock.

For example, the UPDF, in 2018, was able to recover 54 guns from criminals in the region. In 2019, the UPDF recovered 69 guns from criminals and also, currently in this month of January, eight guns have so far been recovered. This is confirmation that operations against criminality in the Karamoja region by UPDF and other security forces are on-going.

Additionally, UPDF will continue to engage and work with the local community, district leaders, kraal leaders, peace committee members, civil society and other security agencies in Karamoja region.

The motion also calls upon Government to put in place mechanisms for recovery of cattle and other livestock lost to cattle rustlers. The following mechanisms are in place to recover rustled livestock: the Nabilatuk and Moruititi resolutions, which are under review because they need improvement to make them more enforceable, are already in place and working.

The UPDF, supported by the LDUs have continued to protect the community kraals, cattle are branded and peace committees are in place. The UPDF has also increased the force levels to brigade size, in order to cover the rustler corridors.

On the issue of effectively securing the borders of Uganda –(Interruption)

MS ALEPER: Thank you, honourable minister. You have said that there are measures in place to recover animals. However, the biggest challenge has been the animals that have crossed over to Kenya. This is a big challenge to the UPDF and the communities. Over 5000 animals are in Turkana, Kenya.

Therefore, can you tell this House how those animals can be recovered because it has been a big challenge because of the international border? Thank you.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, that is exactly the point, which I was moving to. I beg the honourable member to allow me to proceed. I am saying that the UPDF has increased force levels, supported by LDUs to effectively secure the borders of Uganda and protect the Karamoja region from external aggression, especially from the Toposa of South Sudan and the Pokot and Turkana from Kenya.

As the Minister of Karamoja Affairs has said, regional mechanisms such as the establishment of liaison officers between Kenya and Uganda has enhanced coordination and information sharing in cases of cross border raids. For example, on 21 January this year, the Turkana County leadership in Kenya recovered and returned 32 heads of cattle to their Ugandan counterparts through the RDC of Moroto. These cows had been raided from Napak District and crossed the border but the Kenya Liaison Officer coordinated the recovery of the animals.

The liaison officers of the two countries of Kenya and Uganda have been deployed across the borders. The Kenya Liaison Officer, Maj. Edward Kabasa, sits in Moroto while his counterpart, the Uganda Liaison Officer, Maj. John Mwesigwa sits in Lokichogio, West Pokot in Kenya.

The only challenge we have is that the Government of South Sudan has not yet appointed a liaison officer to coordinate this effort. The UPDF units in Karenga, in coordination with Uganda Wildlife Authority, have deployed intelligence teams in suspected smuggling routes. 

Through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Karamoja Affairs, we shall continue to engage our counterparts in Juba to make sure a liaison officer from South Sudan is appointed because that remains a porous area for the entry of illegal guns and rustling from South Sudan.

Cross border regional meetings between the RDCs and County Governors in Kenya as regional mechanisms are being held on a monthly basis.

On the issue of Government putting in place mechanisms to curb proliferation of illegal guns into the region from neighbouring counties, I would like to state that the UPDF is working closely with regional frameworks such as the Regional Centre of Small Arms and Light Weapons for Eastern Africa and the Horn of Africa in Nairobi. At the national level, it is working with the Ministry of Internal Affairs under the Uganda Police Force as well as the national focal centre and the Karamoja Regional Police Commander is the focal point at the local level. 

The establishment of the liaison officers – referred to above – between Uganda and Kenya has increased surveillance and coordination of the border entry points and intelligence sharing. The UPDF’s new deployments have covered the smuggling routes and cattle rustling corridors and force levels have increased to curb this proliferation of illegal guns. 

The arrest and prosecution of the criminal elements found with illegal guns is one of the improvements that have been registered. There is also fingerprinting of weapons, which is on-going. 

Some Members also requested the mechanism of protected kraals to be restored. I think this is something we shall explore and implement. They also requested that more LDUs be deployed. 

Mr Speaker, this is an exercise which the UPDF is carrying out countrywide and we shall continue to do it for all parts of Uganda, including Karamoja. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

MR EDWARD MAKMOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the input of the UPDF on the ground. My procedural matter is that for us, the people who are bordering Karamoja, while we also recognise that there is cross-border cattle theft in which the UPDF have directly done some work, our challenge is that a lot of the cattle theft is a security matter, which involves the Ministry of Internal Affairs – that is not here. 

Resolutions have been made to this effect and one of them was the increasing of the LDUs’ presence, which the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs has talked about. I was in a security meeting in Agago in December and I got information that a number of police stations in Agago have even been closed and yet, we wanted more police officers recruited. In most cases, in a sub-county like Adilang, which is the last sub-county that borders Karamoja, you would find only three police officers – the CID, OC station and one additional police officer. 

We thought we would have more police officers than that but instead, in other sub-counties, the police posts have been closed. I think the Minister of Internal Affairs needs to have an input here. 

Another resolution, which was also made, was the issue of compensation. We had war in northern Uganda and compensation is being done about the atrocities that were meted out by the LRA. However, the Karamoja victimisation has gone on for generations and nothing is done in terms of compensation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the procedure?

MR EDWARD MAKMOT: I think even the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs needs to come here and have an input. Are we proceeding well when we are discussing cross-border defence issues, which are being dealt with by the UPDF and cattle theft from our neighbours in Karamoja in the absence of the Minister of Internal Affairs?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, does any one of you want to guide on the procedural matter that has been raised? (Laughter)

Honourable members, two things have been happening: The Government, the UPDF, the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Minister for Karamoja Affairs have been doing their work in involving the communities but it looks like information has not been fed properly to the representatives that sit in this House. 

Secondly, the members of Parliament who come from Karamoja, Acholi and Lango have been raising these matters persistently. This is the first time we are getting a meeting of minds from the leaders in Government and the members of Parliament on how this matter should be presented and dealt with. Therefore, this motion has brought all these issues together.

If you recall, there was a portion of it that was supposed to be answered and it involves the killing of the LC III chairperson. All those things are spread out and they are not being handled in a coordinated way. This is the first time we are doing this. 

The Minister for Karamoja Affairs and the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs support the motion. Why don’t we adopt the motion and wait for implementation and the subsequent report under rule 217 on actions taken on what we have adopted and then, see what changes have happened? Meanwhile, our colleagues will be on the ground to check whether anything has been done while we wait for the report under rule 217. We can then move from there. 

Therefore, I am going to put the question for the adoption of this motion. Honourable members, I now put the question that the motion of this Parliament urging Government to take immediate steps to restore peace, security and stability in the region be adopted together with the seven specific prayers affecting the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, Minister of Internal Affairs and all other Government departments to join hands to deal with these prayers.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Samson Lokeris for this. I also thank the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the Minister for Karamoja Affairs. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

NATIONAL PLANNING AUTHORITY ANNUAL PERFORMANCE REPORT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

11.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the National Planning Authority Annual Performance Report for the Financial Year 2018/2019. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

AFRICAN PEER REVIEW MECHANISM (APRM) SECOND COUNTRY REVIEW REPORT – JANUARY 2018

11.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM) Second Country Review Report for January 2018 from the National Planning Authority. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those two reports. They stand referred to the appropriate committee for review. Eventually, the committee should advise Parliament on what should be done with the reports. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for your indulgence. I was expecting that since you have given hon. Bahati the opportunity to lay some documents here, I equally expected him to lay the NPDIII. Now that we are running out of time, I do not know why he is delaying us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was laid and we are going to debate the report from the committee. It was laid, it went to the committee and the committee has reported and I have a copy. Do you want a second laying?

MR NZONGHU: Mr Speaker, I was not just asking for the laying but the critical outlook of what he is supposed to present.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we are going to debate it. The report is here and already with the House. Therefore, that is fine. Can we deal with the Bill because the item we are discussing is now the Bill? I am advised that the report of the committee was presented and a question was proposed for debate. 

MS ALUM: Mr Speaker, yes, the report was presented and even two Members contributed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Had debate started?

MS ALUM: Yes, it has started.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, let us continue with the debate of this matter of the Bill on the principle of the Bill entitled, “the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets (Amendment) Bill, 2019.” There is something missing out, that is not the full title of that Bill. It misses the year and does not say the Act.

It is the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (Amendment) Bill. Was there an Act that they are amending? The titling of this Bill has an issue.  You are amending an Act, the Bill does not state that it is amending an Act.

Therefore, it should be the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act (Amendment) Bill, 2019 because you are amending an Act and it should state so. You do not just bring an amendment Bill, which is not amending anything. The title will have to be looked at again so that it captures the true spirit of what we are doing with this Bill.

Honourable members, debate on the principles of this Bill is open and each Member preparing to debate will do. And as you are aware, the main principle is already contained in the Act, which was adopted. The reasons they want to amend or improve the Bill or the Act now constitute a new principle that they considered that there might have been gaps in the legislation that they now want to fix.

Those will be the new principles that we need to debate and debate continues now.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, may I beg your indulgence that the chairperson refreshes our minds because - it is long time since they presented this report on the highlights on the key points that we are discussing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Honourable members, I think we are always fresh on these issues. Therefore, we never tire. 

11.27
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee, for critically looking at this particular law. The unfortunate thing is that this law has been subjected to very many amendments. Making research on it becomes a bit difficult. I wish we could have a time when it is totally revised and we have it in one booklet.

However, the proposed amendments tended to recentralise power to the minister and in effect, rendering the Authority more or less redundant. That is why, after looking at the committee report, I will invite Members to support the committee’s observations that what the principle law states on the powers and functions of the authority be retained by the authority other than giving them to the minister. Issues like issuing guidelines, performance of the functions and the like should be retained by the authority.

Secondly, the proposed amendments do not go deep into the issues that have risen in the procurement process particularly, the arbitrary nature of some of the procurement and disposal of assets entities and also the authority itself. When you look at the current litigation body in the tribunal and in the courts of judicature, there is a lot to do with absence of transparency by the procurement entities and the authority itself.

I hope that at an appropriate time or when we are considering the Bill at Committee Stage, Members will be given the opportunity to bring amendments that will strengthen the areas of transparency and accountability. Other than that, I do support the committee position that we pass this Bill with the recommended amendments.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you said that Members will be allowed to bring amendments but those amendments should already be here. If you are going to anticipate some amendments, which are not yet here, you will be overruled so that we do not create confusion with the final takes of what we are going to pass.

11.30
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee, for the report. There are two issues I would like to address myself to. One is the issue of delays, which this report tries to address.  

The major concern has been that it takes long to conclude a procurement process in public entities. And that is what the Bill tries to address and for that, I support. However, there is the other concern, which seems to be lingering and the Bill does not seem to address itself and yet it is a major concern to some of us as citizens of this country. 

Mr Speaker, there is a concern that whenever we subject anything towards this procurement process, the cost is always very high. Something for which a private entity can acquire at say Shs 1 million, if you subject it towards this process, it will be at Shs 10 million. And the question is why?

Mr Speaker, human beings are very difficult. Even when God says do not kill, they turn around and say you can kill lawfully. God does not allow killing but lawfully, you can kill. Even when we do not want corruption, they can say, you can be corrupt but lawfully.

That is what this PPDA does. It does not matter-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to give us an example of lawful corruption?

MR OTHIENO: That is what I am addressing myself to, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you specifically said that there could be lawful corruption. Can you give us an example?

MR OTHIENO: There is institutionalised corruption. Mr Speaker, it does not matter whether the costs are exaggerated or inflated provided you have followed the rightful procedure. This is what I call lawful and institutionalised corruption. 

It is high time we addressed our minds to these salient issues. It should not be okay –(Member timed out.)

11.33
Mr james waluswaka (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister and the chairperson for this Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (PPDA) Act he has brought. 

Honourable members, you know how this country has suffered at the hands of PPDA. Even if you were to procure a goat in the village - you could ask my uncle to give an example - the biggest goat in Butaleja for in-laws costs Shs 200,000. However, PPDA process would put the cost at Shs 0.5 million. I do not know whether this is legal corruption.
 
There are cases where they say they put 10 mandatory working days for pinning the names of successful people. Right now, we are going for campaigns. People will say 10 days - if you have issues - some of these things should be removed.

Towards evaluation, procurement officers become very powerful. It is not easy to reach them during the advertisement until they conclude the process.  

I would like to request the chairperson of the committee that if you know that contractor X worked on a road in Tororo and this is the average rate, there is another road in the same region - why can’t you say, since you worked well, we are giving you another contract? 

We know people who do not perform in other contracts but because they have good paperwork in their PPDA guidelines - you find a very incompetent person again being awarded a contract. Mr Chairperson, I hope you will address this issue of dilly dallying and taking long to award contracts. 

There is the issue of litigation. If you have lost a contract, wait for another. Why do you take the whole contract to court while villagers suffer? Wait for –(Member timed out.)

11.35
Ms santa alum (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to also thank the committee for coming up with this report.

In clause 11, the Bill proposes to repeal section 17(3) of the Act. That is, barring the Executive Director from engaging in any business, professional work and paid employment. I do neither agree with the committee nor the bill because the executive director should be given time to concentrate at work. 

As far as paid employment is concerned, the Executive Director should not be allowed to get engaged in paid employment. Maybe, for professional work, it could be okay because it does not take much time but for the paid employment, I do not support the Bill and the committee, which has supported the Bill on this matter.

Secondly, the Bill also and the committee –

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable member, we are dealing with the principles but you are now going to the actual provisions. We shall do that at Committee Stage.

Ms alum: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. Allow me to talk about the report of the committee where they are proposing that the investigative powers of the minister should be taken away. Allow me to also talk about the proposal by the committee that the powers to conduct investigation by the Authority should be removed. 

I think the Authority should be given the power to retain this investigative power so that they are able to supervise whatever is going on in the Authority. Some of these Authorities still have power to investigate.

The second issue is to give the minister power to do kind of micro-management. What the Bill seeks is that the minister should be given the authority to do specialised, complex and strategic procurement. This is not right because the minister is supposed to remain at the higher level –(Member timed out.)

11.39
Mr William nzoghu (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to specifically comment about section 97 of the principal Act where the Bill seeks to replace the minister with the Authority.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is the supervising body of PPDA. If you replace the minister with the Authority, first of all, it would introduce conflict of interest. You cannot be the supervisor and also meddle into implementation.

Secondly, when it comes to the reviews of the backlog and other procurements that are within or before PPDA; that is fair. You cannot have PPDA, which is the one to review what they have or not managed to do. There should be an independent body that should review whether it is a backlog for the PPDA so that there are checks and balances.

What I do not agree with is to have the accreditation being done by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I see – I must be honest – that the minister is supposed to issue guidelines. He can issue policies but you cannot have the minister to be the one who accredits the processes within procurement.

Look at a scenario where there are ministers who may not have the competence to do that. This is a technical job. Assume that they appointed one as a Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who does not have the technical competence in –(Member timed out.)

11.42
Mr Muhammad nsereko (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg for your indulgence. If my time expires, it may please you to grant me an extra minute.

There is a matter that honourable members have been debating in the report that touches the indulgence of the minister and the Attorney-General. I would like to persuade my colleagues and the committee to become aware of the fact that the Attorney-General is the Chief Advisor of Government. Therefore, if there is any procurement that requires specialised services, it is the Attorney-General’s role to make an interpretation of such contracts. 

Even if we pass this law, it may, at one stage, be rendered redundant. In case there is any conflict resulting from the contract, the person that must defend Government shall be the Attorney-General. We should also be aware that there is Government procurement that can be done without clearance from the Offices of the Solicitor-General and Attorney-General. 

Therefore, it will render such amendments redundant if we think that ministers are only relegated to policy. Contracts are part of policy. Procurement is not all about sourcing of persons and the actual signing of the contract. The actual signing of the contracts can be done by technical officers but the policy direction must be by the ministers, depending on the following: 

    i. The urgency of the matter; 
    ii. The strategic importance of the matter to the country to mention –(Member timed out.) 

11.44
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the committee report. Any serious minister would be abreast of the affairs within his or her ministry. Government operates through a budget and whenever they submit a budget, there is a procurement plan.

Serious ministers normally attend the top management meetings of their ministries. In other words, they are in charge of what is taking place in the ministry. If we are to go by the proposal in the Bill, we would be legislating conflict within ministries.  

Mr Speaker, even while at Kololo attending the Anti-Corruption Walk, there were people planning corruption within Government entities. Today, if you go the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, you will notice that there are procurement officers who have been rejected by accounting officers and are not deployed at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The same applies to under-secretaries. They always claim that they are very strict. 

I challenge the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who is here, to produce a list of many – because at least, I know of under-secretaries, accountants and procurement officers that have been rejected by permanent secretaries because they say that they are very strict. 

As such, if we are to give the minister power to override technical people, we shall bring about a crisis. At the end of the day, some of these ministers, as hon. Nzoghu has said - Under normal circumstances are supposed to have proper work methods. We have seen ministers exchanging words in the media. At one time, they appointed someone as the Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development and she was undermining a full minister telling her colleague that she was not concerned with land issues – (Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, those are debates on the principles of the Bill. I will put the question to the conclusion of that motion. 

I now put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS ACT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will pause the Committee Stage and handle it in the afternoon. Right now, we will go to the next item. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT AUTHORISING GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO € 162,445,694.1 ($178,276,661.7) FROM THE INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL BANK OF CHINA TO FINANCE THE POWER SUPPLY TO INDUSTRIAL PARKS AND GRID UPGRADE AND POWER TRANSMISSION EXTENSION PROJECT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had a full debate on this issue. It was decision time and I will put the question. 

I put the question that the motion for a resolution of Parliament authorising Government to borrow up to € 162,445,694.1 from the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China to finance the Power Supply to Industrial Parks and Grid Upgrade and Power Transmission Extension Project be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT AUTHORISING GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO € 20,622,435.00 FROM THE CORPORATE INTERNATIONALISATION FUND OF SPAIN FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROJECT “AIRBORNE GEOPHYSICAL SURVEY AND GEOLOGICAL MAPPING OF KARAMOJA”

11.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for the resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to € 20,662,435 from the Corporate Internationalisation Fund of Spain for the implementation of the Project, “Airborne Geophysical Survey and Geological Mapping of Karamoja.” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? I do not like the Front Bench seconding this motion because you have had your chance in Cabinet. 

Is the minister’s motion for this loan seconded? (Members rose_) It is seconded by Members from Karenga, Butaleja, Nakaseke, Abim, Kaabong, Kasilo and Koboko. Would you like to briefly speak to your motion? If you have no speech, we will listen to the chairperson. 


MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, this project is to support our important sector in the mineral development, which we think is one of the key sectors that can contribute to the growth of our economy. To do this, we need to do the survey and mapping. Karamoja is a very rich area in terms of minerals and this project is to help support that development. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, as you know, this matter was referred to our Committee on National Economy. They are the ones with the competence and the time to look at this and advise us. They are ready to report, after which I will propose a question for the debate.

11.51
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am going to present the report on the proposal for Government to borrow up to € 20,622,435 from the Corporate Internationalisation Fund of Spain for implementation of the Project, “Airborne Geophysical Survey and Geological Mapping of Karamoja.” 

As usual, I would like to thank my colleagues and members of the committee, with whom we worked in analysing the request and producing this report.

Before I go further, I have got quite a number of documents in support of this loan request, which I would like to lay on Table. The documents include the following: 

    i. Brief to Parliament by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the proposal to Government to borrow the stated amount. 
    ii. Government commitment by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in sourcing financing from the Spanish Government.
    iii. The report of the Committee on National Economy, which I am going to present, a copy which is fully signed by the Members. 
    iv. The minutes of the meetings, which were held to consider the proposal.
    v. Clearance on loan applications for consideration by Cabinet.
    vi. Financial clearance for the Cabinet memorandum on the proposal to borrow that amount from the Corporate Internationalisation Fund of Spain.
    vii. Minutes of the meeting, which was held on the 27th May to consider this request.
    viii. The National Planning Authority letter on the clearance of the loan for financing. 
    ix. The letter of the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development on a confidential report from a whistleblower on the proposal.
    x. The response and update by the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development on the proposal of SRK Exploration Services Ltd to carry out extensive mineral exploration, including Geological Survey of Karamoja sub-region. 
    xi. The project profile implementation schedule 
    xii. The proposed budget for Vote Ol7: Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, the draft financing agreement between Instituto De Credito Oficial, E.P.E. (acting in the name and on behalf of the Government of Spain) and Government of Uganda. 
    xiii. The results of the price audit carried out on the two contracts of data acquisition and data processing. 
    xiv. Approval by the Council of Ministers of Spain on the Proposed Loan.
    xv. The procurement plan for works, supplies and non-consultancy services.
    xvi. The Performance of Previous Projects on Karamoja Minerals. 
    xvii. The status of the airborne geophysical survey and geological mapping of Karamoja project.
    xviii. The proposal of SRK Exploration Services Limited to carry out the survey.
    xix. The map of Uganda showing Karamoja planned airborne survey area. 
    xx. The contract for airborne survey and geological mapping of Karamoja between the Government of Uganda, represented by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and M/s Xcalibur Geophysics Spain and the Mining and Mineral Policy of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on Table all those documents in this one file. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those documents. 

MS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, on 10 September 2019, Government presented a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise the borrowing of up to Euro 20.622 million from the Corporate Internationalisation Fund of Spain for the implementation of the airborne geophysical survey and geological mapping of Karamoja, and it was referred to the Committee on National Economy for consideration.

By way of background, Uganda is endowed with favourable geological conditions associated with rich and diverse mineral resource base and substantial economic potential. Karamoja is one of the areas hosting these natural resources. 

Government decided to make interventions to explore and collect data on these mineral resources and one of such interventions in the collection of that data was under the Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources Project (SMMRP) in 2004. This was aimed at increasing knowledge of Uganda's mineral resources and to help identify those areas most suitable for more detailed prospecting and exploration. 

This multi-year project that cost a total of $ 50.3 million was financed by the World Bank, the Nordic Development Bank, the African Development Bank and the Government of Uganda, with the project development objective of strengthening Government's capacity to develop a sound mineral sector based on private investments and improvements in selected artisanal and small-scale mining areas. 

By the end of the project in 2012, the Government had produced detailed maps of mineral resource endowments covering 80 per cent of the country and discovered 16 minerals in commercial quantities namely; beryllium, bismuth, copper, clay, glass sand, phosphates, mica, phosphates, gold, gypsum, lead-zinc, limestone, marble, columbite-tantalite, tin, tungsten, salt and vermiculite.

According to the 2015 report by the International Institute for Sustainable Development, as a result of the SMMRP, total investments in mineral exploration increased from $ 5 million in 2003 to $ 340 million by the end of 2011. Revenues from licence fees increased from $ 0.5 million in 2003 to $ 14.6 million in 2011. 

Mineral rights increased dramatically over the same period from 100 mineral licences in 2003 to 726 by the end of 2Ol3 as contained in the Mining Journal of 2012. 

Government, through the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development is in the process of completing mapping for the whole country, which will lead to the production of detailed maps of mineral resource endowments for the whole country. This will be accomplished through the airborne geophysical survey and geological mapping of Karamoja.

The airborne geophysical survey and geological mapping of Karamoja will be implemented by the Department of Geological Survey and Mining of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and it will be funded by a loan from the Corporate Internationalisation Fund of Spain.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which department will implement this? 

MS BBUMBA: The Department of Geological Survey and Mining of the Ministry of Energy.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You said Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development?

MS BBUMBA: I am sorry. I beg your pardon. It is going to be funded by the Corporate Internationalisation Fund of Spain to the tune of €20.62 million and with Government of Uganda counterpart funding of 15 per cent of the loan amount.

Mr Speaker, the methodology was more or less the standard one. We had interviews with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We engaged the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and the Department of Geological Survey and Mines of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. 

We reviewed 20 documents, which are contained under paragraph 2.2 of the report. 

Paragraph three has now become standard following the guidelines, which the committee set up to ensure that the requests comply with the basic requirements. According to the examination as provided under Table 1, the compliance level of the ministry to the guidelines was up to 70 per cent, which is well above average. 

The National Planning Framework, Uganda's Vision 2040 (Paragraph 117) commits the Government to continuously carry out geological explorations in the various parts of the country in order to assess the viability of the various mineral potentials, after the previous airborne geophysical survey, geological mapping and geochemical sampling had established the existence of over 27 types of minerals, which I have alluded to. 

Furthermore, the NDP II identifies incomplete geological, geophysical and geochemical mapping of Uganda as one of the major challenges facing the mining subsector. It, therefore, sets out to establish the geological and mineral potential of the country as a key priority with establishing the mineral potential of Karamoja region as one of the strategic interventions.

Carrying out this survey and attracting investments in the mineral potentials of Karamoja would be one of these things, which would help to bring about stability in the area and also help lift the area from the poverty to higher levels of income.

The performances of projects under the energy sector are provided under Table 2. The energy sector is at 46.8 per cent and this fairly low percentage is mainly a result of low implementation of the transmission lines due to the problems, which I ably explained yesterday – mainly the land acquisition and compensation issues. In addition, due to the slow utilisation, the penalties have been charged to Government. Therefore, once again, we call upon Government to do all it takes to ensure that when loans are approved, their state of readiness is high and they start the implementation immediately to minimise the slow utilisation costs.

The scope of the project is to acquire, process, interpret and deliver high quality resolution Magnetic-Radiometric, Gravimetric, Electromagnetic Survey and its complementary geological and geochemical study data in order to select the targets with the best economic resources for follow-up programmes. It is expected to last for three years.

The proposed survey will cover two areas; Block A (Karamoja) – area coverage of 39,089km2 and 214,990 line kilometres and Block B (Pan-African Granitoids) with an area coverage of 2,572km2 and 14,146 line kilometres. 

The project will be managed in two stages: 

Stage 1: Data acquisition 
Stage 2: Consulting, processing and interpretation activities to focus on design and planning the project

Additionally, the contract will include: 

    1. Training for local personnel 
    2. Supply of basic laboratory equipment 
    3. Provision of hardware and software to manage the data in the future

Overall, the proposed project is intended to contribute to Uganda's competitiveness for foreign direct investment and increase the contribution of mining to Uganda's GDP and also improve the social economic status of mining communities.

The objectives and project components are covered under paragraphs (5.2) and (5.3).

Mr Speaker, the project will increase Uganda's competitiveness for foreign direct investment in mining and will improve the contribution of mining to Uganda's Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and also improve the social economic status of the Karamoja region and diversify livelihood of the mining communities.

The project cost is broken down in Table 3 under paragraph (6.1). The loan terms are also indicated in Table 5 of paragraph (6.2).

The Corporate Internationalisation Fund of Spain will avail its 85 per cent of the total project cost and the balance will be provided by the Government of Uganda. The terms are clearly indicated, as I have already stated, under Table 5.

Mr Speaker, the effect of this borrowing on the debt sustainability is that it will certainly push it up but it will still be below the 50 per cent threshold. Therefore, it is not going to push us in the danger zone of borrowing.

Observations and recommendations

The committee noted that even though 80 per cent of the country had been surveyed, the findings from this survey have not been widely disseminated to potential investors in the mineral sub-sector in their countries. Such information has remained privy to a few people who have the guts to come to the ministry and departments. The committee recommends that information from the previous geophysical survey that covered 80 per cent of the country should be published widely to all potential stakeholders and this will increase competition in the sector and provide an opportunity for better returns to the country.

On artisanal miners, the committee noted that there are currently no regulations that guide the operations of artisanal and small-scale miners in the country, yet they form the biggest portion of mining activity in the country, especially in the Karamoja region. This is an alternative economic activity for Karamoja but there are no regulations to guide them.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the enactment of the new law on artisanal miners should be expedited to streamline operations of the mining sector.

In conclusion, the airborne geophysical survey and geological mapping of Karamoja is a project that is long overdue, owing to the importance of the mineral development sector in the development of the country. With the scanty information on the numerous mineral varieties known to be present in Karamoja region, the survey will just confirm the information and thus attract mineral investors whose results will transform the wellbeing of the people of the area for greater social and economic benefits. 

There is, therefore, need to implement the proposed project airborne geophysical surveys, geological mapping, geochemical sampling and mineral resources assessment to complete national map coverage of the remaining 20 per cent of Karamoja region. If we do so, it will contribute to the stability of the area both in terms of security and also economically. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the request for Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to € 20,622,435 from the Corporate Internationalisation Fund of Spain for the implementation of the Airborne Geophysical Survey and Geological Mapping of Karamoja Project be approved, subject to the recommendations therein. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, committee chairperson. Those are very clear recommendations. I thank members of the committee for always helping this House take proper decisions and also in time. 

Honourable members, the question that I propose for your debate is that the motion for a resolution of Parliament, authorising Government to borrow up to € 20,622,435 from the Corporate Internationalisation Fund of Spain for the implementation of the “Airborne Geophysical Survey and Geological Mapping of Karamoja Project” be adopted. That is the motion for your debate and the debate starts now.

The Members who are prepared to debate will each take two minutes. Two minutes will be reasonable; we will start from Koboko.

12.12
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on National Economy for a very good report. This time round, I rise to support this loan because it is for Karamoja. Anything for Karamoja must be supported because the sub-region has been left behind for a very long time.

We are going to survey minerals, which will be very important for the industrial development of Uganda. This will attract investors. The face of Karamoja will change. Karamoja will have investors who will work there, attract many people and provide jobs for the people there. Instead of running after cattle all the time, they will have an alternative job to do. 

I would like to urge that when this exploration production starts, priority must be given to people of Karamoja so that they benefit from it; not to import people from somewhere, leaving out the Karamojong. 

We would like to see that any industries established using these products must be in Karamoja. We should not utilise lime, which is exported to Tororo, leaving out Karamoja. Therefore, let us also have industries in Karamoja to change the lives of the people there. Let us rise and support this motion. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, based on the very passionate appeal from Koboko, do we need to debate any further? (Laughter) I was so persuaded that I wanted to put the question.

12.15
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to second the motion to borrow. However, I am sure this is the right time to make a request to the chairperson because last week, we requested the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give us a performance report on all the loans we have.

We have a challenge. We come here and approve loans but when it comes to loan performance; for example, we got a loan in April 2017 but up to today, there is nothing on the ground; yet, interest is accumulating. Is it not the right time, as we support this loan for our brothers and sisters from Karamoja sub-region, to demand for the performance of all the loans to be presented immediately? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the law requires that the loan performance and status of loans should be filed in this House with the budget on 1 April. That is what is required to be done and that is done every year; they do it. Please, let us make sure that we actually look at those documents that are submitted to this House because they are submitted every year.  It was submitted; it will be submitted even this year.

MS BBUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that guidance you have given. I wish to further add that right now, the committee has demanded for the current status. We are now busy evaluating the performance of all the loans, which we acquired in the last two Parliaments and the current Parliament. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

12.17
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion for Government to borrow € 20 million to carry out aerial exploration in Karamoja sub-region. There was an earlier geological survey that was carried out. We would like to know how that loan performed in respect to explorations that were made in identifying the kind of minerals that are found in other areas. 

Secondly, on the licensing regime, when these minerals are identified, how are they given out? We are going to explore the minerals in Northern Uganda, mostly in Karamoja. How are the people of Karamoja going to benefit from these minerals? They will identify the minerals; people will come from other regions or places; take these minerals and at the end of the day, the Karamojong will remain artisan miners.

Thirdly, in the report presented by the chairperson, she mentioned that when we add this loan, the indebtedness rate of Uganda will go up and remain below 50 per cent. I think it is not enough to say that the indebtedness will go up. Can we know the exact percentage? Where do we stand? Do we still have breathing space in as far as borrowing is concerned or not, so that we understand the percentage we are at?

Lastly, on counterpart funding, in many cases, we have approved loans here. They have not performed because Government fails to live up to its expectation in as far as counterpart funding is concerned. How ready are we as Government that when this loan is approved, Government is ready to play its part? I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

12.19
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Obongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Talking about development in Karamoja sub-region is a good thing. However, when we talk about minerals today, we must begin from the point that we already know that there are some minerals in Karamoja. These minerals are already being exploited and we see trucks ferrying them away from Karamoja. 

We have cement factories established outside Karamoja using minerals in Karamoja. What is the guarantee that this time round, if we go and do this kind of survey and discover more minerals, they will not be carried away like it is already happening?

My mother from Koboko, I would like you to hold fire and apply a brake on your positive thinking about Karamoja first. Let us use this opportunity to examine the usefulness of the available minerals, which are already known to the people of Karamoja. I was in Karamoja during my Senior Six vacation in 1998, working for a company called Saudi Marble Uganda Limited. I used to work in that marble mine. We ferried marble from Moroto mountains to Jinja. I was asking myself, “Why should I do this? I see gold being taken away from Karamoja.” 

Oil is one of the minerals we celebrated when we discovered deposits in Uganda. In Northern Uganda, we have oil just across the bridge in Pakwach. In Nwoya District, we have oil but we do not see any kind of positive impact of the oil discovery in Northern Uganda today. Where is the oil in Nwoya going? We do not see refinery business and hotels like what we expected in the past. Sometimes, ignorance is good. If they do not know the minerals, which exist in Karamoja, let them not know now. 

We must, first of all, establish proper systems to make sure that all the minerals in Northern Uganda, once we –(Member timed out.)

12.21
MR HILLARY LOKANG (NRM, Ik County, Kaabong): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do not support the motion because it does not support the immediate impact on the people of Karamoja.

The Government said that the poverty level in Karamoja is at 60 per cent and the region is one of the poorest. 
Secondly, Karamoja has problems of insecurity, lack of water and poor roads. Why do you want money for an aerial survey instead of getting money that will impact on the lives of the people of Karamoja? 


Further still, even the € 10 million has not been brought to this House. They have put that money aside and they are now bringing this one for an aerial survey. Why should you do that when you know that the people of Karamoja are poor and have nothing? Do the immediate thing first and then come back for this one. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

12.23
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nabilatuk): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this loan. However, on page 9 of the report of the committee, it says the geophysical survey of 2004 to 2011 left Karamoja out because of regional circumstances. I was already a Member of Parliament in this House. The reason Karamoja was left out, despite the provision of money, was because of insecurity. Mr Speaker, that insecurity is returning to the region. The Turkana are busy attacking Karamoja. It is only for the last three days that we have rested in South Karamoja. How is this loan reconciling with what is happening? 

Actually, this money is not for Karamoja. Let nobody deceive us. This money is for Uganda. Why do you sympathise with us? As the report of the committee says, there is no law on artisan miners to guide people on how they can benefit. 

Secondly, the minerals we know so far are being ferried to Tororo and Jinja. In fact, marble is forming in one of the mountains in Jinja. I do not know whether we should give it the same name it had in Karamoja. 

Thirdly, there have been preliminary studies in my constituency and Moroto Pian Basin to show that there is oil –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up. 

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Thank you. This loan was not a priority even in the NDP. There are other circumstances that are pushing this loan and I think it is because of the urgency of oil. I do not know whether we shall have the same pain that the people of Bunyoro have had in respect to land. 

I would implore this House that while we pass this loan, we need to put certain systems in place; otherwise, it will adversely affect the Karamojong. 

Lastly, on page 3, they say Block A is 39,000 square kilometres and Block B is 2,577 square kilometres. I do not know whether this is outside Karamoja because I know the size of Karamoja is about 28,000 square kilometres. Can the chairperson clarify that?

As a Ugandan, are we starting to borrow €20 million for surveys? Can’t we get a little money from our budget and carry out these surveys? You borrow at 3.5 per cent interest plus a risk premium of 2.6 per cent liable, which can change according to the condition of the international market. Should we go this way?

12.26
MS SARAH BABIRYE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the report of the Committee on National Economy. However, I would like to request this House and the Government to think about artisan miners. I happen to be on the Committee on Natural Resources and we have been visiting different sites. There are a number of challenges. The Committee on Local Government needs to do a lot of work in harmonising issues between the Central Government, the local governments and artisanal miners. 

It is very painful that these surveys are carried out but the local people seem not to know what to do or where they belong. As we carry out these kinds of surveys, can Government take the initiative of meeting the local leadership in those particular areas and the artisanal miners? It is very painful that some artisanal miners are denied the opportunity to do the job and instead, you find foreigners like Indians and these other big people from Asia with companies calling themselves artisanal miners and using bigger machines. 

I am requesting that we should be realistic. The initiative is good but we are not detailed enough. We seem not to be realistic; what we say here is not what is on the ground. As we carry out this survey, I request the committee to look into that matter and reach out to the artisanal miners –(Member timed out.)

12.28
MS LILLY AKELLO (NRM, Woman Representative, Karenga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the report and thank the chairperson of the committee for the presentation. 

As the people of Karamoja, we are getting worried because last year, this House passed a loan of € 10 million from the Italian Corporation, which was supposed to help improve the health sector in Karamoja. However, many months down the road, there is nothing, which has happened. 

Although we are happy that they are going to map and survey Karamoja, how sure are we that the money we are borrowing here is going to help us do the right work? How sure are we that it is not going to disappear like the €10 million, which we, the people of Karamoja, have been waiting for? This money was supposed to help the health sector. 

I would like to tell this House that we missed out on the other loan, which was supposed to help the entire country. They said Karamoja was going to benefit from the loan from the Italian Corporation. My appeal to Government is, as we pass this loan, the money should go to Karamoja; it should not go somewhere else. We would like to know how many minerals we have in Karamoja so that we can benefit. Thank you.

12.30
DR MICHAEL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Kassanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I say I support the motion, I would like to first thank the committee chairperson for having put for us a table showing the performance of loans in the energy sector. It is very unsatisfactory. I wonder whether the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development has the capacity to do what they are supposed to do. 

For the last eight years, they have been talking about the amendment of the Mining Act, which was left by the colonialists. We, the artisanal miners from Kassanda, are suffering and we have been suffering for many years. They give us promises but three years down the road, they are still working on the law. 

They have just come out with the mining policy of recent and they have not yet validated it. Therefore, is the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development able to utilise that money?

We were quarrelling about the Electricity Regulatory Agency loan and the Exim Bank. It is showing that 13 per cent - three years down the road, we are here waiting and we want to give them more money. Why don’t we stay the passing of this loan until they give us assurances and timelines on how they are going to first utilise the Exim loan and when they are producing the Mining Act and then, we know that they are working?

However, giving them more when they have failed to use the little - Mr Speaker, I beg to request the House that we hold up to when they give us assurances. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, as you are aware, I told you about timelines of the Budget and as of now, there are matters that are more urgent than others. We have the report of the Committee on Budget on the National Development Plan (NDP) and when we resume this afternoon, we will also have a report on the Budget Framework Paper, which have timelines and we should be able to complete and deal with them.

I am going to pause this debate on the loan here and ask that we consider the report on the NDP and then resume in the afternoon. Thank you.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN III 2020/2021–2024/2025

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Chairperson, you have 10 minutes.

12.34
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Patrick Opolot): Thank you, Mr Speaker. That means I am going to make a terrible summary.


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, make a good summary. (Laughter) 

MR OPOLOT: Mr Speaker, the National Development Plan III from the year 2020/2021-2024/2025 was sent to the committee and the committee interrogated the report and had discussions; interacted with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the National Planning Authority.

The committee, therefore, reports that the National Development Plan is aimed at defining the strategic direction the country is going to move in the coming five years. It is also going to define the development priorities we are going to have in the five years and then the results, outcomes of NDP - if implemented rightly - which will be achieved.

However, before this, the committee would like to bring the insight of the evaluation of NDP I and the mid-term review of NDP II - if time can allow, Mr Speaker.

NPDI and NDP II had some achievements amidst the challenges. It was observed that NDP I and NDP II achieved;

    1. Sustainable peace and security and macro-economic stability continued to prevail, providing the basic anchor for economic growth and development; 
    2. The size of the economy doubled from Shs 64 trillion in Financial Year 2O10|2011 to Shs 128 trillion in Financial Year 2O18/2019 
    3. The GDP per capita also remained relatively unchanged. That is from $844 to $878. We believe that by the end of the NDP it will have moved towards the target but it will not meet the target of $1,039. It will only achieve up to $920 per capita.
    4. Domestic revenue increased from Shs 5 trillion in Financial Year 2010/2011 to Shs 16.3 trillion in Financial Year 2018/2019. 
    5. We also had increase in exports from Shs 3.83 billion to Shs 5.8 billion.
    6. Remittances from the rest of the world from our people working abroad grew from $1.2 billion to $1.3 billion.
    7. The total paved roads during this period of 2010/2011 to 2018/2019 grew from $3,264 to $4,971. However, the target is most likely not to be met of $6,000 as per NDP II projection.

Mr Speaker, the challenges which were found to exist, the lessons learnt and the difficult situations that arose - where we did not succeed - is that we still remain with a large proportion of households (of about 68.9 per cent) still in subsistence economy.

Insufficient creation of quality and gainful jobs in the economy, especially the bulk of the youth, which remained unemployed of about 13 per cent is still a change. 

Mr Speaker, much as we have in surplus, electricity remains a challenge and very expensive. The cost is very high and we expect the NDP III to address that and bring it down to less than 0.5 cents.

The widening income inequality is still a challenge. We, therefore, look at the highlights of NDP III - where we are heading - which intend to address:

The strategy still stays and the goal is to increase household incomes and improved quality of life of our citizens, which is addressed by a theme “sustainable industrialisation for inclusive growth, employment and sustainable wealth creation for all.”

Mr Speaker, the objectives of the NDP III stand as; 

    1. We intend to enhance value addition in key growth opportunities; 
    2. It is also intended to strengthen the private sector in order to create jobs for our people. 
    3. We also intend to consolidate and increase the stock and quality of productive infrastructure.
    4. We expect to enhance the productivity and social wellbeing of our population and thus strengthen the role of the state in guiding the direction of investment in the country.

This is, therefore, operationalised by the key strategic areas; agro-industrialisation. Honourable colleagues, investment in this period must be geared to the key sectors, which will lead to growth, income generation and not throwing monies anyhow. Therefore, when we bring the Budget Framework Paper, we intend to interrogate the linkage between the allocations and the intended NDP III.

Agro-industrialisation will be emphasised. We intend to fast-track oil, gas and mineral-based industrialisation. Import replacement by promoting local manufacturing and thus export promotion. We intend to harness tourism.

Therefore, these are the productive sectors which must be heavily invested in.

All our financial investments including the foreign investments and the loans we talk of must be geared into productive sectors. That is how the economy of this country can achieve.

The overall outcome targets have been mentioned in this NDPIII. We expect reduced poverty rates from an average of 21.4 to 14.2 per cent. If we looked at region by region as of now, the rate is around 60 in Karamoja but 11 per cent in some regions. 

It is intended that income inequality is reduced from 0.41 to 0.38. These are the measures of income inequality. The models indicate that it is from 0-1. However, zero is not achievable. That is absolute equality, which is not achievable by any. Ours is at 0.4 and it is intended to reduce to 0.38.

It is even an achievement to maintain it where it is as far as income inequality is concerned unless the state grabs money from everybody, lines people and distributes, which is not possible.

This NDP, we expect our industry ratio to Gross Domestic Product (GDP) to grow from 18.6 per cent to 25 per cent. The rate of growth of industrial sector must rise from 6.1 per cent to 8.1 per cent.

Growth of the agricultural sector, if invested in research and linked to inputs and productivity improvement; we expect it to grow from 3.8 per cent to 5.1 per cent.

Youth unemployment is targeted to reduce from 13.3 per cent to 6.6 per cent. Most of your people will get employed -(Interjections)- there is no lying here.

We expect the investment from this plan to move to Shs 342,607 billion (Shs 326.6 trillion) in the medium term. 

The committee recommends that Government should address the quality and appropriateness of the education system. That is to say, the skilling of the youth must be tendered into producing youth who are job creators, not job seekers and appropriate training linking to the demand. That is how we are going to address the issue of unemployment by human capital development.

The committee looked at the interventions and is convinced that if the NDPIII is followed, it will move this country from subsistence standard to commercial standard. That is real development. It will move this country to middle income.

By the way, this report is for the whole committee. There is no minority report. Even the Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was very happy with this NDPIII. What matters, therefore, is the implementation, which we must make sure –(interjections)– hon. Cecilia Ogwal is a member of the committee. She participated in all of the committee activities.

I lay the minutes of the meetings of the committee where the Member raising a point of order participated fully and was happy with the outcome. (Applause)

We, therefore, pray that let the NDPIII be approved by Parliament. I beg to Move.

The Deputy Speaker:  Thank you, honourable chairperson, for the eloquent presentation. It is detailed but time could not allow you to go into more detail. Well done. 

Ms Cecilia ogwal: Mr Speaker, I was calling my colleague to order over the statement he made that this NDPIII has been unanimously approved and there was no minority report.

When we write a report - if we are given the opportunity to scrutinise the report of the chairperson, it will be embarrassing. I do not want to write a response over an issue that would not help Parliament to fully understand the issues behind our minority report.

The point of order I raising is that this document was laid on the Table just a few days ago. The committee was supposed to scrutinise it on your behalf and bring the report. Who on earth would sincerely say, “We have scrutinised and understood it and everybody has agreed?”

Is the vice chairperson who is the acting chairperson of the committee, in order to assume that everybody has approved and endorsed this NDPIII including myself?

The Deputy Speaker: Going by the eloquence with which this report was presented, not reading but just outlining from memory what the NDPIII is and the discussions that took place in the committee, I was very impressed. I thought that the committee had done a good job.

In the circumstances, we all know that this document was brought last week; way out of time. However, that you have been able to achieve this together is commendable. 

I was hoping that, that would be the spirit we carry and now deal with this document as the report of the committee. The committee has proposed that we adopt the NDPIII, use it as a framework for factoring our development issues for the next period that is provided in the NDPIII. 

If the chairperson has made some statements that were kind of suggesting other things, which I did not hear, that would not be proper. However, I did not hear them and so, I find some difficulties in reprimanding the chair.

I think he and the committee did a good job – 

Mr akol: Mr Speaker, I informed the committee that as a Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I needed to appear before them and give my analysis on the NDPIII.

The chairperson told me that there was no time. It would be unfortunate for the chairperson to come to the Floor of Parliament and say, “The Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was satisfied with the report.” Are we proceeding right when he said there is no time to listen to me, yet, I am not a member of the committee?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is not a member of the committee and he did not participate in the discussion. Therefore, his view, as shadow minister, was not in the report. I think you put words in his mouth and that was not necessary.

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Mr Speaker, the Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not telling this House the truth. The members of the committee can confirm that he has sat and attended committee proceedings. However, he has never raised such an issue of wanting to submit an alternate report. 

I even asked the Leader of the Opposition, when she appeared, to submit an alternate report on Budget Framework Paper. I asked whether they had a report on NDP III and she clearly put it that they had not prepared anything alternate and so, I could not make a report for them. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the issues are clear. Let us proceed with this spirit now. I think we are okay. Honourable shadow minister, you did very well to attend the meetings of the committee. It was important that you participated and you did. That is commendable. 

Honourable members, the question I put for debate is that the report of the Committee on Budget on the National Development Plan III 2020/2021 to 2024/2025 be adopted. That is the question for you debate and debate should actually start now but it is already 1 O’clock.  

Honourable members, the key debate would be on the Budget Framework Paper. Can we adopt this and have a debate on the Budget Framework Paper? 

Honourable members, bear with me. As I said before, we do not have the time, just like you heard from the committee. We are even going to sit tomorrow to try and see if we can finish all these things before 1st February, because that is what the law says. Please, bear with me.  

I understand the circumstances under which we are proceeding. Can we proceed to adopt this? Then, we shall wait for the Budget Framework Paper and have a debate on it and see how we proceed. Let us have a statement from the Leader of the Opposition and then, we proceed with the decision. 

12.55
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the Committee on Budget for the hard work and for trying his best to meet his timeframe. 

Indeed, he asked us if we had an alternative paper to present on the NDP III, which we did not have because of time. 

Nevertheless, it is up to all of us here to create the job opportunities for our youth in Uganda. We should stop lip service and advocacy; we must make sure that we act. 

When we go to the area of agriculture, which he clearly articulated, sometimes, we do not emphasise and do not even put in the budget enough resources for extension workers. Those are professionals. You bring some other crafty people to handle this very important thing and you think you can move people from subsistence to commercial agriculture, if you do not help the people on the ground?

Even as far as our Meteorological Department is concerned, we are unable to make weather predictions because those facilities are not there to predict the rainfall, yet, Uganda is basically an agricultural economy. We can even say that over 70 per cent of our people rely on agriculture. It is our economic base. Why don’t we even introduce fertilisers? In my area, I do not see fertilisers as an input in agriculture and yet, if we want to increase our productivity, we need that.

Take a look at electricity. How can you talk of commercialisation when power outage is the order of the day? It just beeps. In Gulu, electricity just beeps and disappears. (Laughter) Therefore, we must stop lip-service.

You have raised important areas in your report and they must be taken up seriously. When we start to analyse the Budget Framework Paper, let us look closely by ensuring that there is a budget for all these projects. The agricultural report must be increased from that 3 per cent or 7 per cent. Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Budget on the National Development Plan 2020/2021 to 2024/2025 be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these proceedings are suspended to 3 O’clock. When we resume, we will handle the remaining business of the day. The House is suspended. 

(The House was suspended at 12.59 p.m.)
 
(On resumption at 3.03 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we look at item six and then we go to item eight?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT AUTHORISING GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO € 20,622,435.00 FROM THE CORPORATE INTERNATIONALISATION FUND OF SPAIN, FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROJECT “AIRBORNE GEOPHYSICAL SURVEY AND GEOLOGICAL MAPPING OF KARAMOJA”
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, some issues were raised. Would you like to speak and then, we see how we proceed?

3.05
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to raise an issue relating to the expensive nature of this loan request. 

I expected the committee to address us on the different methods of survey, one being the one they are proposing, which is airborne but there are also ground and underground methods that are available and they are cheaper. 

I also wanted to bring it to the attention of this House that a company from the UK had offered to do this same work at Shs 35 billion and yet the committee has insisted on going with this Spanish company that will do the same work at Shs 82 billion. 

This is nowhere in the report and I think that this Parliament cannot just sit here and approve what hon. Othieno called lawful corruption. This is very important for the country but we should not do it at an exorbitant cost, as proposed by the committee. 

I am, therefore, inviting the House to reject this request on the basis that it has been overstated by nearly Shs 50 billion and yet the work can be done cheaper. 

Mr Speaker, that is what I wanted to raise and I thought that the committee should clarify why we should do this work at Shs 82 billion and yet there is a company that could do it at Shs 35 billion.

3.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, one of the reasons we started a parliamentary committee system of work is to say that the whole House cannot get all the details in the very short time of the debate. As such, we trust that the committee looks at the work that is before them and makes detailed decisions. 

Regarding the issue, which you are raising, it is true that there was a proposal, which came from UKF. We evaluated it and it did not pass the test of the resources that we are talking about because the survey, which they are going to do, is not only going to look at one particular mineral. It is going to survey all the minerals in the region of Karamoja, according to the technical report, which we have. The other company was talking about a few minerals but we are talking about surveying all the minerals. 

We also looked at the financial cost of the money of UKF and that money was more expensive than the money of Spain. All these details were given to members of the committee to evaluate. (Interruption)

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, honourable, for giving way. As a member of the committee, my chairperson has requested that I stand in for her in the meantime. Indeed, all these issues were brought to the committee. 

One, after being given all the work they wanted to do, SRK went and did a scope, which was about 30 per cent of what the ministry wanted. 

Secondly, the kind of technology they wanted to use was not in tandem with what the ministry had studied. 

Thirdly, the committee could not do the work of the implementing entity. The implementing entity determines the scope, the method and whatever they want to do and they send out communication. 
We also received a letter from the Spanish Government confirming that indeed, when the Spanish company participated, this one was the cheapest and they said it meets the real standards in terms of value for money. 

As a committee, we listened to all this. In fact, I was the first person to raise this issue because I got that information and presented it to the committee but when we engaged with the technical team, we found it couldn’t meet the standards, which were set by the committee. I thank you.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Having listened to the minister, I read the report and listened to what my colleague is raising and the information given. There is an issue that I think the House needs to resolve. 

First and foremost, we are now talking about terms; which loan could have been better and so on. However, the law is very clear that before we approve any loan, this House must, first of all, approve the terms and conditions of every loan. 

The House is supposed to do two things; approve the loan and approve the terms and conditions of the loan. This was not done. If the terms and conditions of this loan had been brought in this House and debated and members spoke on those terms and conditions, these issues would not arise. 

There is a constitutional issue here; a legal matter that I want us to be guided on. When this committee submits, they are fulfilling the obligation of having the loan approved by the House. But now there is the salient issue that is arising from the issues coming up; the terms and conditions must also be approved by this House and we are not doing this. That is why some of these issues are coming up. 

We are now talking about terms. There is just one small table in the report talking about the terms and conditions on page six. Does that amount to the terms and conditions of the loan? The law states that this House must approve the terms and conditions of the loan. 

I imagine that when we approve, we should be addressing our minds to the terms and conditions, resolve them and then, approve. Those are my issues. 

Are we proceeding rightly in a situation where we have not addressed our minds to the terms and conditions of this loan?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the thing about these loans is that they are negotiated, everything is done. The Solicitor-General is supposed to write an opinion confirming that it is okay with the laws of this country. All that is finished. What is brought to this Parliament is just a requirement that parliamentary approval is now required for such things to go ahead. 

Everything is finalised and the terms are negotiated. You are not going to ask hon. Othieno to sit there as a Member of Parliament in the negotiations because now the approval will be a problem. These things are done way before they come here. 

Constitutionally, what we do is look at the loan and decide whether it makes sense and whether it is a necessary loan; those broader principles. If they do, we approve. If they are just outrageous things that are being proposed to do things that do not matter to us then we do not approve. 

However, the terms and conditions are negotiated and signed. The ink dried before and so, we cannot go into those issues again. We now look at the broader picture; how it fits within the economy, how it affects people, as representatives of the people on whose behalf these monies are being borrowed. 

That is how we proceed with these matters. Are we clear? Can I put the question, honourable members?

MR NSEREKO: Mr Speaker, no one in Uganda disputes that as per the NDP, development of the mineral sector is important. It is one of the key sources of revenue for this nation. The only thing that we would like those that want Ugandans to take this loan to know is that we have been talking about the issue of local content. Carrying up a loan with all its burden and giving contracts to non-Ugandans defeats the basic logic of the national contribution of the ordinary Ugandans – when the money is from China the contract is given to Chinese, when the loan is from Spain the contract is given to the Spanish and when the loan is from UK, the UK firms get the contracts.

My prayer is that we should encourage those that are going to further approve and go on with the full negotiations of this loan to put in a string that ties up the issue of local content so that the ordinary Ugandan cartographers can be employed –(Interruption)

MS BBUMBA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. When we are analysing loans, one of the key things we look into these days is local content. If it cannot come in directly, we look for possibilities of creating this local content. In this case, the equipment which they are going to use is not locally made. These are going to be airborne surveys. We do not have the aeroplanes owned by our locals. 

Therefore, what we looked into and enforced is the training of the local personnel. If that is achieved, it means that in the next survey we shall have Ugandans – as part of the local content – participating in these surveys.

MR NSEREKO: If it captures the spirit of local content, then I do not see why we should object. I know it is geophysical survey but we have small planes here that can hold cameras –(Interjection)- I am being serious. To say even planes will come from wherever they will - Mr Speaker, the spirit is that some portion of this money must remain in the hands of Ugandans.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Mr Speaker, I have two procedural matters before we consider this loan.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have already considered it.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: First, we would like to get information from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Two years ago, this Parliament approved $100 million loan for the health sector in the country. Karamoja was excluded and we were told that they were going to borrow € 10 million from the Italian Corporation. Up to today, that € 10 million has not been brought whereas the rest of the country is benefiting from these health centres III project.

Secondly, while excluding Karamoja in 2009 from the other loan, they said “let us keep the money for Karamoja until the guns are removed”. Honourable minister, is that money still there? 

For this survey, these planes carry a lot of equipment, as hon. Bbumba has said, and they are low-flying – slightly above the trees. Given the current situation obtaining on the ground, do we want to put these planes at risk? You are aware that the Turkana are there and they are heavily armed; they have mortars and they are terrorising us every day. 

Can the ministries of defence and internal affairs make it clear to this House and country that this place will be safe with all that investment when they are going to do this work so that we can comfortably approve this loan?

THE SPEAKER: Can you now deal with the procedural matter you were raising? You are now debating.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: My procedural matter is, how comes the same ministry has brought a loan within one month, yet we have been crying to the same ministry to bring the one of health? Is it procedurally correct?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, raise the procedural matter. (Laughter) Hon. Achia, don’t be too clever for me. Raise the procedural matter because you rose on procedure. (Laughter) What is the procedural matter you rose on?

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: My procedural matter is, is the ministry really proceeding properly by having its own priorities to do with the minerals? I do not know what they want the minerals for; they will bring more insecurity. Are we proceeding well by prioritising aerial survey over the health of the people?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a motion that has been brought to this House and that is what we are debating. Other motions will come and we will debate them. If we deem them fit, we will approve them and if we do not deem them fit, we will reject them. Therefore, we are proceeding very well, as Parliament. (Laughter)

Honourable minister, would you like to deal with some of these issues?

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me give information on the issue of the € 10 million from Italy to finance health facilities in Karamoja. We will be considering it in Cabinet. There were some issues that we were correcting and I confirmed this to the leaders of Karamoja. We think that the loan will come to this House in the next two weeks after Cabinet approval. That is the commitment I can make.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of security, we have discussed the security situation in Karamoja and we also note that we have not heard that any part of Uganda has been declared a no-fly zone. Therefore, we think that if we implement what the members have recommended, the situation in Karamoja will be restored to normality.

As I said at the beginning, the mineral sector is one of the key sectors we are looking to develop. The best way to do it is to have what is on the ground. I, again, request Members of Parliament to consider this loan in that context.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that the motion for a resolution of Parliament, authorising Government to borrow € 20,622,435.00 from the Corporate Internationalisation Fund of Spain for the implementation of the Airborne Geophysical Survey and Geological Mapping of Karamoja Project be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, committee chairperson, for the report and for processing this through.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE BUDGET COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FINANCIAL YEARS 2020/2021 – 2024/2025

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, since there is also a minority report attached, I will give you 20 minutes for this big report and I will give the minority report seven minutes.

3.24 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Patrick Opolot): Mr Speaker, the House should be aware that the Committee on Budget has been going through a very difficult time; that is handling the National Development Plan III, which was submitted and laid in the House a few days ago and at the same time, handing the Budget Framework Paper, which was also laid, more or less, the same time.

Members of the Committee on Budget have been struggling to see how they can come up with a report to guide the process. Amidst all difficulty, the committee is here to present a report on the Budget Framework Paper.

The work has been mainly trying to link the Budget Framework alignment with the NDP III, which of course was laid after the BFP was laid. However, we also would like to note that according to Section 9(3) of the Public Finance Management Act 2015, the minister shall, for each financial year, prepare a Budget Framework Paper which shall be consistent with the National Development Plan and with a Charter of Fiscal Responsibility.

The National Budget Framework Paper 2020/2021 was submitted and laid in Parliament on 19 December 2019, complying with the legal provision of submitting it by 31 December of the year preceding. We measured the consistency with NDP III and the committee realises that being sure that NDP II is expiring in June 2020, there is no way but we must align it to NDP III, which work was very tough.

We have, however, come out with a point that the NDP III strategy matches with the mentioned budget framework strategy. However, the allocation of the funds does not rhyme. The investment in year one of the NDP III - according to the NDP - is supposed to be Shs 55.5 trillion but according to the Budget Framework Paper, the investment is about Shs 39.6 trillion. There was a discrepancy in that.

The committee, therefore, recommends that a comprehensive report on the alignment of all sector budgets and Votes with NDP III should be presented at the time of submitting the budget estimates for Financial Year 2020/2021. The House should, therefore, note seriously that for this first year of the NDP, we shall have to rely more on the allocation at the time of budget estimates, when the policy statements shall be submitted. 

We also measured the consistency of the framework paper to the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and found that there was some variance also in relation to that. We note that according to Section 7 of the Public Finance Management Act 2015, there is a provision for a deviation of the objectives of the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. In this regard, the minister shall have to brief Parliament, as a requirement under that section. 

Mr Speaker, we also noted that there is an issue concerning public debt. The committee observed that as at end of June 2019, the stock of total public debt amounted to $12.55 billion, of which external debt was $8.35 billion (Shs 30.85 trillion) and domestic debt was $4.2 billion (Shs 15.51 trillion). This implies that the total stock of public debt to GDP was 36.1 per cent in nominal terms. This is agreeable according to our charter; it is not beyond agreeable standards. Therefore, it is still within the required standard.

Also, according to the Public Debt and Financial Liabilities Management Framework, interest payments to domestic revenue benchmark should not be more than 12 per cent as a standard. However, in our Ugandan standard, we are now falling at 16.7 per cent, which violates the acceptable framework of management of debt. You find that most of our money is going towards clearing debt. However much we try to collect, we spend a lot on payment of interest.

Mr Speaker, we have a highlight on the budget strategy for 2020/2021. The committee observes that the overall focus of the budget for the next financial year is to address challenges hindering the speed of economic transformation, rural economic development and expansion of the industrial base for job creation. Therefore, we need to observe the resource envelope, as provided.

We take note that the resource envelope of the Budget Framework Paper is a document of the Executive so it is the amount of money the Executive would like to raise, to be used in that financial year. 

The revenue is projected to increase from Shs 18.82 trillion in Financial Year 2019/2020 to Shs 20.04 trillion in Financial Year 2020/2021, which will be an increase of six per cent. Tax to GDP is projected to increase from 12.4 per cent to 12.8 per cent. 

Mr Speaker, according to the BFP, the ministry notes that it will mobilise additional resources, on top of the Shs 39 trillion. That is their assurance, as per our interaction that they will mobilise more than Shs 39 trillion before the budget is finalised. That means there is a hint that there are some resources, which have not been declared and allocated at this stage of the BFP.
 
This statement by the ministry testifies to the chronic approach of presenting a resource envelope that requires Parliament approval during the BFP assessment, which is always revised upwards by the time we are doing the final allocations. 

Sector MTEF allocations
 
Mr Speaker, we also noted that the alignment of this BFP is lacking at the allocations. A case in point is the agricultural sector. The agricultural sector, according to these allocations, is allocated only 2.4 per cent. That is the ratio of the figure to agriculture to the total budget. However, when it is reported in the framework paper, it is reported at three per cent and that is the figure allocated to agriculture as a ratio to the total minus debt. Excluding debt, it becomes three per cent. 

Basing on the total allocation of Shs 39 billion, it is then 2.4 per cent, which is so minimal. It should be noted that it violates the spirit of the NDP III, aware that it requires investment in productive sectors. 

According to the Malabo Declaration where Uganda is a signatory, agriculture is targeted at 10 per cent. So, there is need to build up resources for investment in agriculture. 

Domestic arrears have been a long-standing challenge in Government. Government has tried all methods like introduction of commitment control, which was brought way back in 1999. Still, it has not addressed the issue of domestic arrears. 

There has been strengthening of legal frameworks surrounding the public finance management system with special provision entrenched in the commitment control system, but the domestic arrears have kept on growing. 

The Auditor-General, based on his report of the Financial Year 2017/2018, found domestic arrears standing at Shs 3.14 trillion, which was three per cent of the GDP which was an increase from Shs 2.7 trillion in the previous year. So, every year, domestic arrears have been growing and that tantamount to mismanagement of the resources. 

Mr Speaker, that was part one of the report highlights on the macroeconomic futures. 

The committee, therefore, went ahead to interact with our sector committees and picked the reports from them which indicated the challenges, if we went with the existing investment. So, the committee captured the request from the sector committees. 

Mr Speaker, I wonder whether it would not be cumbersome for me to read the report word by word. Since it is uploaded on our iPads, I will mention a few points. 

We noted the required investments that Government should adjust the ceiling; first in the mineral sector. The mineral sector is not well funded most especially in the area of survey that we have just been discussing the loan for. The mineral sector has no equipment to carry out surveys. They do not have the drilling machines and drones to enable them carry out survey to ascertain the mineral deposits in this country. 

The committee, therefore, captured the recommendation for the mineral sector to be increased by Shs 17 billion to carry out the procurement of the equipment. If we are going to talk about the production sectors and job creation, we have the science and technology innovation sector. 

The committee recommended that this sector should be strengthened to carry out science which will build us the industries and the benefits will accrue in the forms of jobs and income. 

The committee recommended Shs 24 billion to be given to Kiira Motors to complete the plan which they started. The committee also recommended that the Ministry of Science and Technology should be allocated more Shs 30 billion to carry out the innovation and research. The committee also said Government should provide above the MTEF an amount of Shs 26 billion to enable Kiira Motors acquire land for testing the machinery. This is to support the technological transfer and domestication of the technology in Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, we talk of productive sectors. A sector like tourism is affected by the distance the tourists have to travel by road in Uganda. A tourist lands at Entebbe International Airport and he travels by road up to Kidepo. This is quite a challenge. 

Therefore, the committee has recommended an allocation of Shs 40 billion to enable the tourism sector develop the aerodromes in places like Kidepo, Kasese, Arua and others. So, a start-up of Shs 40 billion to develop has been recommended. 

The committee also has recommended that we allocate Shs 47 billion for the development of the industrial park for the benefits of this country. 

We recommend that the Ministry of Works and Transport be allocated about Shs 103 billion to support the road sector. At times, when we talk about the road sector, we talk about flyovers and express highway to Entebbe. However, if you travel from Munyonyo, in case you branch off to Lweza, from a nice express highway, the environment is a different world. 

The users of that road are more than the users of the express highway. Most of our population use roads in the countryside. Therefore, interconnectivity between villages and districts is a challenge. 

Therefore, we recommend that sector should be improved; all that is designed to improve the quality of life of the people of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, as we mentioned, we have a minority report. We worked together with our colleagues but they had a point of departure. We almost agreed but they had a small point of departure, which they will raise. (Laughter) 

However, in accordance to the law, we, therefore, propose that the National Budget Framework Paper be approved by Parliament with the amendments as recommended. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. I thank the committee again. This is work that was heavy and it was pressed with time. However, you have been able to pull it off. Thank you very much. 

There is a minority report. Can I ask the author to make the presentation? I have given you seven minutes. 

3.42
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, we have two issues: My colleague, hon. Cecilia Atim, will add a brief remark after my presentation. I will be precise. 

Our first point of departure is on the resource envelope. Mr Speaker, according to Article 93 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Parliament shall not, unless the Bill or motion is introduced on behalf of Government proceed on the imposition of a charge on the Consolidated Fund or other public funds of Uganda or the alteration of any such a charge otherwise than by deduction.

In addition to Schedule 3 of the Public Finance Management Act, Section 5 as amended, permits Parliament to approve, in the process of consideration of the National Budget Framework Paper the resources for the coming financial year, the ceiling for the coming financial year, the flow of investment of Government and the ceiling on total budget funding from the petroleum revenue holding account. 

Mr Speaker, according to the Budget Framework Paper for next year, the resource envelope and consequently, the expenditure ceiling is Shs 59.6 trillion and no funds should be withdrawn from the petroleum fund. 

However, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development notes that in order to meet the critical shortfalls on the Budget for the next financial year, the ministry will mobilise additional resources to bridge up the funding gap under Security, Specialised Funds what they are calling Emyooga, electoral roadmap, new cities, salary enhancement for university professors and science cadres in research institutions before the Budget is finalised.

This, in effect, implies that the resource envelope and expenditure ceilings provided in the BFP for approval before this Parliament is short of the additional resources that the minister is expecting to mobilise as the Budget is finalised in May, 2020. This would be in total breach of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, as amended, that requires Parliament to approve the resource envelope with the expenditure ceilings during the approval of the financial year.

In effect, if we approve a resource envelope of Shs 39.6 trillion, as we must do under the law, Parliament cannot revise the resource envelop and expenditure ceilings upwards during the consideration of the annual Budget for the next year. In this regard, we recommend and request that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, before we proceed with approval, amends the resource envelope. 

Mr Speaker, this is very critical as it borders on infringing on our powers to appropriate. We were bombarded in the making of the last Budget by addendums up to the last minute as we were presenting the Budget.

Secondly, when a Budget ceiling is not provided, that means Parliament does not have resources to reallocate. Therefore, our hands are constrained. This is a critical hijack of powers of Parliament by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Therefore, all that we are asking - and we cannot do otherwise; it is ‘shall and command’ under the law - is for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come here. After all, the Budget Framework Paper speaks to the shortfalls and in the various sector review reports, these figures are provided.

Therefore, why doesn’t he compile the figures in Defence; Emyooga figures, salaries for scientists, money for cities and provide them? After all, even if they have a budget shortfall, the law provides avenues on how to fund a budget deficit.

This is hiding information from Parliament and making us look shabby. This cannot fly before this House if this ceiling is not provided.

Mr Speaker, the second issue is the issue of Bank of Uganda. Bank of Uganda has, for the medium term, been recapitalised to a tune of Shs 1.06 trillion. In this financial year, they require an additional Shs 481 billion. That means that in the last five years, we would have capitalised Bank of Uganda by Shs 1.6 trillion.

They front an argument that this money is for purposes of monetary expenditures. This argument means that Bank of Uganda now requires recurrent expenditure because annually, they will be coming to Parliament to give them money. The accountability of this money is shrouded in a lot of shoddy work.

Mr Speaker, what is amazing is that consistently, the value of the bad debt of Crane Bank, which is nearly Shs 400 million, keeps cropping up at every interval and this figure is near to what they require. Therefore, before Parliament goes ahead to approve the Budget Framework Paper, we must hold on to the money that Bank of Uganda requires for capitalisation until Parliament receives due explanation.

The Governor was supposed to appear before the Budget Committee but he simply sent an accountant. That cannot stand before this House when you require this amount of money. Therefore, we are of a strong opinion that we hold approval of this money until Bank of Uganda comes and speaks for this money.

Mr Speaker, I would beg my colleague to add one or two remarks.

3.50
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I would like to start from where my colleague has ended about the Bank of Uganda. During the Crane Bank crisis, Bank of Uganda was given over Shs 400 billion for recapitalisation of the Crane Bank.

As Ugandans, we would like to know where that money has gone. If Crane Bank went down, Crane Bank had properties and we should have been able to recover that money and account for it. That is one of the issues, which have not come out.

Secondly, the implication of the breach of section 9(3) means all the sector committees that scrutinise the requirements of their sectors have done work, which is now almost redundant because they based their arguments and figures on only half of the NDPII because NDPIII was not yet in place. There is no knowledge of the content of NDPIII. That means that we have to find a way of guiding ourselves. This is very serious, Mr Speaker.

Mr Speaker, the Government committed itself, and it is on our records, that through NDPII, we would have achieved middle-income status by 2019/2020. We are now in 2020; we have already passed 2019 and the middle-income status has not yet come. I do not see it coming in the very near future. Therefore, can that record be corrected? As a legislator, I need to know because our people will be asking.

Mr Speaker, looking backwards, there were nine core projects that were supposed to be initiated, driven and completed in order to propel us to middle income status. Out of the nine, the committee found that only two were completed and done as scheduled.

I am surprised as to why the committee did not raise that serious matter that affects all of us. Seven have not been dealt with and that means that for whatever we had planned to be done under NDPIII, they will have to encroach on the money for NDPIII in order to complete their unfinished projects under NDPII. These are matters, which must be analysed and we would want the minister to come up with an explanation.

Finally, when the ministry breaches the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility, the minister is compelled by law to come with an explanation to Parliament. I have not seen that explanation. Mr Speaker, these are just the highlights. There are several more but I think these are to help us think through what has been presented to us. May God bless you, thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and the authors of the minority report. They raise valid points and premise their concerns within the law.

If the law had been followed, probably this paper would not be debatable because the issues would be clear. Honourable minister, there are areas that you need to help us with before we open the debate. 

The law requires you to provide two ceilings. First is the overall ceiling of how much you intend to spend or raise so that we know. If you are going to play around or under it, it is okay. You may do this and that provided we know the final figure. 

What the minority report is raising is that you have provided a ceiling but also potential expenditure lines that are beyond the ceiling you have provided. You have said 39 but listed so many other things that are likely to come up; the cities and they are quite many. These could easily go beyond. You have Emyooga, electoral road map, new cities and salary increment for university professors and scientific cadres in research, which are not contained in the ceiling you have provided.

If you can clear for us this issue, the debate will be very little. However, if you are not able to, we are going to spend the whole afternoon doing this thing. Honourable minister, please clarify this matter and we proceed.

The second ceiling is how much money you intend to draw from the Petroleum Fund. It is required by law that they should say it. If you do not – the law says that you should not be quiet. If it is zero, you say it is going to be so. Honourable minister, please help the House.

the minister of finance, plaNNing and economIc DEVELOPMENT (PlannIng)(Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, when we appeared in the Budget Committee, we made this clarification. We would like to repeat it here that despite the fact that we had included the Budget Framework Paper, there are some additional pressures like making sure that we finalise the budget for the elections of 2021, Emyooga and others. 

We made it very clear that the position of the ministry about the ceiling is that it remains Shs 39 trillion for the next financial year. That is the figure that we shall consider and that is what we shall work within.

The Deputy Speaker: Won’t there be any additional requirements to finance these other things of the funding gap under security, specialised funds, emyooga, electoral road map and all these? Are you saying it is within the Shs 39 trillion?

Mr bahati: We have to fit within the Shs 39 trillion.

The Deputy Speaker: Is it actually within the Shs 39 trillion and that you are not going to ask for anything beyond it?

Mr Bahati: I can put this in context. When we talk about additional adjustments, what we mean and are referring to is that one of the key adjustments we should be making is the one that relates to our reconciliation with external financing. For example, today, we have passed two loans and they have been passed in January 2020. The Budget Framework Paper came in December 2019. Therefore, it would not have been possible to include that figure of external financing under the Budget Framework Paper without the approval of Parliament.

The budget we are talking about is for 2020/2021. However, you cannot clearly and with certainty include a figure unless Parliament has pronounced itself on it. It will not be prudent to include it in the figure of the ceiling.

Therefore, the only adjustments, which we are talking about are those that you have given us authority to go ahead and get external financing. I do not know whether you understand.

I am saying that we made a provision for the ceiling of the resource envelope with the information that we were sure about then. One of the estimates that we included, which is certain now is the revenue projection. We are not changing that. 

The only thing that can change is the reconciliation of the external finances, which are subject to parliamentary approval. Beyond the external financing, we are not going to adjust our resource envelope –(Interruption)

Mr nzoghu:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the honourable minister is not helping this House. What this Parliament is interested in is that the minister should be telling us; after the ceiling, how much are you going to borrow? What are the items, which are above the ceiling? How much is it?

Ms Cecilia ogwal: Can I give information? Mr Speaker, in simple English, the Shs 39 trillion ceiling we are talking about includes both revenue generated internally and also external borrowing.

Secondly, for the minister to stand before you and say, “Don’t worry, we will borrow” - I did not want to overstretch you with lamentation. I would like to let you know that the population now is more or less staggering at 40 million.

However, our debt status stands at 46.5. This means the children who are born today or those whose data has been already captured, you and my grandparents who are still living; each of you have a debt on your head, which we have passed in this Parliament of 1.1 million. 

We are going back to those Ugandans and ask them to vote for us so that we increase the amount from 1.1 to maybe five million when they do not even have a meal a day. Karamoja is being recorded to have the highest poverty situation standing at 68.9. We are still increasing borrowing.

Let us not bother. Let the minister be honest and tell us. We are the people’s representatives. We would like to know the truth so that we also know what to tell them.  Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Let me ask a simple question. Do we know the figures for emyooga, security, electoral road map and new cities? 

Mr MUWANGA kivumbi: Mr Speaker, I think it is good to be honest to goodness. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is also very pious and is a saved man. 

In every sector budget – I sit on the Committee on Defence – the funding gap is well articulated. About the money for electoral road map, the parliamentary committee that handles that sector is aware of how much is required. It is even articulated in that Budget Framework Paper; some Shs 200 billion. 

Concerning the funding gap in the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, I know it is an obnoxious figure of about Shs. 9.1 trillion. 

For emyooga, we all know what they do and I do not want to politick here because we know what this money will do so we better leave it at this level. However, the amount of money required is well known. 

There was a certificate of financial implication for money for cities so they know the money required for that. 

The money for scientific cadres is also known and those are wages. There is recurrent budget expenditure. The explanation the minister gave here very articulately is that they will work on the figure they have given us, but as we speak now, every figure here is a projection. There is nothing cast in stone. All the law requires is that you give us what you would ultimately wish to spend this financial year, no matter how obnoxious the figure is, and we give it to you. 

You are even at liberty to revise it backwards during the policy statement. This is not rocket science. The only implication, which I never wanted to explain, is that our debt ratio is going beyond what is acceptable and they are hiding it. If they tell us the exact amount of money they will spend this year, they will not be in line with NDP III, which they never wanted to go into. If they do this, literally, they are turning this Parliament into a rubberstamp. We will lack room to manoeuvre and press for people’s needs. 

The power to appropriate was given to this Parliament and people’s representatives, not technocrats.  We share this power with the President, who gives us this ceiling. Therefore, we are asking the Chief Executive to give the people’s representative his wish list with the money and we approve it. Why do you speak a lot of English on simple matters? 

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, hon. Kivumbi, for that elaborate – it is true that the Executive proposes the resource envelop and Parliament approves and appropriates it. 

One question which you asked, Mr Speaker, is there any figure that we are going to get from the Petroleum Fund? We have informed this House that, with the Petroleum Fund, we are getting zero this financial year. It has Shs. 76 billion and Shs. 70 billion is not equal to zero, hon. Nzoghu. 

The second one is the resource envelop. If you look at the resource envelop and how we have structured it, it is comprised of tax revenue. The projected tax revenue for the next financial year, including non-tax revenue, is Shs. 21.7 trillion. That is what we have proposed and we have not changed that figure, Mr Speaker. 

The other part of the resource envelop is the budget support, which is Shs. 91 billion plus project support of Shs. 452 billion. We are not changing that. We have indicated to you that our domestic borrowing for the next financial projected figure is Shs. 10.4 trillion. 

The external financing is Shs. 8.2 trillion. On the external financing, this projection only included the resources which we are projecting to disperse during this financial year but we are going to reconcile this figure with the lenders, including the resources Parliament might approve before we come to the House with a detailed budget estimate. That is a figure that is likely to change. 

Mr Speaker, if Parliament wants to give the Executive a ceiling, then, you can propose it but if it is the Executive giving you a resource envelop, we are telling you that we are working within Shs. 39 trillion. This is the figure you should take us on –(Interjection)– you are the one asking that you expect us to change the figure and we are not disclosing it to you. We are telling you that the resource envelop we are suggesting, as per now, apart from reconciliation of external sources, is Shs. 39 trillion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, the ceiling, as required by law, which has been given to us, is Shs. 39.640 trillion. There is no other ceiling. There are no other proposals listed emyooga that could affect this ceiling. We just want to be clear and move.  The reason I am saying this is because it is the basis of the minority report. Once we resolve that matter, we are ready to go. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, members need to make a distinction between a Budget Framework Paper and a detailed budget estimate. The ceiling for this financial year is Shs. 39 trillion in the Budget Framework Paper but Parliament has made proposals, if you look at the sectors.  

Therefore, what we will do is to go back, sit and reconcile those detailed proposals but they remain within 39 trillion, including adjustment for emyooga and elections. The overall broad figure of the resource envelop is Shs. 39 trillion from the Executive and the NRM Government but if Parliament wants to give us another figure, please give us. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you look at part One of the national Budget Framework Paper for the financial years that have been given on page 14, at the top, there is a statement to the effect that:

“In order to meet the critical shortfalls on the budget for the financial year 2020/2021, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will mobilise additional revenues to bridge up the funding gap under security specialised funds, emyooga, electoral road map, new cities and salary enhancements for university professors and scientific cadres in research institutions before the budget for the financial year 2020/2021 is finalised.”

That is what you need to reconcile. Does this mean it affects the ceiling that they have provided a Budget Framework Paper, Chairperson?

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Mr Speaker, the last statement by the minister is the right one because in a Budget Framework Paper, you make an expression of interest. Now, when you get other issues arising – for example, we have issues and we are recommending the Executive to handle them. 

Therefore, the Executive has to go back and look at what is going to be possible. 

There are must-fund issues like elections. Electoral commission has new districts. They have to hire accommodation for the districts at about Shs 11.7 billion. To run elections, after squeezing and reducing majorly, they need Shs 134 billion. Without that, elections cannot move on. 

So the Executive will go and look at those recommendations that Parliament will make and look at sources of funding the extra activities – what is applicable and also linking the issues to NDP III. 

We must note, the NDPIII came after the Budget Framework Paper (BFP) was done and the NDPIII is so strong in developmental areas. Parliament has to note that you cannot start on the wrong foot. So our recommendations are to correct what the BFP has not handled in the NDPIII. 

It means that the minister has to go back with the executive and plan to accommodate those issues and therefore, they will have to adjust the ceiling after the recommendations which shall be given by Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which ceiling Parliament will approve again. Is that so? In the estimates of course -

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: That ceiling shall be approved at the time of the estimate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is there any conflict still? 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Yes, Mr Speaker, what the chair has just stated is a misinformation. He is trying to give the impression that the BFP is the budget itself. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he has just stated the opposite of what you are saying now. (Laughter)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I think the chair is being a bit mean with the truth – I would have used a different word but I am constrained by parliamentary language. What he has said at the end is what matters; that the ceiling shall be revised. 

The minister said so, that the ceiling, consequently, will be revised. 

Now, the law requires that at this point of doing business, tell us if you are going to build a 10-storied block, tell us that you are going to build a 21-storied block, but you will build wall by wall, floor by floor. You can stop at number six, but tell us that that is where you are going so that there is consistence in planning and in forecast and in Parliament that takes these decisions. The decision we make is based on the whole figure of what has been given. Then we say, is there equity? Is there justice because we know the full amount of money available? 

Therefore, our point of departure, the framers of this, for which some of you were members – I wasn’t – aimed that we must end this hurdle of budgeting and be systematic and smart in what we do.

It required Government – fully fledged by an agency, National Planning Authority, a fully-funded budget office at the ministry – to do us a thorough job. They are simply displaying the utmost incompetence by saying at this time, with all that they are equipped with, they are unable – having written it there and committed that they will – to give us that figure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, that argument is based on the old budget practice. It is not in the new budget practice because the budget practice that we have now, Parliament is engaged from the beginning and they keep making proposals for alteration of figures. That is where the difference is. 

But if it was the old type where the budget comes, after the budget is read, the financial year comes and there is no budget, there months later we are passing a budget and we have the animal called  “Vote on Account” that argument would hold. 

But as of now, those have all changed. So the BFP at the time it was made could not be a cast in stone because Parliament is still given the latitude to make input which it has made, which automatically has already made a change on the ceiling that initially was provided. I think we are together here.

You people have already proposed things that could easily alter this ceiling. Is that correct?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I think we are speaking from the same page and we are speaking the same language. The framers of the law said, at the beginning, we must put our right foot forward when we are beginning the budget process. And they asked Government to do the following:

Tell us how much money we pick from the Petroleum Fund. There is flow on investment, section 2. For all the things you are going to invest in, tell us at this level. Consequently, tell us the maximum amount of money you will work with, what they call a budget ceiling. 

Mr Speaker, the implication of what is taking place is simple. It is that if you do not have a budget ceiling approved right now, the law requires you approve a resource envelop. A resource envelop includes the top and it included a ceiling. It actually ties you down. That in the adjustment expected, you will not revise the maximum ceiling but you can draw down. That is the implication and we need to understand it. 

If the minister tells me – and I will rest my case – that this is just an artificial figure to work with, that later on he is going to bring another figure that we shall deal with and there will be another ceiling. I will rest because Parliament has made enormous recommendations and with those recommendations, you will not come to us and say this is the ceiling we gave you. We will adjust this budget in accordance to our recommendations and Parliament will expect Government to adhere. 

But Parliament is constrained under Article 93 of the Constitution, we cannot raise the ceiling by even two shillings. Therefore, parliamentary resolutions – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Of course, unless the proposal comes from – complete the sentence.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Unless it is a proposal by Government. (Laughter) 

The only argument I will buy is that Government is committing that it is going to revise that ceiling, adopt our proposals and bring it back. I will rest my case. But if they remove – 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, there are quite a number of contradictions from the submission of my good friend hon. Kivumbi. 

Government has proposed a ceiling of Shs 39 trillion. That is our proposal. Parliament has considered the BFP, if you get some time to read through, for example, the sector on education in one item is recommending that Government should look for additional Shs 50 billion to address issues of staffing in public universities. 

When you look at this volume, all these are recommendations of Parliament. Some of them might be handled within the Shs 39 trillion by removing this, adding this and that. Where it is necessary to go beyond, we will come back after. 

How would you have expected the Executive to anticipate that Parliament will make a recommendation of additional funding in these sectors? What Mr Kivumbi is saying is that we should have sat in our boardroom and anticipated that Parliament will recommend an additional Shs 2.0 trillion or 3.0 trillion and we put it in the ceiling. That is not possible. Certainly, that is not how Government works, hon. Kivumbi. It is unfortunate that you will take long to go there; you would see that it doesn’t work that way. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the value of minority reports where they are necessary; to bring out the issues, have them interrogated, analysed and understood. Without intervention from this side, it would be difficult for the House to clearly understand the dynamics involved in these issues of ceilings or no ceilings and whether they are fixed in stone or they are adjustable and so on. 

The question would then become, if we pass the ceiling now, what will we be doing in the Budget because we still have the Budget that is coming on the 1st of April? That will be the final document that we will be handling within this planning process.

Is there any necessary debate after these interactions? I do not see that there is any need for further debate on this matter. Procedure -

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am wondering whether we are proceeding rightly in proceeding to adopt the Budget Framework Paper in view of Section 13(6) of the Public Finance Management Act, which is to the effect that the Budget must conform to the National Development Plan (NDP). 

Mr Speaker, in Financial Year 2015/2016, the Budget complied by 68.3 per cent, leaving a shortfall of 31.7 per cent. In Financial Year 2016/2017, the Budget complied by 58.8 per cent, leaving a shortfall of 41.2 per cent. In Financial Year 2017/2018, the Budget complied by 54.2 per cent, leaving a shortfall of 45.8 per cent. In Financial Year 2018/2019, the Budget complied by 61.5 per cent. 

When the committee chairperson was presenting, he alluded to the fact that whereas we did not achieve the objectives of the NDP II because we did not fund the flagship projects, we moved on to NDP III. He made a disclaimer that he is not even sure whether the NDP III complies because it actually came late.

Mr Speaker, if we proceed to pass the Budget Framework Paper, which contravenes Section 13(6) of the Public Finance Management Act, in my humble view, we would be failing the President because we will not achieve middle-income status as per the objective of the National Development Plan. I seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the figures you have provided are for the Budget in relation to the National Development Plan and not the Budget Framework Paper. That is the distinction. That is the final performance of the budget; how did it perform? Did it actually meet what was recommended in the National Development Plan? There are those variations and so, this is different.

What we are doing now is a preliminary stage. That analysis will come when we finally pass the figures of the final Budget. The analysis will come on how that Budget will reflect on NDP III. It is not at this stage, honourable member. Therefore, we are proceeding perfectly well. (Laughter) – [Ms Aol: “Clarification”] - From whom, Madam Leader of the Opposition?

MS AOL: From the minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is not holding the Floor, Madam.

MS AOL: Okay, can I make a submission then? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As Leader of the Opposition, you have the prerogative. Proceed, Madam. (Laughter)

4.28
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not an accountant, neither did I do accounts, even at the lowest level. The budget ceiling of the previous year was over Shs 40 trillion and we know that the population is growing. Why is that ceiling going down instead of going up if we are growing, if the population is increasing and if we have new cities?

I am seeking this clarification as an ordinary person who has very little knowledge in accounting. Some of us would think that something is fishy somewhere. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, three or four budgets back, there was a figure for Kampala-Entebbe Expressway and it was quite some amount of money. However, that has been completed. If it is withdrawn from the Budget and nothing replaces it, the ceiling naturally drops because some huge project that had shot up the Budget ceiling has been finalised. When there is that gap, naturally the ceiling should come down, unless there is another project that is going to maintain that ceiling. 

It is the same with institutions or different Votes, including that of Parliament. Sometimes our ceiling comes down. For example, if we finish the new Chamber, certainly our ceiling will come down because that is a major investment. We do not expect to maintain the same level when we have taken out a huge investment. That is how it works, Madam. When the need arises, it shoots up and when there is no need, it will either stay the same or drop if some big project has been finalised.

Can I put the question, honourable members? I now put the question that the report of the Budget Committee on the National Budget Framework Paper for Financial Year 2020/2021 to 2024/2025 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can we have some order? Can we have members sitting down? We have a Bill to process. I am still here and you must be here with me. Can I put the question – including the Member who is walking out – that we should all stay here? (Laughter) Adopted. Therefore, let us all stay here.

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 1 is commencement. We will adopt it later. Are you going to propose a different commencement times? Let us then adopt it. It is okay.

Can I put the question that clause 1 stands part of this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 3 as follows:
    1. –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You had a proposal to insert a new amendment; the first one or we do all? You should have given notice that you intend to do that. Clause 3?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 3 as follows:

(i)	By deleting paragraph (f) and
(ii)	By deleting paragraph (g)

The justification is:

    1) The Authority should be left with the mandate to issue guidelines on the implementation of the Act; and
    2) The amendment makes it compulsory that all procurement specialists should be certified or registered by a procurement professional body and yet currently in Uganda, there is no regulatory body to register procurement professionals.

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposals for amendment. I put the question to the proposal for amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR MUSASIZI: On clause 4, Mr Chairman, we propose to insert a new section 4B in the principal Act.
Clause 4 is amended by deleting the words “principles and practices” in 4B(1).

The justification is that the ministry should be left to handle policy issues and the operational issues such as the practices should be left with the authority.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Who have we given powers to make regulations? Who has the power to make regulations?

MR MUSASIZI: The minister.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, why are you taking this away?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, if I may read what we are deleting; the proposal reads as follows:
“Role of the ministry
The ministry shall advise Government on all public procurement and disposal policies, principles and practices”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you want the authority to advise Government?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we are saying that the ministry should be left to handle policy issues and – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This is about advising Government. This is not about giving policy directives; this particular role is about advising Government. The ministry shall advise Government on all public procurement and disposal policies, principles and practices.

MR MUSASIZI: The argument here, Mr Chairman, is that principles and practices are more of operational than policy.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Who will then advise Government on those?

MR MUSASIZI: We are saying this role should be given to the authority, not the minister.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: When it comes to advising the Government, who will play that role?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, I have provided my opinion. Parliament can also give another –  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, I am interrogating your opinion because we have to be clear. You see, it is only the minister who can advise Government; certainly not the authority. The authority advises the minister, not so? In turn, who should advise Government on principles and practices? Shouldn’t it be the minister? I am simply thinking aloud.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, actually the advice to Government usually comes through Cabinet and it is the minister who attends Cabinet. I think the provision should stay the way it is because the authority advises the minister and then the minister brings the advice to Government, mainly through Cabinet. I would like to implore my colleague, the chairperson, to concede and we leave it the way it is.

MR AOGON: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think it is only proper that the minister does his duty of advising on policy. Where he needs to consult with the authority, that is only natural; he knows that he needs to consult. He will consult and say, “What do we do here?” When the authority says “This is the right way,” he will advise Government. Naturally, it is proper that we leave it the way it is. That is what I think, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think this particular provision is different from the types we have always been removing powers from the minister. This is very different. 

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, the statement reads:

“The ministry shall advise Government on all public procurement and disposal policies, principles and practices.”

Our argument is that the role of the minister should be restricted to policy. However, when you come to principles and practices, these are operational in nature and should be handled by the authority.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, the operating word is not that one. The operating word is “advising Government”. Who should advise Government on principles and practices?

MR MUSASIZI: The question I can also put to the House for guidance is whether there are operational matters where advice is needed and this advice is sought from the minister.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, in advising Government, ministries consult relevant technical bodies under their supervision. Chairperson, I do not see any risk of the ministry advising Government. It is on policies and we shall do this in consultation with the relevant body, which will be PPDA. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, sometimes, because we do not want to give the ministers and ministries too much power, we end up doing things wrongly. In what forum will the authority advise the Government on principles and practices? Advice to Government is usually in Cabinet. Only a minister attends and speaks in Cabinet.

If only the minister can speak in Cabinet, who is going to advise the Government in Cabinet about matters of principles and practices? I think it is the right thing.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, in this case, I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Is there no other amendment on clause 4? I will now put the question that clause 4 stands part of this Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, before clause 5, we propose to amend as follows. Section 5 of the principal Act is amended by substituting for sub-section (1) the following: 

“(1) There is established an autonomous body to be known as ‘Public Procurement Regulatory Authority’ in this Act referred to as the ‘Authority’”.

Justification

It is a consequential amendment to Section 3 of the principal Act. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposed amendment to clause 5 of the Bill. I put the question to the amendments as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New Clause, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 5 as proposed:

    (i) By deleting paragraph (b)
    (ii) By deleting paragraph (c)
    (iii) By deleting paragraph (d)
    (iv) By deleting paragraph (e)  

Justification

    1. Restricting the regulator to only monitoring and making a report without providing advice on desirable changes makes the regulator redundant.
    2. To mandate the authority to issue guidelines on objectives and functions of the Act. 

I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, honourable members? I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6
MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 6 by-

    (i) deleting paragraph (a) sub-paragraph (1)(b);
    (ii) deleting paragraph (c);
    (iii) substituting for paragraph (b) the following: “To investigate and act on complaints received on procurements and assets disposal proceedings from procuring and disposing entities, bidders and contractors or the general public that are not the subject of administrative review.”

Justification

    1. If the Authority is to retain the power to require information, documents and records as specified in clause 8(1)(a), it should retain the power to summon witnesses.
    2. The Authority should retain the power to investigate and act on those complaints. 

I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much for the proposed amendment. However, the instruction to Parliament in amendment (i) should be the other way round. You are deleting sub-paragraph (1)(b) of paragraph (a). That is what you are proposing. It is because if you leave it the way it is, by deleting paragraph (a), then you will not have sub-paragraph (1)(b). In that case, you are deleting sub-paragraph (1)(b) of paragraph (a). Is that correct?

MR MUSASIZI: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR MUSASIZI: In clause 7, we propose to amend by deleting paragraph (b).

Justification

    1. It is a consequential amendment of the Authority retaining the power to investigate complaints that are not a result of administrative review. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you want to retain the authority to complaint investigators? It is because by deleting it, it remains in the Act? Is that what you want to achieve?

MR MUSASIZI: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, do you have any issue with this?  Honourable members, the motion is for deletion of paragraph (b). I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15

MR MUSASIZI: In clause 15, we propose to amend it as follows:

    1. In paragraph (a) (fa) by substituting for the word, “minister” for the word, “Authority”’
    2. In paragraph (c) by substituting for the word, “minister” the word, “Authority”.

Justification

    1. The authority should be left with the mandate to issue guidelines in regard to prices.
    2. The accounting officer should be left with the mandate to undertake an assessment of the market price of the supplies or services or the unit costs of the works prior to commencement of the procurement. 

I beg to submit, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable members, the purpose of this proposed amendment is that Parliament should directly delegate these powers to the authority rather than the minister. I put the question to that. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR MUSASIZI: In Clause 17, we propose to amend as follows:

    (i) by renumbering the existing provision as (1);
    (ii) by substituting for the words, “awards of contracts” appearing at the beginning of paragraph (c) with the words, “make award decisions”; and
    (iii) inserting immediately after subsection (1) the following:

“A decision under this section shall be made within ten working days upon receipt of a submission from the procuring and disposal unit.”

Justification

    1. It is to enable the contracts committee to make award decisions in procurement instead of awarding contracts to the bidders. 

I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, honourable members? 

MR AOGON: Mr Chairman, I just would like some clarification. If we decide that they take the decision of award, who awards? I needed to understand that clearly.

MR MUSASIZI: They take a decision and the award is made by the accounting officer.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to that amendment?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18

MR MUSASIZI: On clause 18, we propose to delete it and the justification is that the operational issues should be left with the Authority while the minister should be left to handle the policy related issues.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, the proposal is to delete clause 18. Do you agree to the deletion of clause 18?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I request for two minutes over this clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You had the report of the committee.

MR BAHATI: Yes, I had the report of the committee but there is something small I want to crosscheck.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You are going to delay; we are going to delete this thing. Honourable members, the proposal of the committee is to delete clause 18. I now put the question that clause 18 be deleted?
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18 deleted.

Clause 19 agreed to.

Clause 20 agreed to.

Clause 21 agreed to.

Clause 22

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend by deleting clause 22(b) and the justification is that the authority should retain the power to issue guidelines in respect of the format of the procurement plans.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you propose to delete clause 22 because that is what you said so?

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to delete paragraph (b) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. Honourable members for the justification - that is the repeal of sub section (3). Honourable members that is the proposal from the committee with the justifications given; I put the question to that amendment? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.
Clause 23 agreed to.

Clause 24

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we propose that clause 24 should be deleted. The justification is that the concerns of environment protection, social inclusion and stimulating innovation should be made part of the procurement principles since there may be difficulties in evaluating each and every procurement, if they are part of the statement of requirements.

MR BAHATI:  Mr Chairman, we propose this clause in the spirit of protecting our environment and really emphasising the issue of environmental protection and also other social issues. I do not see any harm this clause will cause. Instead you would put it as part of the guidelines and the procurement plan; you are not giving the environmental protection the emphasis it deserves.

Therefore, Mr Chairman, I would like to convince the chairperson and colleagues that we maintain it the way it is because this was just to give it the weight that it deserves.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, let us be clear. What this proposal is saying is enumerating things that should be prescribed. It is not making a prescription here. It is just listing out those things that will be as prescribed.

Therefore, you are both speaking the same language. The provision is saying, “A procuring and disposing entity shall for each procurement take into account environmental protection, social inclusion and stimulating innovation as may be prescribed. That means it is coming in the regulations.

MR MUSASIZI: In this case, Mr Chairman, I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question clause 24 stands part of this Bill?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25

MR MUSASIZI:  Mr Chairman, we propose to delete it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  It is the same, as may be prescribed by the last wording.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, here we may have to give some information. By implication unsolicited bids will not be official if we retain this clause. And the current situation is the unsolicited bids are not permitted by PPDA and this proposal in the Bill is seeking to regularise and solicit the bids. That is why we are proposing to delete it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable minister, there is a valid point there; explain to the House why you want to legalise unsolicited bids.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, we want to formalise and give it a weight of the law, unsolicited bids, because in modern times we have seen how this can be helpful. We have seen investors coming here and propose some innovations. For example, a number of times we have seen people come here in KCCA and propose how we can turn this garbage into power. It is something that Government has not thought about but you get an idea that is productive for the Government; and can help Government then you do not have anywhere in the law how you can accommodate it. Therefore, what we are saying here is that-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, save us and withdraw that one.

MR BAHATI: What we are saying here is that if they are unsolicited-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  You are opening up chaos. Everybody is going to resort to that. Please.

MR BAHATI: That is why we are saying that the bid shall be subjected to the requirements of part 6 of this Act as may be subscribed. That even when we have opened this window -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable minister, how can it be a bid when no request has been made for it? How can you call that a bid?

MR BAHATI: But, Mr Chairman, how can we also send away good ideas? How can we accommodate these good ideas?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  The good idea can be brought to you and then you take a decision to procure and it becomes procurement and not that you come and tell me that this is what I want to do for you, please give me the contract. 

Honourable members, I am going to put a question to the proposal by the chairperson that this clause 25 be deleted. I put the question?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, deleted.

Mr sabiiti: Mr Chairman, can you allow me to explain this?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Did you draft it? Wait and recommit it at the right time.

Clause 26 agreed to.

Clause 27

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we propose to delete clause 27 and our justification is that the market dynamics should determine the best price and performance guarantees can be called into play in the event that the bidder fails to perform.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, the importation of this clause was to address this important situation. We have been basing ourselves on price mainly as a way of evaluating a bid. What we are suggesting here is, even when you have offered the least price in a bid, we should be able to use some other parameters to make the bid the best. 

You could have the best technical bid but a slightly higher price than somebody who has quoted a lower price but technically, he does not offer the best. We are saying here, can we consider both so that we do not use one parameter as price to get the best and value for money and good service?

Mr tayebwa: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The moment you allow this, you will have opened Pandora’s Box in terms of corruption in this country.

I would like to give an example. The argument brought by hon. Bahati and this amendment is already covered in consultancies. In consultancies, “technical” covers 70 per cent and “price” 30 per cent. In others, for example, in civil works, you must qualify technically before they consider your price.

Therefore, this is redundant. What they now want is for people to start conniving and say, “No, even if you have performed very well in terms of price, this one is much better technically.” This will defeat the spirit of the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA) that encourages value for money. I support the committee that we delete this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 27 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27 deleted.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 30 by deleting paragraph (c). The justification is that the minister should be left to handle policy issues and the operational matters should be left with the Authority.

Mr Bahati: Mr Chairman, I think the spirit of the amendment by the chairperson is a fact that we have already agreed on; that operational issues be left to the Authority and the minister concentrates on policy matters. It is consistent with what we have already passed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the committee?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we propose to delete clause 34. The justification is, determination of the method of procurement should be the mandate of the Authority and not the Attorney-General or a minister.

The proposal will stifle the procurement process since the entity cannot plan for this method of procurement and the public and disposing entities should be able to hire technical expertise to assist develop technical specifications, in case of complex procurements. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This is supposed to be an exception to the general authority given under the law that in certain cases, this should be used. However, in all other cases, it is okay.

The proposal seeks to create an exception in cases of complex, specialised and strategic goods, works or services. It is not overruling the principle but creating an exception.

Mr otieno: Mr Chairman, I would like to disagree with the committee on this one because this provision is being made for complex, specialised and strategic goods and works. 

We have seen situations where the normal procurement process cannot handle certain situations. We have seen this even here, in strategic procurement, where delays have been as a result of the bureaucratic nature of the process, which cannot adapt itself to handle certain emerging situations.

On this, I would persuade members that we disagree with the committee and go with the provision of the Bill to allow us have this process move faster, in some cases and where need arises, for special and strategic considerations.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: They have created an exception, I am not going to open debate on this matter.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 34 stands part of this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we propose to delete clause 35. The justification is that the international contracting agreements should be retained.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I agree with the committee. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is that clause 35 be deleted. I put the question for deletion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35 be deleted
Clause 36

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 36 as follows:

    i) In 89(2), by inserting the word “review” immediately after the word “administrative”.
    ii) In 89(7)(a) by inserting the words “and communicate” immediately after the word “make” and (b), by inserting the word “working” immediately after the word “ten”;
(iii) In 89(8)- 
    (a) By inserting the words “and communicate” immediately after the word “make”.
    (b) By inserting the word “working” immediately after the word “Ten”.

(iv)  By deleting 89(12).

Justification
 
    (1) To provide for the word “review” which had been omitted; 
    (2) Use working days as opposed to merely days; 
    (3) The decision of the accounting officer must not only be made but it must be communicated to the complainant; 
    (4) The Authority should retain the power to investigate and act on complaints that are not a subject of administrative review. 

I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, Chairperson. Honourable minister? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, we agree with the committee’s proposals. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. I put the question that clause 36 be amended in the terms proposed by the committee chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 37

MR MUSASIZI: In clause 37, we propose that Section 91 of the principal Act is repealed. 

Justification: The consequential amendment of removing administrative reviews from the Authority.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Section 90 remains. What you are proposing is to delete from clause 37 the words “and 91” and the “s” in “sections”. Is that correct? It reads as “sections” but you want it to read as “section 90” only. 

MR MUSASIZI: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, your amendment is that the word “sections” should read “section” and the words “and” in the figure 91 after 90 should be deleted. Is that correct? The clause will now read, “Section 90 of the principal Act is repealed.” Which one are you repealing?   

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, before you put a question, we still have proposals under this clause. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Under this same clause? 

MR MUSASIZI: Yes, I beg that – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We want to understand the first one. Which one do you want to remove from the Bill? Is it Section 90 or Section 91? 

MR MUSASIZI: Clause 37 should be substituted with the following: 

“(37) Repeal of Section 91 of the principal Act.
Section 91 of the principal Act is repealed”. 
I think this one is clearer now. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There are words that should be removed from the text in the Bill because you want to amend that provision. The letter that we remove is the “s” in “sections”. Which one do you want to repeal?  

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, the objective is to retain Section 90 and repeal Section 91 of the principal Act. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Then you say, “Delete section 90 and Section 91 of the principal Act is repealed.” 

MR MUSASIZI: I need someone to interpret it for me. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, when you look at the principal Act, Section 90’s head note is “Review by the accounting officer” and Section 91 reads “Review by the Authority”. 

Now, the minister had proposed that both be repealed. However, the committee says that we should maintain “Review by the accounting officer” but we only repeal the “Review by the authority”. I think it will break the bureaucracy and reduce the time it takes to have these reviews. That is what the provision is about.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What do they want to repeal from the principal Act? 

DR BARYOMUNSI: The minister had proposed that we repeal – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What are we saying now? Which one do we want to repeal? 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Section 91, which is “Review by the Authority”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, are we retaining section 90 in the Act? 

DR BARYOMUNSI: We retain “Review by the accounting officer”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The draft will read, “Section 91 of the principal Act is repealed.” You are deleting from this proposal of the Bill the “s” on “sections”, “90” and replacing “are” with “is”. You have achieved it, instead of going round and round and proposing new things. Is that okay? That is the proposal by the committee. Did you have additional amendments for it? 

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, in this section, under this clause, we propose to insert a new clause in the Bill to read as follows: 

Section 91A of the principal Act is amended by substituting for the definition of “tribunal” the following:
“‘Tribunal’ means the Procurement and Disposal Appeals Tribunal.” 

Justification 

The tribunal is not part of the structures of the Authority, and as such, there is need to draw that distinction. 

We propose to insert another new clause to read as follows: 
 
The Bill is amended by inserting the following new clauses 
Amendment of Section 91B of the principal Act
Section 91B of the principal Act is amended – 

    (i)  by substituting for the headnote the following: 
“Procurement and Disposal Appeals Tribunal”;

(ii) in subsection (1)(a), by substituting for the words “Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Appeals Tribunal” the words “Procurement and Disposal Appeals Tribunal;”
(b)  by substituting for the word “four” the word “eight”.
(iii)  by substituting for sub-section (3) the following: 

“(3)The eight members appointed under sub-section (1) shall be constituted as follows: 
    (a) two persons nominated by the Uganda Law Society; 
    (b) two persons nominated by a recognised procurement professional body; 
    (c) one person nominated by the Uganda Institute of Professional Engineers; 
    (d) one person nominated by Uganda Society of Architects; 
    (e) one person nominated by the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda; 
    (f) one person nominated by the minister who shall represent the business community. 

Justification:

    1. The tribunal is not part of the structures of the Authority and as such, there is need to draw that distinction. 
    2. The increased number of members of the tribunal is to cater for the increased workload the tribunal is to handle as a result of administrative reviews the tribunal has been mandated to handle.
    3. Provide for the criteria of the number of members of the tribunal. 

Mr Chairman - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, I think we should pause there and then we continue. All these things that you are proposing have nothing to do with clause 37. They are new clauses; so we need to take a decision on clause 37 which we have amended so that this one can follow because they are not part of clause 37. 

Honourable members, the proposed amendment on clause 37 as read earlier. It is a small amendment. I put a question to that amendment in clause 37.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please continue with what you were reading. Where had you reached? 

MR MUSASIZI:  I had finished the nominations and I was going to 22, Insertion of a new clause in the Bill.

The Bill is amended by inserting the following new clause:

“Functions of the tribunal

The functions of the tribunal are to-

    (a) hear applications for administrative review of decisions of accounting officers made by a bidder who is aggrieved under Section 89(7);
    (b) hear and determine applications made under Section 89(8) by the bidder who is aggrieved by the failure of the accounting officer to make a decision within ten working days from the date of receipt of the complaint;
    (c) hear applications for review of a decision of the authority with regard to suspension of providers under Section 94 of this Act;
    (d) perform any other function conferred to a tribunal by this Act, regulations or any other written law.” 

Justification

To provide for specific functions of the tribunal

Insertion of a new clause in the Bill

The Bill is amended by inserting the following new clause:

Amendment of Section 91C of the Principal Act
Section 91C of the Principal Act is amended by substituting for the word “three” the word “four”.

Justification

To enhance the tenure of the members of the tribunal. 

Mr Chairman, I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the committee proposes to insert, immediately after clause 37 which we have adopted, eight new clauses to the Bill. Correct? And the eight new clauses which the chair proposes to insert immediately after clause 37 have been read. Honourable minister, do you agree with them?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I have a clarification I will seek from the chairperson on why we are removing the word “public” in the tribunal, “Public Procurement and Disposal” – why, in insertion 20, the tribunal means “Procurement and Disposable Appeals Tribunal”. 

Then the second is on the composition of the tribunal. I would like to propose as follow:

    1. That we get one person nominated by the Uganda Law Society, then one person nominated by a recognised procurement professional body, one person nominated by Uganda Institute of Professional Engineers, one person nominated by the Uganda Society of Architects, one person by the Institute of Public Accountants and three persons nominated by the minister who shall represent the public. 

The numbers are the same and I want to be fair and even to other professional bodies. We want to do one representation from each of those professional bodies and have three members from the public nominated by the minister instead of having two from the Uganda Law Society, two from the procurement body and then one from other professional bodies. Also giving the minister and Government an opportunity to search around and identify experts and people with integrity who can help in addition to these constituencies. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please wait. These are too many, they can easily create confusion. There is an amendment proposed by the committee, the minister has made a counter proposal. 

But while that is going on, Mr Chairperson, if you look at 22(1) in (a), you make a citation on section 89 (7) and in (b), you make a citation of Section 89(8) and those are not in the Principal Act.

Let us take this slowly, they are too many, we can easily make a mistake - No, let him consult.

The confusion is arising because there is no Section 89(7) and Section 89(8) as we speak. There is only a clause which has not yet been passed formally by Parliament and assented to, so it can only remain a clause. Are we together? How do we now deal with that?

Honourable members, 89(7) and 89(8) are part of this Bill and we have passed them in clause 36. The committee chairperson should have helped us to say that these are the clauses that we have just passed in clause 36. That way, the record would be clear that you are referring to the 89 which is under clause 36, which we have passed. When you just say “section” without explaining – sections always refer to the Principal Act. That is why we were all asking: “Where is it coming from?” Now, it is clear that what you are referring to are what we have passed in clause 36. Is it clear now? Alright.

In respect of paragraph 22(1), we are clear that under paragraph 22 on page 14 they are proposing insertion of new clause in the Bill. In clause 22(1), which is on top of page 15, those references are what we passed in clause 36. They are clear now –(Mr Bahti rose_)- I want a concrete proposal. What were you proposing?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, would it be smarter to go one by one. In paragraph 20, we are seeking clarification on why we are not having the word “public” on page 13.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, that might help us. Let us start with the proposed new clause under paragraph 20 of the report. Does anybody have a concern with it?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, we want to maintain what is in the law. In the Principal Act the “Tribunal” means “The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Appeals Tribunal”. The committee chairperson is suggesting that we say a “Tribunal” means, “The Procurement and Disposal Appeals Tribunal”.

We might need to tap into your wisdom on this issue.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Well, it is only proper that you restate what it is – you are talking about “public procurement”. Isn’t it? Is there any other procurement we are talking about?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we are talking about public procurement and we should be specific. I, therefore, agree with the minister’s proposal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, under the new clause that is proposed under paragraph 20, the amendment is being proposed by the minister that the definition of “Tribunal” should mean – okay, that is actually what is in the law. Let us just reject this proposal. Therefore, committee chairperson, can you withdraw this proposal?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, I would like to withdraw the proposal on the definition of “Tribunal”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Withdrawn. 

Paragraph 21

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, under paragraph 21(3)(a), I propose that instead of two persons nominated from the law society, we get one nomination from the law society, one nomination from a recognised procurement professional body and in 21(3)(f), we get three persons nominated by the minister, who shall represent the public.

MR TAYEBWA: Committee chairperson, procurement is general. The way you have coined this, it looks like it will all be about engineering construction works as you have not proposed an expert on medical or complicated ICT issues.

Mr Chairman, it should be about procedure – having people who understand that the procedure of procurement has been clearly followed. Otherwise, if you are to say we bring in engineers or architects, we shall demand ICT experts, medical practitioners and others.

Under paragraph 21(3)(f) where they say “one person nominated by the minister who shall represent the business community”, the minister can nominate someone selling gonja on the road – that is a businessperson. There should be very clear entities here. We have the Private Sector Foundation Uganda, Uganda Manufacturers Association and Uganda Chamber of Commerce; why don’t we refer to a body other than saying “a person who is doing business” to avoid people to bring in their own people who are selling gonja?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us first process the first part of this amendment. There is the first part that we have already passed, that we need to finalise – paragraph 21 on the proposed new clause. There is a proposal in paragraph 21(1)&(2). Consequentially, we consider them withdrawn. Isn’t it so, committee chairperson? 

Under paragraph 21, there is sub-paragraph (1) where they are substituting the headnote with “Procurement and Disposal Appeals Tribunal” and in sub-paragraph (2) where there are substituting for the words “Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Tribunal” the words “Procurement and Disposal Appeals Tribunal”. 

Those now stand withdrawn on the basis of what we decided earlier. The only remaining part of this proposal is on the composition in (3). That is what we are looking at now and that is what the minister has proposed. The Member for Ruhinda North has made some comments without making a specific proposal and it is very dangerous at this stage.

MR TAYEBWA: Mr Chairman, I made a proposal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What proposal did you make?

MR TAYEBWA: My proposal was, let us not go into these professional bodies, let us only focus on competent people. We can -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, what is the proposal?

MR TAYEBWA: On the criteria for appointing people, Mr Chairman, I would propose that we leave it to the minister but ensure that he gets people who are qualified in procurement. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, at this stage, we draft. We do not speak generally. What is the provision you are proposing?

MR TAYEBWA: I will seek the guidance of my senior colleague, hon. Oboth.

MR OBOTH: He made a proposal, which was good; I do not know why hon. Tayebwa shied away. When he gave the example of somebody doing business in gonja or bushera –(Laughter)- he said we could prefer that the minister will get nomination from -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Oboth, please make the proposals that we are going to take now. 

MR OBOTH: The minister would get a person from either Private Sector Foundation Uganda or Uganda National Chamber of Commerce. Those who are registered there are definitely business people. You would be sure that these are business people with a stake in matters of procurement. 

I thought that proposal from hon. Thomas was good enough -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, it was not a proposal, it was a speech.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to draw the attention of the House to the formulation in the original Act. Clause 91B says:

“91B. Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Appeals Tribunal

(1) 	There is established a Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Appeals Tribunal, which shall consist of a chairperson and four other members appointed in accordance with this Part.
(2) 	A person to be appointed chairperson of the Tribunal shall be a person qualified to be a judge of the High Court.
(3) 	A person to be appointed a member of the Tribunal shall be a person with knowledge and experience in public procurement, finance, commerce, business, administration or law.”

The clarification I would like to seek from the committee is, you are now increasing the number from five to eight and that could be one consideration. If you want to introduce engineers and architects, you could expand on these professions so that in addition to public procurement, commerce, finance and law, we include those other professions. Therefore, we increase the number to eight and increase the professions. The formulation would remain the way the original text is.

Otherwise, like now you are dropping the judge of the High Court; it is getting lost. If you introduce specifically architects and engineers, questions will arise on where the doctors and the other professionals are. I wanted to give that information. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: In the principal Act, we have the number five and this is a semi-judicial body, which means that when they are taking a decision, the issue of a split can come in. Here, I see eight members with a possibility of having four-four, in case they sit as one.

I would like the chairperson to process that information. Either you make it odd numbers that we usually favour, like nine or seven, instead of the eight because eight can cause more problems.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal from the committee seeks to enlarge sub-section (3) in the Act. In the Act, as the honourable minister read, a person to be appointed a member of the tribunal shall be a person with “knowledge and experience in public procurement, finance, commerce, business, administration or law.”

Does that require expansion? By trying to expand, we have already increased the number to eight. Do we need eight or do we stick to five as a tribunal? What was the justification for increasing the number?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we are proposing to increase the number because we are adding additional responsibilities to the tribunal, especially in regard to handling administrative reviews, which has been the work of the authority. This function is now moving from the authority to the tribunal. Henceforth, the tribunal will need to be -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Administrative review is handled by a single judge in the High Court; one person. In the High Court, it is one person who handles administrative reviews so why do you want eight people to do it? You see, even if they are many, they will be handling one case at a time. Each one is not going to be assigned a case. You are complicating things, honourable members.

MR OGUZU: As already observed by my colleagues, procurement will not only be addressed to engineering. Therefore, my thinking is that we must give the tribunal the mandate to co-opt technical people whenever necessary so that any issues can be addressed.

For example, there could be social issues in a procurement process that must be addressed and that may require the input of such experts. The tribunal can call on such an expert to resolve that. Thank you.

MR AOGON: Mr Chairman, I remember at one time this House -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, please go to the subject. (Laughter)

MR AOGON: I think it is proper that we take the guidance given by our honourable colleague here and I would like to agree with him. We do not need to complicate anything.

MS ALYEK: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I am in support of what hon. Oguzu has brought forward about co-opting the additional four members of the tribunal, if we agree that we go back to the four.

All in all, I also support what the minister came up with on sub-section (3)(f) about one person nominated by the minister to change to three people nominated by the minister, who shall represent the business community. Here, we did not agree on which people we should bring on board.

I propose that we put the three persons to be nominated from registered business entities, without mentioning any business entity. It will be upon the discretion of the minister to bring on board the three people from any registered business entity.

MR KASULE: Mr Chairman, thank you. I agree with us staying with five members and then co-opt a specialised technical team, maybe on an annual basis or whenever necessary. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Co-opting will be on a case-by-case basis. Depending on the nature of the case, the tribunal can say, “We need this category of people,” and they can co-opt them. That person will serve for that inquiry of the tribunal. Once it is done, he leaves. If another case requires another type of specialisation, then they co-opt a specialist in that field. That is what they are proposing.

Therefore, do you need eight people? Why do you have to increase the number? Is it to create jobs? Why don’t you leave the number as it is? You can co-opt to deal with the cases arising. Even the Court of Appeal has five judges. 

Honourable member for Koboko District, there is a Member on the Floor. 

MR BAHATI: I am already standing. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: When you stand, honourable minister, you must talk so that you can –

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, the wisdom of the committee was that we have removed some responsibilities from the Authority. It is now going to include administrative review and also to perform other functions of making judgements and correcting what has gone wrong. 

The purpose for this amendment is to increase speed in our public procurement processes. So, if you do not mind, we could propose to amend Section 91B to say that “There is an established Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Appeal Tribunal, which shall consist of a chairperson and six other members,” so that they are seven and they are appointed in accordance with this part. 

In sub-section (3), “A person to be appointed as a member of the tribunal shall be a person with knowledge and experience in public procurement, finance, commerce, business, administration or law or any other relevant profession.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now that it has come from the minister, it is okay. For us, we operate with a legal mind. By the chairperson proposing it, it breaches Article 93, because you do not have the authority to make an amendment to a motion that has an effect of creating a charge on the Consolidated Fund. Therefore, when it is proposed by the minister, it sits well with me. (Laughter) However, when it is from the committee chairperson, it does not. 

So, the minister proposes that we increase the number of the members of the tribunal from five to seven. Can we adopt that? This is just a number. We are not yet talking about the details. 

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to add that out of the seven members, at least a third should be women because we also engage in business and we need representation. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the next stage. We have already recorded that. Can we agree on the number first? The number that has been proposed by the minister is to move it from a total of five members to a total of seven members. That is an increase by two members of the tribunal. I put the question to that. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What will be the composition of this tribunal? In that case, we are now only going to be required to amend Section 91B(3) without all the elaboration. You enlarge Section 91B(3) and create the power for co-opting.

MR BAHATI: I had suggested that after the words, “administration or law”, we add the words, “any other relevant profession”. So, it would be: “A person to be appointed a member of the tribunal shall be a person with knowledge and experience in public procurement, finance, commerce, business, administration or law or any other relevant profession.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Does that cover it? 

DR BARYOMUNSI: My understanding, Mr Chairman, is that this tribunal is appointed and it is in place. On a case-by-case basis, there may be a specialised procurement - for instance, when you are procuring the anti-cancer drugs, you may not have the expertise on the tribunal. Therefore, you may need an oncologist to come and advise the tribunal. 
So, I think we should still add an additional provision to say “The tribunal or the minister may co-opt a member on a case-by-case basis.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The tribunal will do that and not the minister. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Yes, the tribunal may co-opt a member on a case-by-case basis. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do we leave subsection (3) as it is?

DR BARYOMUNSI: With amendments by the minister –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Including the amendment which says, “any other profession” and then you also add co-opting? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, there is an implication there. The complication of co-opting is that these tribunal members are going to be paid and they are specific. Therefore, to allow a tribunal without being specific and to say we may co-opt – The tribunal is going to have some sort of a secretariat. In case they need additional expertise, they may get it but we do not have to put it in the law. It is an administrative issue.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Mr Chairman, for me, my understanding of the tribunal is that they dispense justice. If we go into now requiring particular people, we are even questioning - You know like judges, they make decisions on procurements that have engineer aspects but they are not engineers. 

So, I do not understand why we should co-opt a cancer specialist on the tribunal because this is about fixing an injustice that happened within the procurement chain. Maybe a decision was not made properly somewhere and someone is aggrieved by it and they come before the tribunal for that purpose. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You see, in the case of a judge, there are witnesses and lawyers who will submit on those various aspects of the case. The judge then relies on the information that has been given by various people qualified to take that decision. Therefore, it is not the same with what you are saying. The tribunal will be just a group of seven people. If they have limitation, can’t they invite lawyers and other experts to give evidence?

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, I hear you very loudly. What has the practice been? The danger of putting the “case-by-case basis” in the law is that you will be diluting the very purpose of legislating for the tribunal. 

When you open up that you give them the latitude, for example, a committee of Parliament, when we are constituted to investigate a matter, you get to a point where you need an expert. The latitude is there and administratively, you can seek out to write for expert evidence.

I did that when we were doing for Umeme here and it would be better to narrow down and leave it as it is so that even court can call for an expert witness when it is needed. Therefore, this procurement matter - the people who are going to be put there- the presumption is that they would really be knowledgeable of quite various areas but they cannot know everything. You cannot legislate for all the fields.

We cannot even know what will be that you may need a cyber space expert. If Mulago is procuring something for a neurosurgeon, you do not have them. Therefore, they can be able -(Interjection)- you are talking about coronavirus, yes I do not know whether they will need it that time.

Mr Speaker, you were guiding and I am inclined, when you think loud, I stop thinking.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. My understanding is that this is an appeals tribunal which is going to evaluate evidence that is already in place. It is not going to adduce fresh evidence from the administrative review; they are going to evaluate the existing evidence.

And we have said that in certain instances where they find that they do not have the specialisation, they can get somebody to advise. Therefore, we might not need to legislate on that but on a cases by case, if need arises which in most cases it might not. You might find the existing committee is able to manage. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House resumes and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House to report. I put the question to that motion?

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (Amendment) Bill, 2019” and considered and passed clauses 2 to 37 with amendments.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We actually started from clause 1; they put commencement as a clause.

MR BAHATI: It is like I heard that we did not consider clause 1.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You reported from clause 2 but we started from clause 1. Therefore, your report is that it is from clause 1 to wherever we ended.

MR BAHATI: We did not do clause-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We did clause 1.

MR BAHATI: Okay. Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled the Public Procurement and Disposal Public Assets Act (Amendment) Bill, 2019 and passed clauses 1, 2, 4 to 37 with amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, honourable members. This is a Bill that we have done very well today. Is it possible that we can meet tomorrow for an hour and finish with this Bill so that we start with other business next week? Is it okay members to meet tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. for about an hour? House adjourned to tomorrow, 10 o’clock.

(House rose at 6.08 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 31 January 2020 at 10.00 a.m.) 
