

Wednesday, 31 January 2018 

Parliament met at 2.37 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. A few weeks ago, I attended the Legislative Forum organised by the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) as well as the Assembly of States in Abu Dhabi in the United Arab Emirates (UAE). I attended with hon. Irene Muloni, who is the Minister of Energy and Minerals, hon. Songa Lawrence and hon. Adome. 

During the meeting, states were reporting on their compliance to the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) under the Paris Agreement of 2015, which we have been asking for here. Uganda indicated the following as her priorities: agriculture, forestry, water, energy and health. 

In agriculture, we undertook to expand extension services; introduce climate resilient agriculture; expand value addition, post-harvest storage, access to markets including microfinance; and extend electricity to rural areas, especially through the use of solar systems, to support value addition and irrigation. 

In forestry, we committed to many things and one of them was to encourage agroforestry. On water, there were many proposals. However, we committed to establish an integrated water resources management system. We also agreed to promote renewable energy and other energy services. Under health, we agreed to assess the impact of climate change on the health and wellbeing of the population and establish contingency plans for climate change resilient health services. 

We have not been seeing much come up on issues of environment in this Parliament. Therefore, I thought I should remind us about that commitment. I would like to invite the Committee of Natural Resources to take interest in our Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) and update the House on our status.

I would like to also ask the Prime Minister to take interest in the work of IRENA. It is multi-sectoral and needs a lot of collaboration. In that meeting, a number of leaders of delegations were prime ministers. I hope that our Government will also upscale our participation. Thank you.

Honourable members, there were some Members who had issues to raise on the Floor. There was hon. Akugizibwe and hon. Rosemary Tumusiime. You have three minutes. 

2.41
MS ROSEMARY TUMUSIIME (NRM, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. I refer to a press conference by the Executive Director of the National Drug Authority (NDA), Ms Donna Kusemererwa, on Wednesday, 10 January 2018, in which she communicated that drug shops located in the city, municipalities and town councils have been accorded one year to transform into pharmacies or they will be shut down. 

While the stated objective of this sanction was the enforcement of the relevant sections of the National Drug Policy and Authority Act that governs location of drug shops, which can be addressed through strengthening the regulatory and surveillance functions of the NDA, closing drug shops in the city, municipalities, and towns will cause adverse consequences. One of these is loss of employment. Madam Speaker, the current estimated 11,000 drug shops countrywide employ at least two persons each on average. Hence, the decision threatens about 22,000 jobs. 

Besides, even if all the 11,000 drug shops are upgraded into pharmacies, the country may not have 11,000 pharmacists as required. Most persons owning these drug shops are retried health practitioners, who may be financially constrained to upgrade their facilities to pharmacies. In Wakiso alone, all former subcounties were upgraded to town councils and the drug shops in these localities may lack a viable catchment area within the district to which to locate.

Given the information during the press conference, that each pharmacy is intended to serve 500 people, the existing 478 pharmacies can only serve about 25,000 people. This is a considerably small proportion of the estimated population of 35 million people.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that the Ministry of Health and National Drug Authority strengthen their regulatory and surveillance capabilities to ensure that only licensed drug shops and pharmacies are allowed to operate and their operations conform to the existing regulations and guidelines.
Further, the licensing of these drug shops and pharmacies should be pegged to desirable locations, factoring in the need to decongest the city and municipalities.

In addition to the above, licensing could be used to control the numbers of both drugs shops and pharmacies, strengthening the capacity, efficiency and effectiveness of public health facilities, so that drugs are easily accessed from public health facilities. This in the long term will inhibit the proliferation of drug shops.

I beg that the move by the National Drug Authority to push drug shops out of towns, municipalities and the city be stayed. Instead, a combination of the aforementioned proposals should be implemented to achieve a desired result. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Tumusiime. What you have said is quite alarming. Last week, it was the pharmacists who came to my office to bring a petition complaining about being constrained by the National Drug Authority. I am actually arranging to bring the petition here. I think both issues raised by hon. Tumusiime about the drug shops and the pharmacists should be brought together so that our committee can examine them. 

They were being told that they could not have wholesale and retail services in the same shop, they could not have as many pharmacies there – I think that is something we need to look at.

2.47
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I would like to request you to pass by the offices of National Drug Authority tomorrow morning before you come to Parliament. You will see two colours there - Indians and Chinese. They go there to clear their drugs and they are the ones who are trying to influence National Drug Authority because they want to sell their drugs. They want to squeeze all Ugandans out of business and they take up the whole market. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, National Drug Authority has become one of the worst entities we have in this country. Look at the drugs we are swallowing now. I think you have seen this; there are some Panadols which you take and instead of getting relief from pain, you get more pain.

I think our Committee on Health should urgently look into National Drug Authority and even get those people who give clearance. Recently, I met somebody, whom I will not declare by name, going to China and India to inspect factories which make drugs. I had never seen this person before but I got his name at the back of his card; he also owns a pharmacy. So, Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when the pharmacists came, they came with one of the first Ugandans to open a pharmacy in this country and he told me that the indigenous people of this country are being pushed out of that industry. Therefore, it is really a matter we need to discuss. On Tuesday, I will arrange for the petition of the pharmacists to come here and we join it with this one. This is serious. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, thank you for your wise guidance. I was approached by a group of pharmacists and they were also claiming that they are not doing their professional jobs. The act of dispensing medicine is not for doctors; it is actually for pharmacists. However, there are situations where hospitals are running their own pharmacies within the hospitals and there is now massive unemployment among those who got degrees in the pharmaceutical industry.

In Europe where we travel to, dispensing medicine is done by pharmacists. However, in this country, doctors are doing the work of pharmacists and some pharmacists are doing the work of doctors. Therefore, as we come here on Tuesday, we should help and see to it that those who studied degrees in that area are protected and we provide for designated places for dispensing medicine. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: As I conclude on that -

THE SPEAKER: You had not finished?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: He gave me information. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, I am raising this matter because it is very serious. These Chinese and Indian crooks –(Interjections)- I have to call them crooks - connive with National Medical Stores. I will tell you what they do. Let me give an example of gloves. Gloves in the private pharmacies owned by blacks might cost about Shs 1000, but at National Medical Stores the price may be Shs 2000. This is because the chain is from National Drug Authority to National Medical Stores. 

Therefore, if this report comes as you have said, Madam Speaker, we should clearly task our Committee on Health to go beyond simply appropriating the budget for these entities.

2.50
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, my point concerns the same issue. I would like to agree very much with hon. Nandala and other colleagues. The Indians and the Chinese have taken over the medical industry of this country. If you go downtown in Kikuubo, it is full of pharmacies that are full of Indians and Chinese who are not even trained to dispense medicine. 

Therefore, I think what we need to do majorly is to help people who have drug shops get enough training so that they can dispense drugs. Most districts do not have pharmacists and this is a very big problem to our people. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think we shall discuss the details. I am bringing the petition of the pharmacists so that it is sent to the committee and then we can give them instructions on Tuesday. 

MS OGWAL: Do we have the petition, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: I have the petition and it is going to be brought here on Tuesday. I received a petition from the pharmacists.

2.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I also wanted to say – (Interjections)- Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was asking how we are going to do it. We can also prepare a statement from the Ministry of Health and combine it with the petition so that when we are debating, all these facts are presented and we come up with something out of the debate.

2.52
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just to add onto the issue of the pharmacists, can we know the status of the pharmaceutical industries, especially the ones in Jinja and other areas which have closed instantly? These used to produce drugs that were cheap for Ugandans. 

There is no way we can discuss the issue of pharmacists and ignore the industries that produced drugs for Ugandans – drugs manufactured in Uganda. Maybe we should also look at that, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think I will ask the Clerk to pick out those issues and when the petition comes on Tuesday, as we send it to the committee we can include a few of the things that we want to be handled.

2.53
MR LAWRENCE AKUGIZIBWE (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance about the tea sector in Uganda and particularly, Toro region that is known for tea growing.

In this region, there are two farmer-owned factories, that is, Mabale Tea Factory in Kyenjojo District and Mpanga Tea Factory in Kabarole. These factories are owned by farmers and they have over 6000 stakeholders who are farmers. Their tea is sold locally and also at the Mombasa auction market, in Asia and in the Middle East and it fetches us a lot of income as a country.

The problem that these two factories are facing today is that they have a very big debt burden with commercial banks and worn-out machinery. The farmers who supply them with green leaf for them to dry and crush cannot give them the green leaves now since they cannot afford to pay because they do not have working capital. Even Kenya Commercial Bank (KCB) is threatening to seal or auction these two farmer-owned tea factories. 

These factories now have nowhere to run to but to seek for assistance from Government. My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that the Minister of Agriculture should clearly show how much of their 2018/2019 budget is allocated to the tea sector, so that they can work on their machinery and get working capital.

Government should also give us a plan showing how it is going to bail out these farmer-owned factories. Since you have been bailing out so many other companies, let us also bail out these farmer-owned factories so that they are not auctioned by the commercial banks. 

Also, if Government can guarantee their loans so that they can have working capital and they work on their machinery, which is worn out, then these factories can be saved and the farmers of Kyenjojo and Kabarole can benefit from them.

For the future, Government should also look at a situation where we should have agricultural banks so that the farmers can access credit facilities to be able to bail out farmers. Since agriculture is the backbone of Uganda, we actually need a lot of assistance from Government through agricultural banks. Also – 

THE SPEAKER: Are you submitting or you have an issue? What is the emergency issue you brought?

MR AKUGIZIBWE: The emergency issue is that Government should bail out these farmer-owned factories, Mpanga and Mabale, by paying the loans, which is a burden, so that they can have working capital to continue production.

THE SPEAKER: We shall ask the Ministry of Finance to respond. Do you want to speak or you will update us later?
 
2.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, the honourable member has raised three issues. The first one is how much we have provided for the tea sector. We have provided over Shs 200 billion for the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS), which includes all these crops like coffee, tea and fruits. 

The second issue is about the access to credit by our farmers. It is an issue we have been discussing. The action we took from last year was to provide Shs 50 billion through Uganda Development Bank (UDB). You also approved $20 million to capitalise it. This year, we provided another $50 million and also an agriculture credit facility of Shs 120 billion. We think these efforts can help the farmers as we think about whether it is possible to look at the issue of an agricultural bank.

On the issue of the two factories and the problems they are experiencing, it is true we have received these concerns from the region and also factories in Kigezi. It is something we are discussing and trying to see how best we can help. At the moment, I have no definite answer but I can come back to update the House.

THE SPEAKER: The issue we wanted answered was about the date. Let him come back to us on the date. 

2.58
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Independent, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Last year, we sat here and passed excise duty on cigarettes. I have a ruling here which we can call a dangerous precedent. You know, when you say something here, people take it lightly. The ruling came from the East African Court of Justice on a case between British American Tobacco Uganda Limited and the Attorney-General. 

Madam Speaker, we passed this excise duty in the Financial Year 2017/2018. However, when you read this ruling, there is a problem of separation of powers. What is the East African Court of Justice’s jurisdiction over Ugandan laws and local authorities, especially when it comes to domestic legislation? Excise duty has never been an East African law; it is a domestic law.

Looking at the East African Community Customs Union, there are laws we legislated, which were brought by Government of Uganda for purposes of promoting our industries because we are a sovereign state. This court gave an interim injunction stating that Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) should not collect taxes, which were part of the revenue projected for this year’s budget. Once this precedent is maintained, Madam Speaker, this Parliament will never pass any tax law again. 

This law was passed here, and the reason we passed it was because of some industries in West Nile, which were beginning. We gave them preferential treatment and said the tariff rates cannot be the same with those companies importing cigarettes into Uganda because we have our local industries. Now, the East Africa Court of Justice said that the law we passed here to collect revenue cannot apply. Does the East African Court of Justice have any jurisdiction over our local authorities especially when it comes to domestic legislation? 

Secondly, the East African Court of Justice’s ruling on the Tobacco excise duty caused market distortion and non-competitiveness in the subsector and is a disincentive to investment in Uganda. It scares some of our investors. Also, when you look at this in detail, you will see that they did not condemn Tanzania, Burundi or Rwanda but it is only Uganda that they condemned.

Madam Speaker, if this ruling is maintained, that means all existing tobacco companies which have invested in Uganda will exit to the neighbouring countries to take advantage of the low costs, thus making Uganda more of a garden and like a supermarket with imported products. My humble appeal - (Interruption)

MR KABERUKA: The information I would like to give my honourable colleague is that last year and this year, Uganda took up a drive to make sure we promote local content. The factories in West Nile were meant to employ Ugandans, and we set up that law to protect Ugandan factories against imported cigarettes. Therefore, if we maintain this ruling, it is going to cripple our local content drive to promote and improve our employment status. That is the information I wanted to give. Thank you.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable member. My humble appeal is that the Government of Uganda should appeal against such an archaic ruling, which interferes with Uganda’s domestic legislations.

Secondly, Parliament of Uganda should take a position or come up with a resolution of the plenary rejecting this interference of the East African Court of Justice’s ruling in Uganda’s domestic tax legislations. Parliament of Uganda should resolve that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Attorney-General take up the matter and appeal the ruling with the support of a Uganda Parliament resolution, so that Uganda Revenue Authority continues collecting taxes until the end of this financial year. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you now know why in December I rejected an attempt to bring Article 38 of the Treaty here to tie the hands of Parliament. Now, it has happened. 

Honourable members, the situation is extremely gross. When I read it over the weekend, I thought it was really interesting how a junior court can slap an injunction on an Act of a sovereign Parliament. I am still thinking about what to do. However, I would like to ask the Attorney-General, at the earliest opportunity, to appeal this matter. I felt a matter of an injunction on an Act of Parliament is not for that court. If they wanted, they could have come here to the Constitutional Court to seek an injunction but not have people sitting in Arusha pass an injunction on an Act of the National Assembly of Uganda. 

Therefore, because this has to do with our revenue, I would like to ask the Attorney-General to first file a certificate of urgency in the appellate court and appeal against the decision. I would like the Government to reinstate our sovereignty; otherwise, people will just sit in Arusha and say, “close Parliament”. Honourable minister, there is no other way. I think you should defend the sovereignty of Uganda.

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, indeed we are all disturbed by the action of the court in Arusha. As Government, we have instructed the Attorney-General to appeal immediately so that our sovereignty is protected. There should be a way of resolving this issue- (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek a clarification from my brother, hon. Bahati, the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development. If hon. James Kakooza had not raised this issue, were you comfortable with the situation? (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: We want to appreciate hon. James Kakooza for raising this issue but also inform Parliament that it is an issue that we have already started working on through the Attorney-General. Therefore, whether he had raised it or not, certainly there is no way we could just sit back and see the sovereignty of our country being tampered with. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the gallery we have a delegation of students and professors from the University of Ljubljana in Slovenia. They are visiting Uganda to explore the possibility of collaborations in higher education and other fields. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.08
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, I rise to draw the attention of Government generally, and the Ministry in charge of Karamoja Affairs in particular, to the presence of the Karimojong herdsmen and their alleged associated criminal activities in Omoro Subcounty, Ajuri County, Alebtong District. 

The two leaders of Alebtong, the district woman representative and I, out of courtesy, have written to the ministry. However, I intend, with your permission, to find out from Government what plans they have put in place in the immediate, midterm and long-term, to avert this perennial and annual movement with the associated criminal activities of herdsmen from Karamoja. May we be informed? 

Last year, this issue was raised and the year before, it was also raised, and we have a ministry in charge of the affairs of Karamoja. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister for Karamoja here?

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, the Minister for Karamoja will make a statement tomorrow on this issue and also maybe with the Ministry of Defence.

3.11
MS ANITA AMONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Madam Speaker, I rise on the issue of the reports that are presented in this House. 

We presented a report as the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) on 21 December 2016 to the House and it was approved and recommendations were made. Under rule 217, a report should have been brought back to the House on 21 June 2017. To date, we have not got any report or any recommendations, actions and implementations of the report. On the same note, we also presented a report on the presidential handshake but no action has been taken and no feedback has been given to this House. 

May we know from the minister whether there is any essence in presenting reports and action is not taken?

THE SPEAKER: Treasury memoranda on COSASE reports, December 2016, honourable minister.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to raise a procedural issue. On the list of Members supposed to be members of Cabinet, which came to the Appointment’s Committee, there were over 80 names. Now, hon. Bahati has become the only minister available while these ones- Therefore, Madam Speaker, don’t you think we should appoint hon. Bahati a minister for everything and these ones be deleted from the list? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you should thank hon. Bahati for always being available and knowledgeable on many issues. 

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, you should also inform the former Leader of the Opposition and Secretary General of FDC that I am acting Government Chief Whip. 

Madam Speaker, it is by law that we report back to this House through treasury memoranda on the issues and recommendations made by Parliament on the Auditor-General’s reports. We are working on these treasury memoranda. We will be able to come back here in March with the actions that have been taken on the recommendations, which were made on the handshake report and also on COSASE. Thank you.

MS AMONG: Madam Speaker, we were supposed to have gotten this report in June and we were supposed to get a report in December for the golden handshake report.  Now, the minister is saying we will get it in March. What is the problem? 

Remember, when we are looking at the Budget Framework Paper, we have recommendations that we made on some of the institutions mentioned, like Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), but they have not been implemented up to date. Could we know what the problem is?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the recommendations that were made in the COSASE report and the Auditor-General’s reports are not simple recommendations. Decisions needed to be taken on them and they could not be taken in a week or two because they have far reaching implications.

However, the most important thing is that we are working within the period as speculated by law on when we should come back using treasury memoranda. That is what we are doing.

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to encourage the honourable minister to recognize that the matter we are handling is critical and serious.

Madam Speaker, Uganda today has become one of the most dangerous and evil countries globally and there is documentation to that effect. It is not because of people who do evil but because of people who do nothing about it.

Madam Speaker, the country is what it is today because of the exaggerated and devastating corruption in the country. This House has the mandate to check every expenditure. As a matter of procedure, I would think that we should aggregate all of the recommendations that have been made in this House for actual action. The minister should also be in a position to inform this House about the extent of those implementations-

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Katusabe, the minister has said he is coming to respond by March. He said he is coming with them by March.

MR KATUSABE: Much appreciated, Madam Speaker. However, I am saying that this should not be handled as a standalone. We should have all the select committee recommendations -(Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to rise on the Floor of the House and say that Uganda has become the most evil country in the whole world when just two years ago, Uganda was declared the best destination for tourism? What does he mean by Uganda being the most evil country in the whole world? Is he in order to use this language when describing his country that he loves much? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a country cannot be evil. Hon. Katusabe, please withdraw that reference to the country, and name the evil people and not the country.

MR KATUSABE: Much appreciated, Madam Speaker, for your wise guidance and I will withdraw. However, this is basically backed up with evidence, especially -

THE SPEAKER: Is the country evil? Are the 35 million Ugandans and the 241 square miles of Uganda evil?

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, the country is not evil. I was only saying that we are not taking enough action, but the country is not evil. Thank you.

3.18
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I arise on a matter of national importance regarding petroleum revenue that has accrued to Uganda through the Government. 

One of the principles of Uganda’s fiscal policy, which we are all conversant with, is the management of revenue from petroleum resources and other national resources for the benefit of the current and future generations as contained in Section 4 (2) (c) of the Public Finance Management Act. Additionally, Section 13(10) (a) (i) of the Public Finance Management Act provides that funds can be withdrawn from the Petroleum Fund to finance the national budget.

In the current financial year, 2017/2018, Government indicated that Shs 125 billion was to be withdrawn from the Petroleum Fund to expedite the construction of oil roads and bridges so as to achieve oil production by 2020. This was reflected in the National Budget Framework Paper and subsequent annual budget estimates of the current year. 

It is also expected that the Government publicises the status of the Petroleum Fund in newspapers of wide circulation as required under Section 61 (2) of the Public Finance Management Act. This is so that the country is aware of the status of our oil and the extent of the revenue coming into the country that is being generated for our development activities.

Madam Speaker, the Budget Framework Paper under review, which was tabled before Parliament yesterday, is silent on the Petroleum Fund and we do not know what that implies. Does it mean that Ugandans should not expect to benefit from the Petroleum Fund in the Financial Year 2018/2019 through the annual budget in terms of infrastructural and development projects as stipulated in Section 13 (10), which I quoted above?

Madam Speaker, even Section 59(3) of the Petroleum Finance Management Act requires that Government should tell us the status of the Petroleum Fund. I live in Bunyoro - it is no secret to many of you - and I get a lot of information regarding the activities around the oil areas. I have been informed that trucks upon trucks ferry goods from the oil area and they operate between 8.00 p.m. and 5.00 a.m. almost daily.

When this House was informed about the export of sand, people doubted. I am now giving you the information I receive as a person who is interested in the affairs that affect Bunyoro, because we are the ones giving you the oil at the moment. 

This issue raises some questions in the minds of Ugandans like you and me. Does Government receive any funds from the petroleum activities being undertaken in the country? We are also asking whether the oil that has been discovered or its associated products are being traded stealthily or not. The status of the Petroleum Fund needs to be exposed not only to Parliament but even through the newspapers. Funds will be withdrawn from the Petroleum Fund to finance the national budget. 

Madam Speaker, I urge this House to take interest in the following:

1. 	We want the Government to disclose an incorporation of the status of the Petroleum Fund in the National Budget Framework Paper and budget estimates.

2. 	Development of an investment profile detailing prioritised infrastructure and development projects be tabled in Parliament as required by law. Development of a petroleum revenue investment policy anchored on the investment profile should also be brought before Parliament.

3. 	The Government must appoint an investment advisory committee that advises the minister responsible for finance on the utilisation of the Petroleum Fund.

4. 	We want adequate anchoring of oil reporting requirements as detailed by the Public Finance and Accountability Act, which was authored by the Ministry of Finance and approved by this Parliament.

Madam Speaker, my attention has been drawn, for the purpose of information, to article - (Interjections) - If there are people who are interested in reopening the debate on Article 102(b) - (Laughter) - that will be for another Parliament. I am referring you to the Public Finance Management Act, Section 62, which will guide you on all these matters that I have detailed before you.

Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter because the Budget Framework Paper, which is the foundational document upon which all the budget estimates will be based, is silent on the petroleum revenue and that causes suspicion. That is why I am raising this as a matter of national importance, and particularly based on the fact that I am receiving a lot of rumours of goods being ferried from the oil area in numerous trucks and we do not know what is being ferried. Therefore, Madam Speaker, the people of Uganda are entitled to know what is going on with the oil, which we are mining at the moment. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. I want to say that during the last session – or was it the last Parliament - we pressurised the ministry to come here and report on the Petroleum Fund. Why do we have to pressurise you when it is there in the law? 

I also do not know whether the Government did what we had agreed to during the debate, to join Transparency International Initiative - You have not done it. Thirdly, we are now demanding for the report on the Petroleum Fund and the nocturnal activities, if they are there. Thank you.

3.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, regarding the expenditure of oil revenue, certainly we came to Parliament and the provision that was made, the Shs 125 billion, was made according to the law. 

In regard to reporting, Madam Speaker, we thank you for raising this issue. According to the law, we shall put this information on our website as early as Tuesday next week. 

On the issue of the rumours that there are people selling our oil from the oil region, the Minister of Internal Affairs should take the lead to inform the whole country because this is a very serious rumour from a senior citizen. Therefore, the Minister of Internal Affairs should work with the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to inform the House. Otherwise, I highly doubt that our oil is being stolen at night. I highly doubt that rumour, Madam Speaker.

MR HAMSON OBUA: The point of order I would like to raise is on the dress code. Madam Speaker, rule 81 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda prescribe the dress code for Members while transacting business on the Floor. May I know whether the hon. Samson Lokeris is properly dressed according to the provisions of rule 81 of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament? Is he in order to dress the way he has done, like a herdsman? Can he rise up and we see him?

THE SPEAKER: Can I see hon. Lokeris? He is dressed in African attire; it is an African suit. (Laughter) 

3.30
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank you for making this an organised House that speaks for the people of Uganda. 

I would like to implore my colleagues to realise that outside there, if it has missed their eyes, the fuel pump price in this country has surged. Since December, the price has risen by over Shs 900 for both diesel and petrol. This definitely translates into fuel-driven inflation. 

The prices of consumables have started going high. As one of the aids of production, of course fuel drives up prices. As you realise, children are returning to school very soon. Therefore, the cost of maintenance at schools will go high and will be reflected in the school dues that we shall pay. 

In this country, there is less consumer protection. When you compare our pump price with that of our neighbours in the East African region, including those countries that are landlocked such as South Sudan where there is war, Rwanda and Eastern Congo, their fuel prices are still low. We do not know what is happening in Uganda. The price of crude oil per barrel has only increased by a few dollars but even when it dropped to $40 per barrel, the pump price in Uganda remained the same. 

We have always been informed that we have fuel reserves in Uganda but we do not know their status. Even before that is closed, Madam Speaker, it is in this same Parliament where we have been told that the people that have local debts accrued as a result of war and instability in South Sudan would be paid. However, their property has been foreclosed and they have lost business yet the finance minister is always here making responses to - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we talked about the fuel, please. Let us deal with the cost of living of the people.

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, the people we represent in this city and the taxpayers are facing the same problems. Imagine a person who is trying to set up another business and also has a debt that Government undertook to pay -

THE SPEAKER: You can bring that one in the other debate. I want us to focus on the fuel cost. That one can be brought up during our debate on the budget.

MR NSEREKO: Okay, Madam Speaker. As I was saying, the cost of fuel has surged and is definitely being reflected on the cost of goods because prices have gone up too. The decimal indices that have gone up may look minimal but the wages of people that work and serve this nation have not risen. Therefore, as the pump prices go up, their real income continues to narrow and the aggregate demand in this country continues to contract.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I ask the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to update the country on why Uganda is experiencing high fuel prices. Let us come back to that issue later. Let us now go to item No.3.

LAYING OF PAPERS

MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Parliamentary Commission Annual Report for the Financial Year 2016/2017. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report is committed to the relevant committee for perusal and they will give us an update. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR FY 2018/19–2022/23

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, yesterday we asked for the committee reports. They were taken to the Committee on Budget but we had wanted them to be laid here so that they become part of our record and we would be able to access them from here. 

Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the chairperson of the Committee on Budget to lay on the Table the reports of the committees, which he received when they appeared before his committee?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do appreciate the concerns raised yesterday. However, it seems that we may have to adjust our Rules of Procedure because the official committee that reports here is the Committee on Budget. If we want the sectoral committees to also have their reports examined here, we shall have to amend the rules. 

Therefore, while I appreciate the problem, let us for now leave it as it is and deal with the report. However, we instruct the Committee on Rules and Privileges to examine the situation because it is a matter of concern. I do not know whether we expect the committees to give oral reports or written reports. We did not say anything about that in the rules. Therefore, there is some grey area, which I think we need to refine.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I just want to give clarification. Many members of the sectoral committees blame the Committee on Budget for not incorporating their concerns. They feel that the Committee on Budget got information but ignored it and have come up with different estimates. Therefore, I think the concerns of the Members, which were raised yesterday, should be taken seriously. 

The Committee on Budget should be able to receive sector reports, which have been approved by the respective committees and signed by the respective committee members, so that they are committed to the report submitted to the Committee on Budget. Otherwise, if the chairman and the clerk to the committee author a report, which has not been discussed and debated by the members, there can be an assumption that the Committee on Budget is manipulating figures.

While this has already happened, I plead that in future, the Committee on Budget should not consider any sector report unless the members of that committee have duly signed it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you cannot take that decision on behalf of the Committee on Budget. Let us ask the Committee on Rules and Privileges to examine all the scenarios - Should it be signed, should it be oral or should it be the whole committee to come? Let us refine those areas.

There are some grey areas we need to refine but for now, let us debate. However, the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline must address this issue before the close of this session.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you are right when you say that. However, whenever a committee sits, they write minutes and when they come here they lay those minutes on the Table. Now we want to assume the reports were the minutes of the committee because they must have got something to work on from them. Therefore, the minutes of the committee should be those reports of the -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I agree with you but let the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline state that in the rules. Let them state that the reports should be signed and brought here because that is their work. I am not saying it is not important but let us do it properly.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I seek further guidance. Under this multiparty system, removing a chairperson of a committee has become very difficult. I am a member of the Budget Committee but I can state that I am also listening to the report from here together with others. I do not know where it was written from. 

Therefore, I do not know if you could direct the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to amend the rules. Whereas the multiparty dispensation is dividing us, there should be remedies we can seek directly from the Speaker’s Office because we are also only listening to the report now together with other Members.

THE SPEAKER: I will invite the chairperson of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to listen and when the committee sits, please go and present your views there; they will be captured and agreed on by this House - I cannot give the dates but I have instructed them. I am not the chairperson of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, but I know he is here and all the other members are here.

MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, can I provide information? I am a member of the Budget Committee and I want to clear the air. 

Madam Speaker, as a committee, we have been sitting; maybe my colleague has been away. However, there is also a majority and minority report and all are duly signed.

Madam Speaker, what I can observe is that we need to remove that lacuna. Members also complained to the Budget Committee that some chairpersons alienated them in the final decisions on their reports.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have instructed the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to listen to all the views and bring a proposal to this House, which we shall discuss and agree upon. Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for accepting me to raise this procedural matter. I am member of the Committee on Education and indeed, we have not submitted our report to the Budget Committee and yet there is a report here.

Madam Speaker, hon. Kaberuka was with us yesterday and I know the rules. Maybe the chairperson, hon. Safia Nalule, can update us on how many committees have submitted -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, the report was presented yesterday. Please, take your seat.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is not far from what hon. Ssewungu has said regarding the issues that were raised yesterday. Rule 170 (3) (e) is about the functions of the Budget Committee and it says that the committee should “scrutinize the proposed annual budget and harmonise recommendations of the House on the reports of the sectoral committees on ministerial policy statements.” 

Now, the chairman has already submitted but some Members are still complaining that they did not sign reports and did not conclude. I sit on the finance committee and I can testify that we did not conclude our meetings. I did not see both the draft and the final reports. We have not produced the report. Therefore, I really do not know -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am going to call for the registers of all the committees to establish who attended the meetings and who did not.

3.45
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, PWD National): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to make my comments on the Budget Framework Paper, which was presented yesterday. 

Madam Speaker, Section 9 of the Public Finance Management Act calls for gender and equity sensitive budgeting. This is to happen during the development of the National Budget Framework Paper and the Sector Budget Framework Papers. Indeed, the finance ministry is required to issue a certificate of gender and equity compliance –(Interjections)– They submitted it, though late. 

Most importantly, the Public Finance Management Act requires that this certificate must specify measures taken to equalise opportunities for men and women, persons with disability, et cetera. Since the enactment of the Public Finance Management Act and the issuance of this certificate, this requirement has never been observed. The best the ministry and the commission have done this financial year is to provide percentages of compliance and when a sector gets 50 per cent plus, it passes.

However, Madam Speaker, we have observed that when a sector observes only the issues of gender, for example, it always passes even though the other issues of equity are left out. It is also said in the certificate that sectors like ICT never comply. For social sectors like education, agriculture, health, at the close of their submissions in the Budget Framework Paper they all say that it was a challenge for them to comply with gender and equity budgeting.

What actually was very hurting to me was to see a sector like education clearly spelling out all the subsectors, the responsible technical officers and the budget vote but regarding special needs education, it never did anything.

Madam Speaker, we are here to discuss this Budget Framework Paper and pass it, but it is so hurting to some of us to always come here every financial year to pass these budgets when the concerns of our constituents are not catered for. My prayer is that between now and the 15th of March, when we are going to receive the ministerial policy statements, can I request that all the sectors receive our concerns so as they can readjust because they are breaking the law? I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

3.47
MR GORDON BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. While the chairman was presenting the report, he said that there was a shift from output to programme-based budgeting. In view of that, where is our role as Members of Parliament in terms of oversight? When one talks about programme-based budgeting, it is so broad that even Members of Parliament may not know what is going on, and we shall always be under the mercy of the technocrats. 

What happened to output-based budgeting? How will people in my constituency, deep in the village, know that the Government has budgeted to build a classroom block? If one said today’s programme-based budgeting would enable us do something for Universal Primary Education (UPE), how will Members of Parliament and other local leaders be accountable in terms of this budget? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.49
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for doing a thorough job in validating and making recommendations on the Budget Framework Paper. At the same time, I would like to also thank the National Planning Authority for their input in this budget. 

Madam Speaker, from the comments and evaluations, and when you go through the Budget Framework Paper, it is clear that we should be more committed to deliver this country from a peasantry economy to a middleclass status. We made a promise to Ugandans to deliver this country to a middle-income status come 2020. However, with all these high levels of a mismatch in the budget, the likelihood is that we shall not attain our target of 2020. This mismatch need not be over emphasised. 

Madam Speaker, when you look at the economic trend where kick-start economic policies have been mixed with stimulant economic policies, this mixture has not been adequately applied. It therefore must be revisited. We should invest and take advantage of our natural resources as an economy, which is moving towards a middle income status. We should also invest more funds in money-making industries like agriculture, tourism, energy and mineral development. However, when you look at the budgets of these sectors, agriculture has been allocated 3.1 per cent of the national budget, which does not match because the sector employs 70 per cent of the population. 

Madam Speaker, when it comes to domestic arrears, this current financial year we had Shs 300 billion in domestic arrears. In this National Budget Framework Paper, we have Shs 302 billion as domestic arrears. This is money meant for traders - where people have borrowed money from commercial banks. It is money which has overstayed and banks are foreclosing on the traders. We all say that we do not see money circulating; it is because of these domestic arrears. 

My humble appeal to the Government is that they should clear domestic arrears as they had promised to do in the first quarter, which was never done. They should also clear domestic arrears with interest because the same money bears interest from commercial banks. 

On the issue of Uganda Development Bank, we heard this before so it is high time the Government capitalised it. We are talking about agro industries but where shall we get the capital? It is through this development bank that we can get capital to start value addition of products from these agro industries. This is very serious because we are moving towards industrialisation of this country and we would like to employ more people with time. Therefore, the Uganda Development Bank must be fully capitalised.  Last financial year we said the same but up to now we are saying the same. It is high time action is taken. 

On cooperatives, we have Masaka Cooperative Union whose compensation has not been done from 1987 to date. Masaka Cooperative Union at one time was the biggest cooperative union, employing people from all regions, but now it is closed and down the line - 25 years –(Member timed out.)

3.54
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga East County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I would like to take this opportunity to also commend the committee for presenting a good report. I have a few observations to make on the report and specifically on payment reforms. 

The committee recommends that there is need for a comprehensive review of salaries in the entire public service. Madam Speaker, it is very true that if we are to reduce these constant strikes and demonstrations in the public sector, there must be a comprehensive mechanism of addressing salaries disparities. In the case of my district, I have a hospital called Kagadi Hospital that has got only one doctor. It was built in 1960s and it is now serving almost seven districts. However, doctors do not want to work in such an area and yet we are looking at the exportation of such services to other countries. If the National Budget Framework Paper works on reviewing salaries for the public service, that would be the best.

Secondly, we looked at honorarium. If the honorarium for sub-county councillors and chairpersons can be included, then that will be the best. The best subcounty today in Uganda gives allowances of only Shs 20,000 to Shs 40,000. I think this is too low. If it is captured, that would be the best.  

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I would like to talk about the operationalisation of administrative units. It is true that Government has promised a number of districts and town councils. Over 200 town councils within the country were promised. We want to concur with the committee on the fact that Government must find funds to fund town councils and the 13 districts because these are promises that were made by this Government. I thank you.
3.57

MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Budget for the elaborate report they have presented, although I have some few concerns.

One, the committee observed that the outputs in this budget framework did not match with the National Development Plan and the specific plans of each sector. We spend a lot of money planning and coming up with five-year development and strategic plans. If the ministries are now using different outputs, why do we waste our resources to develop those plans?

My next concern is what the Budget Committee said, that we are growing poorer and poorer every year. We are supposed to reach a middle income status in 2022, why then are we becoming poorer? I think our priorities are misplaced. I do agree that we need infrastructure - we need roads and electricity - but I think the most important thing, which we should emphasise is the development of human capital. The Chinese developed because they emphasised a lot of education and skills training. Merely giving people skills without changing their mind-set is a waste of time. 

There is also the issue of the health of the people. If people are unhealthy and there are no drugs in health centres and hospitals, who will carry out production? Therefore, we really need to change. Yes, we have put a lot of money on roads but it is not being used properly. Over one trillion shillings is going to be returned to the Treasury and yet if we had given it to the education or health sector, it would have been used properly.

Madam Speaker, we got angry with the Committee on Budget because they did not consider our concerns. We wasted two weeks scrutinising this report so as to give our input on the Budget Framework Paper but all was wasted. Let us give an example of the education sector; they may say that they need money for skills development, but you will find money for the same purpose in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and even in the President’s office budget. 

If we could consolidate and improve on our vocational education by having a polytechnic in each subcounty and an institution in each constituency, I think many more of our young men would be trained. Actually, training has become expensive because people have to pay a lot of money. Students stop in senior four or senior six and they do not go for further training –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am glad the Minister of Education and Sports is here. Yesterday we talked about preparing for the oil industry, but it seems we do not have focused training. Recently, I was talking to a friend of mine; she is a Ugandan who works in the World Bank. She was touring the World Bank projects in the region and she went to a technical school in Nairobi where they are training people in oil. She asked them whether there was oil in Kenya and they responded, “No, we are going to work in Uganda.” (Laughter) 

This is serious, honourable members. Kenyans are preparing their people to come and work here. What are we doing for our people? They are preparing; they are training them. 

4.00
MS ROSE MUTONYI MASAABA (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a problem with the Ministry of Finance in relation to the National Budget Framework Paper. I do not know why they have lumped Ministry of Foreign Affairs with the Electoral Commission and the President’s office. I do not know how they match. 

This is one way of undermining the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. We have been crying and requesting for funds in order to sell the image of Uganda outside the country but they are not giving us money. They have removed us from being a fully-fledged sector. They are now calling it “the public administration sector” and they have hidden the Ministry of Foreign Affairs there. 

We are looking at Uganda’s image outside. We have dilapidated buildings. We have pieces of land, which the Government is not purchasing and then in the end we lose out. We have a plot in the United States of America, for example, where we had to pay $5 million. We have not paid and the Government of the United States of America says that they are not going to give us security where we are because it is not in the diplomatic area. Therefore, Ministry of Finance, can you please separate the funds for Ministry Foreign Affairs from that block and give them the maximum required support so that the image of Uganda improves?

Madam Speaker, they are talking about commercial diplomacy. We have been begging and they only gave us a few missions. We asked for 16 missions and then we roll out the rest, but they are not saying anything. Every time, they refer to this as an unfunded priority. Is that why you are undermining the Ministry of Foreign Affairs?

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I want to support emoluments for LC III councillors because really come out with nothing. 

Thirdly, I would like to seek clarification from the Ministry of Works and Transport on the Northern By-Pass. When driving on that road and you want to access Namugongo or any other route, you have to go for around six kilometres before you get an access road. When driving on a flyover, there is no way you can access the lower roads. Is there any plan for improvement or are we going to remain like that? Now that they are constructing the road, we really want to have easy access by either going up to join the flyover or going down off the flyover. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.03
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I was disturbed yesterday when I learnt that out of the four centres of excellence in technical education, three are going to western Uganda –(Interjections)– Are they six? 

Madam Speaker, you are aware, from several reports, that the poverty levels in eastern Uganda, where you come from and where my senior brother, hon. Nandala, and I come from, are bad. Why can’t there be equitable distribution of resources? (Applause) I do not know whether the technical officers are intentionally causing this Government to be hated.

Madam Speaker, I will give an example. The President promised a school in Bunghanga - Bunghanga Primary School. The Tarehe Sita celebrations were supposed to be at Bunghanga but they had to shift the President. For how long shall we shift the President? Honourable Minister of Education and Sports, please handle the issue of Bunghanga Primary School.

Madam Speaker, I was happy when the committee chairperson said there is need to merge some agencies. We have some executive directors who are getting over Shs 50 million but doing nothing. The honourable member mentioned NEMA and NFA. However, do not merge Rural Electrification Agency (REA) because at least those gave us some power in the villages. When will Government merge these agencies because some of them are duplicating services?

Minister of Works and Transport, we resolved the issue of the Bukungu-Kagwara-Kaberamaido (BKK) Ferry. If it is not provided for here, why should we pass this budget? Why? 

Madam Speaker, as we talk now the people of Butaleja, Nagongera and Namutumba have no tarmac roads. Minister, you can’t even tarmac five kilometres of road per town council and at least people go away with something. Why do you waste time - every time on oil roads in the west? Why? 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of the newly created town councils, we have already told people and on the 6th people are going to ask the President about the town councils. Where you will get the money is not our issue; the issue is the town councils. Why do you want Members of Parliament to be hated like they are the ones who refused these administrative units to take off?

Madam Speaker, on the issue of the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE) – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute for you to conclude on SAGE.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Ministry of Finance, why can’t you resolve this? If Government cannot roll out SAGE in the whole country, scrap it. This is because some people think Members just sit here and do not talk about SAGE, which is not correct. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, on the issue of counter funding, the other time Government told us they would renovate Busolwe Hospital. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, did you get counter funding or it is only the projects in the east, especially in Butaleja, which lack counter funding?

Madam Speaker, the issue of salary increment is a time bomb. Government should not segregate workers by saying they are only increasing salaries for health workers, for example. If police would rise up to strike, you would see how this country will go on riot. I would like to request Members; unless these issues are put to order, we should not come here to rubberstamp and pass this budget. We can differ it. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.11
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to first of all make some corrections. 

One, under the Ministry of Works and Transport there are roads which they named wrongly and I wish to correct that. In their presentation, they say road No.7 is the Kasese-Nyakalingijo but it is supposed to be Mubuku-Nkenda-Nyakalingijo-UWA Gate. Secondly, road No.15 in their presentation is not supposed to be Kasese-UWA Gate; it is supposed to be Rugendabara-Kasangali-Mbua Hot springs Road

THE SPEAKER: Are they in the Budget Framework Paper?

MR NZOGHU: Yes, they are there, Madam Speaker. 

In the Ninth Parliament we grappled with the issue of physical planning for the Albertine Graben. We even went ahead to secure a loan but up to today, they are still fumbling with physical planning in the Albertine Graben. They are simply doing piecemeal planning for particular areas where they pick interest and yet the basis on which the loan was acquired was that the entire Albertine Graben should be planned, so that the oil should not become a curse to the oil graben but rather be a source of development that is planned and organised. Therefore, Madam Speaker, it would be prudent that in this financial year, 2018/2019, projections, they should be able to tell us why they are doing piecemeal planning as opposed to comprehensive planning of the area.

The third aspect, Madam Speaker, is to do with the budget for technical training for the district road unit operators. Government acquired a loan to procure road units but as I speak, the engines of some of the road units have started knocking because the operators are not well trained and yet that money was provided for in the loan. Government knows that it is very critical to manage and purchase a road unit but I do not know why they continue to use – (Member timed out.)

4.15
MS ROBINA SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is on the sector Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) allocation for financial year 2018/2019. When you look at the budget the committee chairman tabled yesterday, the total sectoral allocation was overall projected to drop, although he continued to say that it was a share to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP).

Madam Speaker, my other concern is on the decision that was made regarding which sector will grow and which sector will drop off. One of those that were projected to decline is a very important sector - the health sector. The health sector has been projected to decline by 7.4 per cent, at the very time we are in our committees trying to budget for health and trying to project where we can improve. 

Honourable members, you have been to various regional and district hospitals as well as health centres IV and III; most of them are in devastating situations. Recently, we went to Nakaseke Hospital, which serves a big area, and there is a lot they need. 

Recently, medical officers went on strike because of the failure by Government to increase their salaries. The response from the Government was that in the current budget, there was no money to increase their salaries. 

Madam Speaker, in this new budget, we are expecting an increase in the allocation to health, to go towards increasing the salaries of medical officers and facilitating the management of many epidemics that are on the rise.  There is an increase in cases of hepatitis B, cancer and also Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever. Therefore, we propose that there should be an extensive programme of sensitisation and an improvement of health facilities. I heard that Arua and Gulu hospitals are in devastating situations.

Madam Speaker, I am concerned about the projected decline in the health sector, by 7.4 per cent. I think it is not wise to increase the increase the budget for other sectors and leave out the health sector. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.18
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to base my contribution on the issue of equity. We are sent here to represent people from the different districts and regions of this country. 

I would like to start with Special Assistance Grants for the Elderly (SAGE). The committee’s recommendation on page 85 says that for the national rollout to take place, Cabinet should consider the option and allocate Shs 47.07 billion. If the committee up to now is still referring us to Cabinet and yet the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development sits in Cabinet, then I do not know when the Cabinet is going to sit to scrutinise the national rollout of the SAGE programme.

Further, I have an issue with the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, which was laid on the Table yesterday. The issue of arrears is also not captured and yet the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development committed to the donors that this money will be found. At an appropriate time, I will lay that document on the Table. For now, I would like to request the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to tell us when Cabinet is going to sit to handle the recommendation of the committee so that SAGE – (Interruption)

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you, honourable member, for giving me way. The information I would like to give to the honourable member is that this House should know that the donors that are counter funding the SAGE programme have given us up to March. If we do not find money for SAGE, they will withdraw. 

Therefore, as we think about the next budget, if we cannot find money for SAGE, the donors are going to withdraw and it is a lot of money. This is the information I wanted to give.
	
MR CENTENARY: Thank you for giving way. For the information of this Parliament, the Minister of State for Gender, Labour and Social Development, hon. Peace Mutuuzo, had pledged that the SAGE programme was going to be rolled out this current financial year in five districts, which include Kasese, but that has not happened. They are even now promising to rollout to five more districts. She was requested to come and make a statement about the national rollout in the previous session and that has not happened.

Therefore, I would like to know if she defied the ruling of the Speaker, because she has not appeared to make good the promise that she made to come and give a status on the national rollout plan by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

MS ALUM: Thank you, honourable colleagues. What we are advocating for is the money for the national rollout because we have older people in the entire country. That is what we want. If arrears have not been paid, we are advocating that they should be paid and then we shall call ourselves Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, when you look at the technical colleges that this budget is proposing, there are three in the western region, one in the northern region and in the east, where the wise are supposed to come from, there is nothing. (Laughter) In Buganda, there are only two –(Interruption)
	
MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, honourable colleagues have continuously raised issues of regional imbalance and equity. In the last Parliament, we had a motion moved by a Member on affirmative action in Busoga and no implementation was done to that effect. In Bunyoro, we have a ministry without any funding. Teso has challenges. In 2005, the constitutional amendment was to effect that regional governments should be put in place. 

The procedural point I am raising is: Now that issues of regional imbalance are increasingly dividing this country and the budget does not seem to address it, would Government want to inform this Parliament on this issue? If, for example, Kampala City is getting interventions because they are a city, why don’t we have a law to have other cities so that Lango gets interventions through its city, Arua gets through its city, Mbale gets through its city - Those would be regional tier cities? -(Interjection) - I am a westerner but part of the excluded western of Buliisa. 

The procedural point I am raising is: why don’t we operationalise this in line with the constitutional amendment, which provided for regional tiers, and the Country Planning Act? Why don’t we implement the regional cities and tiers so that every region gets equitable development instead of Cabinet giving to those who make noise and those who are quiet are left out? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what you have raised is important. However, I think we shall need a motion on that issue. Busoga region was the first to lay their charter on the Table. Lango followed and now Bunyoro has joined. I would like to suggest that we should arrange for a motion for that debate so that we can discuss it. 

Hon. Alum, your issue has been taken. However, just to compliment what she brought forward. In November, I was pressurised to go to London to the Commonwealth Office to lobby so that the Department for International Development (DFID) does not withdraw from the SAGE programme. I had to go there to beg them. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should not let me down. I informed them that the programme is very necessary, running well and we all want it. It should cover the entire country and they should not withdraw.  

4.26
MS ANITA AMONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine concerns the banking sector in relation to agricultural credit funding.

Madam Speaker, recently, in our committee, we looked at the issue of agricultural credit funding. The participating financial institutions discriminate. I must commend the minority report for bringing out this issue. The minority report is bringing out issues of discrimination because few people are getting these loans. It is only commercial farmers benefitting from loans, and they also say that it is only people from the western and central regions that are benefitting. That still brings in the issue of equity. 

When we looked at this report on agricultural credit funding under Bank of Uganda, there is poor monitoring of these funds. There are “ghosts” who got this money. We have a case where somebody claimed to have got a loan and when we followed it up, that person is non-existent.

Therefore, as we plan for this money, we must take into consideration the recommendation that has been given by the minority report about establishing funds under the National Bank for Agricultural Transformation. This is because the financial institutions regard these as a high risk area and they find themselves even charging more money than what is expected. Evaluation of these loans is not done properly by the participating financial institutions. 

4.28
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have only three issues to raise since we are limited by time.

I want to begin from page 38 of the main report of the Committee on Budget, which mentions water for agricultural production. This House has pronounced itself on water for production every year. In this Parliament, Members, especially those who come from drought prone areas, have always cried out about having irrigation schemes and programmes extended especially to rural areas so that farmers do not rely on rainfall.

I see only Shs 20 billion being committed here this coming financial year. I wonder whether this Shs 20 billion will really be able to extend enough of these most needed facilities. Still under water for production, I have not seen any indication of the Budget Committee or maybe the sectoral committee that is in charge of water specifically for animals. On dams, we have always appropriated money for desilting dams. I come from an area that gets affected whenever it is a dry season from lack of water for animals. My 16 sub counties, especially when it is a dry season, do not have water for their animals. So, we really need to provide dams especially in the districts that have this crisis.

My final issue, Madam Speaker, is about SAGE. My district Agago is one of the beneficiary districts but there are issues I want to raise before this Parliament that we will support the suggestion by hon. Waluswaka. Even the districts that are benefitting from this SAGE programme are getting a lot of difficulties. For instance, the selection, which takes place of 100 people per subcounty is bringing a lot of conflicts. The leaders are getting difficulties in selecting the elderly persons. 

Whenever they call for people to come, about 5,000 of these elderly persons come and gather in the sub county. Then they begin to say, “Let us consider those who are 100 years and above.” They separate 99 year olds from 80 year olds and 79 year olds. When the list is full, the rest of the elderly persons go back without being included on the list.

Therefore, the issue of equity and universal provision for this money for elderly must be looked at very carefully. I see in the report, a provision for only Shs 42 billion to roll out countrywide and also make it universal, instead of selecting a few individuals per subcounty. This would work and I think this Parliament cannot fail to get Shs 42 billion so that every district gets this SAGE programme and every elderly person beginning from the age of 65 years and above benefits from this programme.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that this Parliament resolves that we find this money. We allocate it such that even the donors who have threatened to pull out -(Member timed out.)

4.33
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will seek your indulgence for a few minutes. The budget is for allocation and I think before we pass this document, we should look at allocation region by region. If you take it that the total budget is Shs 29.3 trillion, at the end of the day, it is a few individuals who will benefit. Those who voted hon. Nandala or hon. Kaberuka would not have benefitted.

The reason I am raising this is that people tend to want to hide under block figures, claiming that we are doing well, yet some other areas are generally marginalised. This is a serious matter; the budget is a big tool, which really shows the allocation of resources.

I commend both the main and minority reports. I do not see why the chairman of the committee would not agree to incorporate many of the issues raised in the minority because they are justifiable.

We have a debt problem. We have NAADS issues. We have issues concerning over-pricing, corruption and others. The committee should have incorporated these points.

Madam Speaker, I will start from domestic debt, which is now Shs 12 trillion and external debt is over Shs 42 trillion. That means that our total debt is Shs 56 trillion. In this budget, we are going to spend Shs 12 trillion to service the debt by paying the Treasury bill, which is Shs 5 trillion; interest payment will be Shs 2.7 trillion and other refinancing – paying back the external debt is about Shs 4 trillion. So, that is about Shs 12 trillion yet, URA is going to collect Shs 13.3 trillion.

This shows that the balance will only be Shs 3.3 trillion. It means to finance a budget of Shs 29.3 trillion, we need to borrow Shs 14 trillion. This country shows that we are living in debt and we are building debt stock. As we speak now, the biggest call on our budget is debt payment. Education and agriculture, nothing. It means we are working for debts and unless we decide to make a decision about debt, we are finished.

I think the Parliament has capacity to do that. If we do not curtail consumption and deal with production, then we are finished. That is the reason I want us to look at this budget in a realistic way - where the sector is only for consumption, we cut it down and invest money in production. You have talked about agriculture, tourism and that would be the best way to move.

Madam Speaker, I am from a coffee growing area. Every year, we get 10 million seedlings of coffee, according to NAADS and Operation Wealth Creation. That means those are 10,000 stems of coffee. I want to compute from the day we started producing them and take an example that every tree produces two kilogrammes. That means by now, if we have planted 10 million for the last ten years, we have planted 100 million trees. 

A hundred million times two kilogrammes per tree means we should be talking about two trillion kilogrammes of coffee but we are crying of 20 million kilogrammes. It shows these coffee trees we are talking about are never delivered and it clearly shows that NAADS and Operation Wealth Creation is busy stealing money in the names of people of Uganda. This should be really done quickly and an additional audit must be done.

I am raising this because the situation is worsening. The other day, I saw a letter written by somebody that the President had directed that every district should give nine heifers to NRM youth executives. That really brings another question; does it mean the opposition do not pay taxes? 

It clearly shows if you start doing it like that, then I do not know the reason we brought multi-party political system. That is criminal. I ask those doing it to quickly think about it and change that policy because Uganda belongs to all of us. We also have multi-party political system in our Constitution unless we delete it. 

The National Agricultural Advisory Services needs a serious audit and that is one of the areas of theft of public resources. That equally applies to UNRA, the place where money is being wasted. If you compare how much we put there and how much we get out, at the end of the day, we are in a problem. UNRA, where we have a saved person at the top, I am sure she never went there to be used as a conduit to take the money. We must do things in the right way. Uganda National Roads Authority and procurement must be dealt with.

Madam Speaker, I would have expected the Budget Committee to have come up - I know hon. Lugoloobi is a very educated man since he is near eastern Uganda. We have what is called “the budget”, “the actual” and “the variance” so that we know what happens in the variance. However, as we are speaking now, we are only saying we need to appropriate money. How did we perform previously? I would have been happier if the committee came up with better appropriation. It should have also come up with a better idea about tax collection because we get our income through tax collection.

The biggest problem we now have in Uganda is tax evasion. The Ugandans paying taxes are not well connected but those who are well connected are not paying. The Chinese and Indians are not paying taxes. When they evade, they take money out. Therefore, I would have been happier if the committee had recommended serious sanctions on tax evasion because it is one of the leading items in this country. If we do not deal with it, we are really finished. 

Madam Speaker, poverty is a serious issue and it is brought by unemployment. For example, if the Uganda Police Force employs 100,000 people and 70,000 are coming from one region, that means 70 per cent of the budget of police goes to one region and only 30 per cent remains for the other regions. This means the regions getting 30 per cent will remain poor because a big number is sharing very little.

Therefore, this unemployment issue must be dealt with also. How fast can we curb corruption so that money is available to invest in production and to also allow employment to be done equitably? I have been to some offices where the officers speak one local language. How can the people in an office speak one local language as if they were meant for that office? That is unfair and we must stop it now. (Interjections) Yes, they speak Lugisu and it is very unfair the language they speak is only from one area –(Member timed out.)

4.41
MR PATRICK KASUMBA (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have two issues. The first one is on page 82 of the report where the committee recommends Shs 500 billion to be given to the Land Commission to compensate absentee landlords. My concern here is that we all know there are several land titles that were surrendered to the Land Commission in view of the compensation as far as the development of infrastructure in this country is concerned. Those titles are there and the owners await compensation. 

The committee is looking at the absentee landlords. I do not know from which sites. Is it the absentee landlords from Bunyoro where I come from? What about the landlords whose lands have been taken ever since oil was discovered in Bunyoro? People’s lands have been taken without compensation.

Therefore, I implore the committee to recommend a minimum of Shs 800 billion to compensate the landlords in Bunyoro sub-region. 

My second issue is on page 7 of the minority report. The committee observed that the absorption capacity of some sectors of Government is too low. Specifically, it notes that UNRA’s performance by last year was only 21 per cent of the money that had been allocated to them and yet, the money was acquired through loans. However, there are some sectors of Government, which are in dire need of finances but they are not catered for. A case in point is the Ministry of Bunyoro Affairs, which is not funded. The minister has come up with Bunyoro Development Action Plan which is not funded.

Madam Speaker, I, therefore, implore this committee to consider removing this idle money from UNRA and allocate it to Bunyoro Affairs. I beg to submit.

4.43
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha County East, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the colleague who produced the minority report. Secondly, I would like to state that we have tried to work on the issue of discrimination and that is why we removed the age limit cap. Therefore, we do not want to see discrimination in this budget. (Laughter) We must ensure that all Ugandans benefit equally from the resources of this country because discrimination was an issue during the age limit debate. 

I would like to talk about the Agriculture Credit Facility (ACF). The ACF wants to introduce the issue of agricultural insurance. We are talking about introducing agricultural irrigation but we are not talking about the cost. How much money have we put into environment protection? Where are we going to get the water to irrigate our fields when we are not protecting the sources including the River Nile that generates hydroelectric power for us? It looks like we are more interested in mitigation than working on the question of adaptation. 

Our environment has already been battered. We have lost the battle on environment. Our focus in the budget must be investing more in environment protection than looking at the short term measures. 

My third point is in relation to the regional allocation of resources. I do not know when the West Nile Region last received funds from the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. We have been told the Uganda Tourism Board has never allocated any resources to the West Nile Cluster, a region that has had great tourism potential right from the days of President Idi Amin. 

We had things like the White Rhino Hotel and the Ajai Game Reserve with the white rhino species facilitated by regular domestic flights. All these things have disappeared. As we talk now, West Nile Region is a ghost in terms of tourism activities and yet recently the minister of state was in west Nile visiting on a programme called “Tulambule.” I asked him what he was doing in West Nile when he had not invested anything in the region.

I, therefore, request this Budget Committee to take it back to the Executive that we need investment in tourism especially in the West Nile region in order for our people to address the question of poverty.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would like to talk about two other things; one is electricity. We have been told in these reports that our generation activity has been enhanced, we now have more power than we need. I do not know who has made that statement because Ugandans have generally not been given electricity at a cheap rate neither have they been given access to electricity especially the rural electrification programme.

We have seen a lot of people who do not utilise the energy that this country produces. The Northern region is now the main source of charcoal. We are giving a –(Member timed out.)

4.46
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My first concern is about the issue of civil servants who are being considered by Public Service from hard to reach areas. I do not know whether under the Public Service and Local Government sector, this issue had been exhaustedly discussed.

I was shocked that the list, which the Minister of Public Service came with included areas like Bulambuli, Bududa and others and left out Sironko, which is in the same zone and more that most of the areas that our civil servants are working in are mountainous areas that are hard to reach. Therefore, I would be very happy that this is captured. 

The other point is that I am a Member of the Committee on Presidential Affairs. However, I have observed some of the issues we discuss under some vital sectors like Office of the Prime Minister have been left out. We have been grappling with the issue of resettling our people who were affected by disasters. This is a critical issue because until now, resettlement of the victims of disasters of landslides has not occurred.

We would be very happy that this is handled because we discussed and indeed, we agreed that resettlement of the victims of disasters should be given a priority.

The other issue is about contingency funding. It is something we looked at because in this country whenever we have disasters, we are on fire fighting. There are no funds for emergency response. I hope that these can be captured in the budget. Thank you.

4.49
MS STELLA ATYANG (NRM, Woman Representative Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. My concern is on health budget. I am concerned about why Moroto Referral Hospital is not budgeted for in the National Budget. Last year, in two different meetings with the President with Moroto delegation and Karamoja Parliamentary Group in the presence of different ministries, we were informed that Moroto Referral Hospital is planned to be allocated Shs 5 billion for the second phase construction starting this year.

I am surprised that in this budget, that money is not reflected anywhere or the hospital is not reflected in the budget. I am questioning, where will that money be got from if it is not reflected in the national Budget?

The issue of having Moroto Referral Hospital allocated in this budget is because the in-patients department is in a poor condition. The space of the in-patient department is inadequate to accommodate the turn up of patients that come to the hospital. Thank you.

4.51
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have three issues; the first one concerns Hepatitis B. Many times, when we are allocating resources, we tend to forget allocation of resources towards immunisation. Later on, you find that a number of issues come up. 

Apart from allocation, Hepatitis B treatment has become a challenge but we seem not to be paying attention to one critical area. Many times when people are checked and discovered that one has Hepatitis B, there is need for such a person to undergo series of examination to determine whether such a person qualifies to be put on treatment or not.

However, when you go to most of these regions, these machines which are meant for these examinations are not there. For example, before somebody is treated, the state of this person’s liver whether this person will be allowed to consume more drugs or not must be determined. The state of Hepatitis B virus whether it is active or dormant must also be determined. Many times when these people are tested positive, they are advised to come to Kampala and these are people who are very poor. They cannot travel all the way to Kampala.

I would request that if it was possible, in this current budget, we could look at regions. We would purchase these machines such that in these regional referral hospitals, such patients can come and get this kind of medical check up to ascertain whether they qualify for the treatment or not.

My second point is on page 16 that is related to the statement towards tax. The observation by the committee there is that Government will propose modulate adjustments to the current tax regime to ensure revenue productivity of the tax system.

My concern here particularly is about the determination of who pays tax and who should be exempted. Many times, those who qualify to pay a lot of money are sometimes exempted but also seem to be more of those who cannot pay much tax but yet they are squeezed.

Secondly, the issue of losing tax through investors in some situations, I remember last time when we were trying to allocate resources; some resources were allocated to bailout some of our investors. However then, the initial idea of encouraging these people is and basically for one to create employment and also pay for such taxes.

However, at the end of the day, if you do not get this tax, instead as Government we lose money to bail them out. How beneficial are they to us?

Thirdly, my point is about determination of roads to be under UNRA, districts and sub counties. In the recent floods, many of our bridges have been swept away but you find that a huge bridge that purportedly falls under a sub county and yet, a sub-county does not have capacity to work on these bridges. The money allocated to these sub counties by the Road Fund is around Shs 15 million per quarter and yet it cannot work on some of these bridges. 

My input here is that it would be fine for the Ministry of Works and Transport to carry statistics to find out how many of these kind of bridges are there, that sub-counties cannot work on so that resources are allocated to handle them. They are issues that can be referred to as emergencies. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.55
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is on page 62 in the main report, where it is clearly reported that about 62 per cent of the total population of Ugandans cannot access credit through the normal banks and the only way should have been through SACCOs.

They mentioned about it but there was no action taken and even no figure was given. I propose that at least Shs 50 billion should be budgeted for the SACCOs where the common people can benefit in order to do business at a cheaper price.

The second is from the minority report on page 9, where it is clearly - even today in one of the workshops at Protea Hotel, it was mentioned. How can the cost of one kilo metre under UNRA be almost four times other units in Africa? 

Why don’t we cause a commission of inquiry - because we are losing billions? We are borrowing money to benefit a few individuals who are the shareholders in those companies. 

Madam Speaker, recently, the Committee on National Economy went to Jinja Nile Bridge. The work is almost complete but we are applying for another new loan of $45 million to finish the work. However, according to the minority report consumption of the money we borrowed is not yet over 65 per cent. That should be seriously looked into if we are to balance our budget and to cater for many demands that we are coming up with.

Madam Speaker, on page 15 in the minority report we are wondering when we see that power tariffs are hiking day and night and we are just talking about it but nothing is being done. 

Madam Speaker, you can wonder the way Umeme is handling Ugandans - when I apply for one pole service, I pay only Shs 320,000 the moment you apply for two poles the budget goes to Shs 2 million, which is a direct way of denying Ugandans access to power. 

Something must be done by this Parliament about the issues that are affecting Ugandans before we approve this budget. We went for a loan in order for tariffs to come down but the tariffs are just going up day and night. Even for those who are using it for commercial power –(Member timed out.)

4.58
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWDs, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the committee for the report. However, I have some concerns especially under equity. 

Madam Speaker, 68 per cent of the population of Uganda is in subsistence agriculture and I am aware that the three per cent there is likely to look at commercial agriculture. How are we catering for the women who are down there in the villages doing subsistence agriculture, the people with disabilities who are doing small farming? This budget is focusing at the big farmers, are our people going to die of hunger!

Madam Speaker, in Uganda and on NRM day, the President said that we must promote Buy Uganda Build Uganda (BUBU) but when you look at the budget, there is no effort to promote investors who produce for the local market. 

People are struggling on their own and are being caught up with loans. Much as we are saying that we support BUBU, where do we get the BUBU products when we are not putting enough money to support BUBU industries? 

Madam Speaker, the budget given for education is very little. I come from eastern Uganda where we were the worst performers in national exams but when you look at the budget there is nothing that increases on the inspection of schools, how to promote continuous progressing assessment. What are we doing to support that region?

If we do not invest in the human resource, do not expect to get an outcome of a middle income status because the human resource is very important in delivering these. Unfortunately, we are just weighing money and on the road. And it is the other people who are on the roads working whereas our own children have no jobs; we need to invest money in the right area.

Madam Speaker, in the Ninth Parliament we passed money under a loan on micro financing which was going to support people who were marginalised. Some of us stood here and knowing that that money was going to help our people. I am wondering when it is coming?

We do not need to be duped to always pass things which do not support the majority people down there. When it comes to addressing their issues, they do not even know where to go to get such information. Information itself is limited.

Madam Speaker, last year when we had a lot of hunger irrigation became a song, but when you look at the budget there is nothing for irrigation. The sun is getting hot people are waiting for it to worsen and then we start running around Uganda telling people about irrigation. 

I think there is a very big mismatch in the planning sector and what is on the ground.

5.02
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. My first concern is on the pay reforms and the trade-off identified by Government and I am particularly concerned about the trade-off on freezing new recruitment.

Madam Speaker, there are districts that are operating below the required number of staff; some time the minister of State for Local Government presented a report here and acknowledged low staffing as a challenge in service and mentioned Amudat as operating at 23 per cent.

Madam Speaker, when we ban recruitment in such districts, it is very unfortunate. In Amudat District the technical people are doubling roles. You find that a CDO is a clerk to council; a probation officer also serves as a procurement officer. How do you expect services from such over worked staff?

No wonder UNEB results over the years have been indicating Amudat among the last; even in the recently released PLE results Amudat District was among the worst performing districts. 

The move to freeze recruitment in such districts is unfair instead Government should have a special consideration for those districts and have them staffed.

Madam Speaker, on pest and disease control, there is need to provide funding. We are aware agriculture is the source of livelihood for a majority of our people. In the last planting season in Amudat District, and Karamoja at large, people’s efforts were frustrated by the army worm. I visited some of the villages during that planting season who took me to their gardens to see the crops. They were asking me whether they could continue cultivating. 

Madam Speaker, we had a programme called the Tractor Hire Scheme under the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM), which taught people how to open up big gardens. They had learnt that.  However, with the fall of army worms, they got frustrated. Therefore, Government should provide funds for pests and disease control so that the people’s efforts are not frustrated.

Finally, on FED, I do not concur with the honourable member who says we should scrap it. Instead, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should help us to look for money to roll it out since the beneficiaries in the districts that are having that programme have testified about how good it is. Therefore, look for money for us to roll out the programme countrywide. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before hon. Aogon comes, I want clarification from the Government whether there is still a ban on recruitment. I heard that yesterday from the report.

On Monday, I was with the Deputy Attorney-General at the High Court. He informed the Chief Justice that the ban had been lifted and the Chief Justice was very happy. I want you to tell us what is happening. Is it there or not? The ban on recruitment - I hope he will be able to tell us.

5.08 
MR SILAS AOGON: (Independent, Kumi Municipality): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee first, for the work well done but also let them prepare to receive my remarks because I have made some observations within the report. 

The first issue that I need to raise this evening is that I am not sure whether the recommendations that we make as Parliament are always implemented. For instance, last year, we made so many of them when we were talking about the Budget Framework Paper. However, to what extent did the Government implement our recommendations?

Whenever the Auditor-General brings their report, and Parliament debates them, we ask for the Treasury Memorandum. What happens to these other recommendations that we make? I fear that we are debating in vain since we make recommendations that I am not sure that you implement. That is why we always remain in the same footing without moving away from the reality.

Madam Speaker, I have a challenge with issues of Operation Wealth Creation (OWC), which I think that as a country, we should close down. The reason is that we should do so and open an agricultural bank so that people go there and get money. I am saying so because there is not equitable distribution of these resources. We must close this thing called OWC. It is just a tunnel for taking away money from the people. I do not support it totally. 

I am in a municipality and we all do zero-grazing of animals, we raise a lot of things that we do using our own means. I want to tell members that what we needed to have, for instance, are the fertilisers, give us proper professional extensional services but not to say that they are going to distribute seedlings. These seedlings that are brought to Teso are not bought in Teso. They bring them from other places. How then do we benefit through the procurement process? 

Therefore, to me, we need to close it down and channel that money through other means. If you gave me money, as a Member of Parliament, I would even do a better job than this thing called OWC. It is “poverty creation” and that is what I have seen. 

The second issue regards education and sports. I would like us to separate these two. There is nothing the Government is doing about sports. We are now the ones buying footballs. Nearly all the football pitches in Uganda do not even have goal posts. They are full of anthills. What is the budget for sports here? You only want to say, “They have beaten Uganda again” yet you are not nurturing the sport. What are you doing? There is no talent incubation at all. I am naturally talented but the Government has never supported me in doing anything. Madam Speaker, this perturbs me a lot.

We are talking about health. I would like to suggest that every year, we prioritise one sector. For example, next year, we go to health. Forget about these roads. Let us invest in the health sector by installing equipment in all hospitals. Let us go for the critical ones other than saying, “Tirinyi- poor roads - the other one, poor roads –(Interruption)-

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, I was talking about sports. I would like to welcome hon. Patrick Nsanja who is up in the gallery. He was the captain of our football team in the 9th Parliament. You are welcome. 

5.13
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to start by looking at page 38 and let me read it verbatim. The committee observes that, “Uganda’s agriculture has remained significantly rain-fed and despite recent changes in weather, the country has not invested strategically in irrigation despite the availability of water resources all over the country. Prolonged drought has in the past led to death of animals and crop failure leading to famine across the country”.

Therefore, if the committee observed this and you have experience from the President who even showed you how he can irrigate his land with mineral water bottles, how do you fail to raise money for irrigation?

I was trying to make a calculation here. They are lacking Shs 20 billion. If you buy lorries worth Shs 50 million for every district, you will raise about 400 lorries from the Shs 20 billion. Provide roads for every district so that they can give their people water for irrigation.

The issue of agriculture must be handled very seriously. Let us look at wealth creation. We have these soldiers in our constituencies who do not even know where the maize comes from nor its cost yet they have their redundant vehicles waiting for what comes from Kampala. There are no returns. They do not write reports on the performance of Ugandans after giving them maize or coffee seedlings.

Madam Speaker, you gave us new districts but I do not know why UNRA has failed to distribute these roads equally. Kalungu, Kween and others are new districts - why don’t you put it in your budget that Kalungu and Kween or 15 districts per year will get some new tarmac roads? However, a new district has not a single tarmac road yet everybody is saying, “We gave you a district.” 

There is an old man in my constituency who, from the day the President promised that Shs 20,000, calculated the time in hours, minutes and seconds and says he is demanding Shs 5 million from Government –(Interjections)– I will bring for you that record, Madam Speaker, and one time I will show you that person.

Let me conclude on this before I seek your information. We have 10 army representatives in Parliament who have kept quiet about the increment of allowances for the soldiers, police and prison officers. For these people, because they are under an oath of allegiance, nobody comes out to fight for them. 

I saw hon. Pecos Kutesa earlier on but he has now left. I want to inform this House that I am tired of soldiers and policemen stopping me along the road to fight for their salary increment because we are fighting for teachers in this House. It is on record. These soldiers are working hard including beating us along the road over the Togikwatako. We fight with them but they must be paid because they do a lot of work. I can now take your information.

Mr AOGON: A brief one the issue of SAGE. Madam speaker, I carried out a simple research in my district on this matter of SAGE. The elderly persons who got to learn that they were paying money for the elders in other places have become so sickly. Every other time they are in hospital because they are thinking about the money, which is not forthcoming. (Laughter) Therefore, this is a problem. It is a serious matter.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, we must conduct a serious investigation on SAGE for us to see if they are getting this money.

We once had a committee meeting and they told us that they get this money through mobile phones. Now how do you give accountability as Government when the elderly are getting money through mobile phones and others from the LCs and these are Government funds? Therefore, we need to investigate this matter. In addition, why are some districts benefiting and others are not? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.16
MR EMMANUEL SSEMPALA (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to make two points. The first is that we can never improve our budget resources if we do not address the poverty problem in the country. In addition, we can only address this problem by addressing the agricultural production processing and marketing. 

When we do that, we shall increase the earnings of the biggest part of our population, the aggregate demand will increase, people will demand for manufactured goods, and factories will come up. When the factories come up, it will draw labour from agriculture to the industry; in essence, they are using land in the agricultural sector for commercial production. 

Automatically, the salaries in the manufacturing industry will go up and the earnings in the agricultural sector will go up. That means even the tax base will increase. However, we are just joking if we do not address the people’s poverty problem in the country.

The second point is about the Busabala Road. This road was earmarked to be constructed starting 31 March 2013 after the then Chairperson LC5 Ian Kyeune was rolled in dust. It was presidential pledge. It was supposed to be completed three months from now; on 30 April 2018, those records are very clear in this Parliament, UNRA and the ministry.

Last year, I lobbied and we were told that they had put Shs 800 million in the budget to do the studies. I understand that UNRA has studies ready but I do not see the money in the budget. Therefore, by the time, we put money in the budget for the next financial year, the design will be obsolete because every six months I understand, they have to re-do the designs because of the developments that have taken place along the road.

I think we are ‘spoiling’ money if we do not allocate money for this road this financial year and start constructing it. The road is so important that it offloads over 40 per cent of the traffic from Entebbe Road to Kibuye and it goes on to the Munyonyo spur, according the record I have from the district. That means that the jam between Kibuye and Kajansi will be reduced by 40 per cent. I request that the finance ministry –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Mwijukye comes, I will direct this to the Minister of Works and Transport and the Minister for Internal Affairs. I was in Maracha over the weekend; there are issues they asked me to bring to you.

First, is about the road from Maracha to DRC which is an international road but has not been taken up by UNRA and yet the international road between Koboko and DRC are done by UNRA - the one on the Arua side that goes to DRC is being done by UNRA. It is only the one of Maracha, which they have been told that the district should do it. We shall want to know why.

Then for the Minister of Internal Affairs, there is a border post, I cannot pronounce the name it is a bit difficult but the immigration officers come two days a week - Monday and Tuesday. On Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday and Sunday, the LC1 chairperson of that town acts as an immigration officer. Therefore, you might want to take interest in that situation.

5.21
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the majority and minority reports.

I am concerned about the roads. My colleague has just talked about Busabala Road. However, some time back, the Executive Director of UNRA talked about not embarking on new roads and the minister came here and said that was not true.

However, I think since last year, we began to hear that priority was for oil roads and no new roads are being worked on yet there are some roads that were designed, surveys done, some properties and houses of people earmarked for compensation. They cannot develop because they are waiting for compensation because the surveys have already been done. 

For example, the road from Sheema-Buhweju-Ibanda-Kamwenge has been there and the designs were completed about five years ago. The survey was done for compensation about three years ago. The road is there but people cannot develop their properties and every time we go to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, we are told there is no money.

Therefore, what happens? Are they going to do the surveys again? Are we going to wait for another 10 years until the oil roads are completed? What happens?

Secondly, last time we were in a meeting for Ankole Members of Parliament talking about presidential pledges and the finance minister, who is here, promised that they were going to work on the farmers’ tea factory for Buhweju. He said then to the President that it was not in the other budget but something was going to be done in this budget. 

The agriculture ministry is going down, certain provisions are not being put in the budget and we are wondering whether that promise is going to come up.

Finally, we need to talk about the issue of SAGE. We have been unequivocal on the issues of young people and very old ones like we did last year. If we are to be seen to be very serious and of course you know, Madam Speaker, that the population is looking up to us - at some stage they thought we are not doing much to support development activities and that we were only looking at ourselves - now this time they are looking at us to see what we are providing for them especially around this time of the budget.

I would like to also support the idea that we should roll out SAGE nationally so that the old people can get this money because they think it is Members of Parliament who are not thinking about them but thinking about themselves. Thank you.

5.24
MR GUTOMOI ABACANON (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern as Shadow Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is that Government should take serious notice of Police accommodation. When you go to Ntinda Police Barracks, its state is appalling. I went there to see a sick police officer. I wonder what we are doing for these police officers.

If you look at the type of accommodation they live in and then the sanitation in the area you just shudder. Now what is in our budget to address this situation? Sometime back, you remember we went out - a select committee of Parliament to prove this situation in the Police quarters and the report disappeared.

Now, it seems that is one of the reasons why some police officers are very corrupt. You cannot imagine sleeping there, eating in a place that is stinking and you feel – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am not speaking for the Ministry of Internal Affairs but one day I was invited by the Inspector General of Police to go to Naguru to see the houses they are constructing for the Police. I know that he took me there to show what they are doing for the Police.

MR ABACANON: Thank you. Secondly, Madam Speaker, about the domestic debt levels, I understand now it has increased by about Shs 0.45 trillion. We have the war affected area claimants who need to be compensated. 

I wonder how much has been put in this year’s financial budget to address this because many of them are dying and it is not easy to claim when one is dead and every time we appear there, they ask us, “what about our position” because these were cases taken to court and they were won and now they need compensation. They lost their property and their cows were stolen. 

What is the position from the finance ministry because it is becoming very difficult for us to talk to some of these people who have already been waiting for this payment? We demand to know.

Thirdly, on the youth employment status. I have been to my constituency in Lira District and the number of youth roaming during day and night without doing any work is alarming. 

Are we really trying to care for them in our budget? Some of them are educated while others are not. What about the vocational issues that we talk about? Are we implementing it seriously in every sub county? 

I would like to request that we should know because you see the gap between the “yes” and the “no” political development areas widening. Therefore, it is time for us to know the type of development that we have at regional, district, constituency, subcounty, parish and village levels because there are no graduates in some parishes in Uganda. 

When we go to look for parish chiefs, we are going to import them from other areas. What are we now doing? Can we really succeed with our plan without paying attention to education, health and agriculture among others which are the main sectors which we are talking about year in and out in our – (Member timed out.)     

5.28
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In the event that I am caught up by time, I would like to focus on eight items:
    1. Safe and clean drinking water.
    2. Electric fencing. 
    3. Lightning arrestors.
    4. Keep the existing health budget. We do not want to entertain any cuts on the health budget.

    5. Prioritise primary core sectors. Madam Speaker, you will recognise that we have about six sectors and a lot of these are just for consumption. They do not produce and help our budget to generate the funds that we need. Therefore, I would like to encourage the committee to work with the finance ministry to ensure that we focus more on the production sectors. Here, I am talking about tourism and agriculture.

    6. I will focus on an affirmative budget. I come from the west but I get aggrieved every time I hear about teenage pregnancies and epidemics and all those things in the east, as much as, of course, we have the same in Kasese. 

    7. I would also like to draw the attention of the committee to the Contingency Fund as provided for in our Public Finance Management Act, especially drawing your attention to No.26 where in our annual budget we are supposed to provide, Madam Speaker, 0.5 per cent. I witnessed this when my community got a disaster. I had an opportunity to meet the Prime Minister and also to linkup with the minister of disaster. However, the only reply that I got was that Government had no money and that was devastating.

    8. As a Shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs, I am interested in our planning for foreign affairs. I am glad that we have had some international trips as Parliament under your leadership. We are losing – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Just conclude on the issue of the property.

MR KATUSABE: Yes, Madam Speaker. A case in point is our port sandwiched between that of Zimbabwe and Chad. In Addis Ababa as I speak right now, we are at the border of losing that port because we do not have funding as Ministry of Foreign Affairs to have that cleared or paid.

Lastly, this is the only opportunity that we have for the first time to use our domestic capabilities to have the Agricultural Credit Facility. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.32
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday you ably cited among the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy the one on balanced and equitable development. You even emphasised that the state shall accord special measures and attention to the less developed areas of this country. 

Madam Speaker, Operation Wealth Creation is an operation and not a programme nor a project. In the real sense and understanding of an operation, we have seen and witnessed operations for Operation Anaconda and Operation Iron Fist. (Laughter) 

Operations have timeframes. In an operation, you first and foremost deploy after you have mobilised; you mobilise, deploy, stabilise, consolidate and then exit. 

However, this particular Operation Wealth Creation has come to stay; it is no longer an operation, but a project. This project is skewed in favour of certain regions, Madam Speaker, and I would like to state.

Eastern Uganda, which recently according to the survey that was conducted on the poverty index, has the highest levels of poverty and the highest levels of poverty. 

When you come to the distribution of inputs, technologies, eastern Uganda vis-a-vis western Uganda, for instance, we receive seedlings of all categories like eucalyptus, mangoes and oranges whereas tractors are commissioned in Mbarara courtesy of the same budget of Operation Wealth Creation. 

This brings the question that floods one’s mind iyo ni ungwana ukweli. I will allow information later.

Madam Speaker, this Operation Wealth Creation boasts of distributions of these inputs in trillions, but if you interrogated the corresponding increased productivity, there is virtually nothing visible and tangible. 

Therefore, I must impute the minority report for making a recommendation that this Operation Wealth Creation should be discontinued so that we enable ministries, departments and agencies and relevant – (Member timed out.)

5.36
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for giving us this report. I would like to mention a few recollections.

The first is tourism. I would like to refer to Teso region because we have so many tourist attraction sites but the only thing that you can see in Teso is purely signposts in Nyero and Kapir. However, there is nothing concrete in terms of investments. Here you are talking about PPPs but how useful is it now in this case? 

Number two, Madam Speaker, in October 2016, the Minister of Works and Transport told this House in black and white that the bridge between Pallisa and Ngora at Aleles had been fixed and yet there is nothing completed to date. 

I hope that today in this report, maybe she will remember to put that bridge in the budget. Otherwise, one day when she comes to Teso, she will find us there and we shall shame her publically and I am sure because it is bad manners. This time I am simple but dangerous.

Number three is about the street lights in the city here. There is a lot of traffic jam in this city. I am, however, not hearing how we are going to address the issue of street lights and jam in the city. For us who do not have lead vehicles - I stay around Kirinya but it takes me about two hours to arrive home after leaving here.

Maybe for, Madam Speaker, she just crosses but for us who move around in our vehicles, it is a problem. (Laughter). Unless we sort this matter out, that will remain a challenge.

Number four, Madam Speaker, allow me to emphasise the issue of SAGE. For me, David Abala, I am saying that if Government is not going to roll this thing out, we are going to say, “Let this programme end as early as immediately”. We are not going to discuss the issue of SAGE now. We are now serious. If we are going to keep quiet, the people are going to assume that things are okay yet they are discriminating our old men and women in other areas.

The other thing that I want to say is the issue dealing with the Ministry of Teso Affairs – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, 30 seconds.

MR ABALA: You know this ministry is the only one without a budget. It has a plan but no budget. That is one. 

Number two, the only ministry without a flag is this very one, the Ministry of Teso Affairs. My appeal to Government is that if there is no budget for this ministry, it is useless to have it there. Let us close it permanently. 

Finally on Soroti University. It is in critical state. As we talk now, the National Council of Higher Education blocked Soroti University from opening. As the publicity head of the Teso Parliamentary Group, I wish to condemn that act. 

The National Council of Higher Education must come out and open Soroti University without discussion. Everything is in place. This Parliament here gave money and I would like to thank the Parliament for having done that and that is basically what I am happy about. 

Unfortunately, the National Council of Higher Education is saying no to opening and this is a problem. I hate that statement. I thank you.

5.41
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is on the pay reforms. 

You may recall that last year, we had a lot of industrial unrest and Government promised that they were working on the salary structure which would come out very soon. 

You may also recall that the Minister of Public Service, hon. Muruli Mukasa addressed the press and informed the public that the salary structure had been approved by Cabinet in its sitting on the 9th of December. But looking at the Budget Framework Paper, the wage bill has not provided for the increase of salary. 

I have read on Page 50 in this report, where the committee mentioned that they reliably learnt that Cabinet has improved salaries by five per cent. If you look at the salary of a prosecutor who gets Shs 850,000 and you calculate the five per cent, it means that person will get an increase of Shs 40,000. 

Looking at what they have been promising and what they intend to pay, I would call upon Government to ensure that they look for money. This is going to help all the members of the public and Members of Parliament. 

You may recall that when the medical workers went on strike, it affected the workers and MPs - because those are our people whom we represent and if you come here and hospitals are closed and people are dying out there then we shall not be able to serve our people.

Madam Speaker, yesterday in the minority report, they proposed that we can cut the budget of UNRA to cater for these other sectors like health, education and also paying salaries. I think we should be serious on this matter and ensure that that budget is reduced and we cater for these other sectors which are not being considered. 

Another area I would like to talk about is the education sector. The proposal does not consider secondary schools. You may recall there is a proposal that each sub county must have a secondary school but this has not been catered for. 

Yesterday, a member moved a motion here over the schools that are going to be closed by the Ministry of Education and Sports. How are they planning to cover up those gaps because most of the students or pupils go to these other private schools because there are no Government schools in their areas?

How are they covering up the gaps if they have not increased the budget for the education sector to ensure that there are going to be these schools and also provide better services? However, some of these Government schools are not the best if you moved out there – (Member timed out.)

5.45
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me add my voice to thank the committee for the report. I have had an opportunity of going through that report and I had my own analysis of it. What interested me is the increase in the poverty levels in the country from 19.7 per cent in 2012/2013 to 21 per cent in 2016/2017. 

The report goes ahead to say that there is increase in the number of poor persons from 6.6 million in 2012/2013 to 10 million in 2016/2017. They made quite a good recommendation that if we want to reverse this trend, then there is need of balancing the social sector and the infrastructural sector. 

I went ahead to look at the allocation of the budget. When you go to the allocation of budgets, the social development has been allocated 0.80 percent. Last year, it was 0.80 percent and it is the same this year.

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Madam Speaker, I raise on point of order in relation to dress code. Rule 81 (1) (b) prescribes, “a suit, a jacket, blouse and skirt or dress for lady Members” but our lady members have continued wearing trousers. Is it in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wear trousers. Are you going to eject me from here?

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Madam Speaker, Rule 81 (1) (b) says they must dress in a “a suit, a jacket, blouse and skirt or dress for lady Members” 

THE SPEAKER: Who is not in a suit?

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: My colleague is not in a suit. She is in a blouse and a trouser. That is not in order, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I think he is right. I think you needed a jacket on top of that blouse. But tomorrow, come properly in a suit. (Laughter)

MS AKURUT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was giving the statistics in terms of the budget allocation and I was on the point that last financial year the social development sector was given 0.80 per cent and this Financial Year 2018/2019 it has the same allocation. 

On the agricultural sector, last year we had 3.8 per cent and this year it is the same. When you go to health, it is even reduced. 

When you look at it, I was just wondering and making a comparison. They are talking about balancing the social sector with the infrastructural sector but when you go to works and transport, there has been an increase instead. In energy there has also been an increase. Therefore, I was just wondering if we can go ahead to pass such a budget. 

We are talking of balancing it but we are looking at these sectors where most of our people that we represent – the poor – actually, the report says 76 per cent of the poor people are coming from the rural areas and they contribute 86 per cent to the national poverty. When you look at the budget allocation, when you aggregate all of it maybe it is not even 30 per cent and those are the people you and I represent in this august House. 

I was just making an appeal and a recommendation that unless something is done about this budget, the issue of poverty that has been talked about here may remain the same. I think we need to do something in terms of the budget allocation and also go with the recommendations of the committee to balance. 

Otherwise, it is not good for us to continue focusing on infrastructure and we leave the social sector such as agriculture where the majority of our people are. Agriculture is where the majority of our people are but the budget is the same year in and year out. 

I just want to conclude on the issue of Soroti University that my colleague raised – (Member timed out.)

5.50
MS NOELINE BASEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to first of all concern myself with the aspect of agriculture. 

Despite the drought that we experienced last Financial Year 2016/2017 and the commitments by the Government in this House to go irrigation, I am very surprised that in the report as indicated water for production is among the unfunded priority – Shs 20 billion. This is on page 38 of the report. 

I feel it is like we are not learning from the past and probably we are planning to manage crisis again like it was last time.

Last week in my district we had a stakeholders’ meeting to discuss coffee production and we realised that the survival rate of the seedlings we give to the farmers through Operation Wealth Creation is 33 per cent. The reason is that we are depending on rain-fed agriculture and the second reason is the delayed distribution of the seedlings. These are the more reasons we need to go irrigation. I hope there has to be a plan to make this a priority.

Secondly, I am concerned about the oil roads as presented in the minority report on page 10. It is stated that out of the 15 planned roads, only two roads had feasibility studies done and detailed designs undertaken and for the rest nothing was done. This means Shs 851.2 billion is not going to be absorbed as per this report. 

This is very disheartening and I feel it is unacceptable. As someone who comes from the oil region of Bunyoro, I feel it is disappointing and unacceptable. Something has to be done.

Thirdly, I would like to talk about the issue of education. I have checked on the budget framework paper on page 80 on secondary schools. The plan is to construct only 12 secondary schools in fulfilling the policy of one government-aided secondary school per subcounty. In my district of Kibaale, out of the 10 sub counties and one town council only four sub counties have a government-aided secondary school. I am wondering that at this rate of coverage, when will my district be catered for because in the budget framework paper – (Member timed out.)

5.53
MS HILLARY LOKWANG (NRM, Ik County, Kaabong): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is my maiden speech for 2018. (Laughter)

Article 32(1) of the Constitution talks about affirmative action and favour of the marginalised groups. Also, Article 36 talks about the protection of the rights of the minorities – right to participate in decision-making process and their views and interests shall be taken into account in the making of national plans.

Madam Speaker, I have some critical issues. One of the issues is about cross-border roads and security roads in Karamoja, especially the Ik County. We are completely landlocked. We cannot talk to our neighbours from Kenya and South Sudan.

Most of the tourists cross to Kidepo through my constituency. They land on Lokichogio International Airport in my neighbourhood and they cross on foot through my constituency to Kidepo National Park and they hire boys from Kenya to carry their luggage to go to Kidepo –

THE SPEAKER: Just repeat that because I did not get it. It is a very important point about having to come by air and then they walk on the road.

MR LOKWANG: Yes, they land in Lokichogio International Airport in Kenya and when they come to Kidepo, they come on foot across my constituency just because there is no road. 

Madam Speaker, part of Uganda has been abandoned in my constituency. Kenyans travel 17 kilometres inside Uganda in my constituency and in that place the customs was supposed to be established but now it cannot be established there because there is no road. Now, these people have established permanent settlements in my constituency.

In the whole of Karamoja the border is porous – 360 kilometres across Karamoja starting from Amudat to the border with Kitgum and now there is free entry and exit of people. The boys in my constituency do business in Kenya and they just walk on foot with their goods and end up being robbed on the way because we do not have roads. As people are complaining about tarmac, for me I need murram roads because I cannot afford tarmac as per now. (Laughter). I urge the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to at least budget for my roads.

Madam Speaker, we need security roads in Karamoja. Soldiers are not deployed because there are no roads. Water cannot – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Okay, half a minute for the minority. 

MR LOKWANG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also have an issue of coding of schools. My children are not learning because I have three community schools and two government-aided schools. We have been submitting reports for the last five years but Public Service has said there is no money for coding these schools.

There is also an issue of Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road. The loan was approved in the Ninth Parliament. There are over 300 vehicles, which use that road everyday but some spots on that road have collapsed completely. We need this road to be tarmacked - (Interruption) 

MR WAMAKUYU: Thank you very much. Ik constituency passes through my constituency of Bulambuli. Madam Speaker, you remember last year, around November when you directed, through your honourable Chair, that ministers should go and quickly work on Chetui Bridge, which connects Kween, Nakapiripirit, Moroto, Amudat and all those north eastern districts. However, up to now – today, we must shame the devil.

The other temporary bridge, which was constructed, has completely collapsed and they have now closed it. What is going on? People are now using the old bridge, which completely collapsed and they are risking their lives by crossing on that bridge. 

Madam Speaker, any time from now, you are going to hear the announcement and that is why I was boiling here as if I was seated on fire. I wanted to inform you that any time from now, we are going to hear that some people have died either from Bugisu or Karamoja sub-region, including the Member of Parliament. I am sorry to say this but it is very serious; it is not a joke. We are not staging a drama here. Thank you my brother.

MR LOKWANG: I am concluding; he used my time. Madam Speaker, sometimes when I want to go to Kenya for security meetings, instead of covering 22 kilometres, I cover 500 kilometres because there is no road. Thank you.

6.00
MS JUDITH	ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to take this opportunity to thank the committee for the report. I wish to specifically comment on the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund.

The HIV/AIDS Trust Fund was established under section 25 of the HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Act, 2014. However, to date, the fund has not been established as directed by the Act. The existing HIV/AIDS response programmes are being majorly funded by resources from development partners, which funds are not adequate to meet the required commodities for prevention and treatment of HIV/AIDS.

The demand for these commodities has further increased with the test and treat strategy that was rolled out by the Ministry of Health late last year. The launch of the Presidential Fast-Track Initiative was also done some time last year by His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda. Strategy four of the initiative provides for, among others, mobilisation of resources, especially the domestic resources and fast-tracking the establishment of the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to beg your indulgence to require the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give assurance to this august House that the fund will be established this time round, in this budget that we are entering into. We want these funds provided in this National Budget Framework Paper and budgeted for in the Financial Year 2018/2019. Our communities are suffering. Anti-Retroviral drugs (ARVs) are in shortage in almost all medical facilities. Recent reports are quite alarming to the extent that doses are being split to be given to children. 

Madam Speaker, we are in a crisis and we cannot keep quiet on this. We want HIV/AIDS Trust Fund established in the next financial year.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Alyek, I think you have been mild. Government should explain. Why have they failed to establish the trust fund? It has been five years. They must explain to this country. We do not want any assurance; let them tell us why they have not done it.

MS ALYEK: Madam Speaker, we scrutinised the regulations that were passed by Cabinet in this House and these regulations were referred back to the Ministry of Health. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was tasked to establish the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund and even go ahead to open an account with Bank of Uganda. 

Therefore, I would like to know what they have done so far. They should tell us. We want this money very fast. We cannot keep waiting. That is why I have brought it to this august House to help us resolve this matter - (Interruption)

MS KYINYAMATAMA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, as a member of the committee and as someone from Rakai District, which is highly affected by HIV/AIDS, I would like to report that line 2 ARV drugs are out of stock everywhere. When you hear that HIV/AIDS patients are dying, do not get shocked. Whenever we complain they tell us that there are no funds.

The HIV/AIDS Trust Fund is in place and everything was done but it has not been included in the National Budget Framework Paper.  One wonders. The ministers are present. Please, explain to the country. Thank you.

MS ALYEK: Thank you very much, hon. Kyinyamatama. The other issue that I would like to bring to the attention of this House is on physical infrastructure. Madam Speaker, when you look at the budget of FY 2018/2019, you will note that national roads are getting more money than community access roads. When you compare the budgets, they are not fair at all. 

What I am trying to say is that the community is not interested in national roads, neither are they interested in international roads. The community is interested in community access roads. I am wondering why more money is going to national and international roads leaving out community access roads, which our children use to go to schools, which our mothers use to go to health centres for referrals and they are dying on the way. We are looking on when these roads are being given meagre budgets.

Madam Speaker, when you look at the money given to Uganda National Roads Authority, in the 2016/2017 budget, 60 per cent of the budget was released but UNRA – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MS ALYEK: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You will find that only 44 per cent of the budget that was released to Uganda National Roads Authority was utilised, which means that they have low absorption capacity for the monies that are always borrowed to fund roads.

When you compare the budget of agriculture, which is just 3.8 per cent of the national budget, to the budget of roads, you will find that the agricultural sector is given very meagre resources. Madam Speaker, we are constructing more roads but we have 3.8 per cent given to agriculture.

I would propose, as my prayer, that the budget for roads be cut and given to agriculture so that – Why are we making these roads? We want to make these roads to transport produce from the farmers - (Member timed out.)

6.08
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to that of others.

I think it is clear that we need to review the design of the budget; how it is presented because the budget appears ambiguous and without clear outputs. For instance, if you look at the agriculture sector and you have an input like skills development and technologies, how much is that improving the lives of the majority who are involved in agriculture?

Last year, we had very serious issues that we wanted the Ministry of Agriculture to fix but these come out as very dismal in the budget: issues of acaricides, fake seeds and irrigation. I have added to these issues because they are very critical. For example, in the region I represent, people have already started starving. How are we going to address the issue of irrigation? This is not coming out clearly. 

There is mention of investment in coffee and tea. What about regions that do not have coffee and tea? What measures is the Government putting in place for those places? This is clear inequality in resource distribution. 

Poverty in the east is real. This House must request for affirmative action for the eastern region as matters are very serious. 

On the issue of infrastructure, we pray that this Government puts priority on infrastructure, especially in the city. This city is the eye and the magnet of further development in the country. However, its infrastructure is appalling. Every time I drive around our city, it is getting more confused. The roads are so bad, the buildings are disorganised. 

Let it be a deliberate policy for Government to improve our city. If Kampala can no longer hold as a city, which city are you going to plan as a sustainable one? Without a good city, we will not attract investment. 

Therefore, I allude to all Members who have spoken that we need more investment – (Member timed out)

6.11
MR MOSES WALYOMU (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank the committee for this report. My concern is on page 32; observations on the social implication of the Government stopping to give grants to private schools, private hospitals and private universities.

Madam Speaker, I think this is a critical area and we need to urge Government to look for funds so that they can help these private schools and hospitals to carry out their mandates and even help the Government. They are providing services to Ugandans not to Kenyans. Therefore, by denying them grants, we are losing out and this will have a negative impact on the population of this country. 

Secondly, I was so disappointed with UNRA, which was given a lot of money that they did not utilise. I would like to tell you that we have a road from Kimaka via Budondo via Buzaaya to Mbulamuti, Kamuli. That road was designed. My people are not renovating their houses because they know that these houses are going to be destroyed. However, up to now, this road is not considered. If you hear that UNRA is not utilising the funds that are being allocated to it, with utilised funds at only 25 per cent, it is disturbing because Ugandans have bad roads in this country. 

My third point is about SAGE. I would like to draw the attention of all members of the NRM that SAGE is in our manifesto. When you go back, read page 60 of the NRM manifesto. We would like the Government to look for funds for a national roll out for SAGE.

Madam Speaker, we get disturbed. You know very well that Kamuli is near Jinja. When my people of Jinja hear that people in Kamuli or Mayuge are getting money yet they are not getting any, they might think that maybe the Members of Parliament from Jinja are not advocating for their rights. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude with the issue of salaries. This issue is not only outside there but even our staff here complain about salaries. Therefore, we should not look at the medical or education professions only but also our staff here at Parliament. I think we should urge the Government to take the issue of salaries very seriously. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Azairwe comes, I have been asked to explain, in Kamuli, how bicycles for LCI were driven through Kamuli to Buyende and Kamuli did not get. (Laughter)

6.15
MS DOROTHY AZAIRWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for advocating for your constituency. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, I have three issues to talk about in the Budget Framework Paper. 

Last financial year, we considered emoluments for local council councillors and it was Shs 12 billion. The people expected that maybe they would also get something. On this matter, therefore, I am requesting the Government that if we considered district councillors and now they are getting monthly allowances as well as allowances for their council sittings, it would be very paramount to encourage our local councillors to also be given emoluments in this financial year.

Secondly - 

THE SPEAKER: Do we have good news for the LCs?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, during appropriation for FY 2017/2018, Parliament provided money for these sub-county councillors as well as for town councils. To our dismay, this money is not being remitted to the districts. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has to explain why.

MS AZAIRWE: Thank you, Chairperson of the Budget Committee. I think the minister is here to give an explanation to our councillors. 

I also wanted to talk about infrastructure. I would like to thank the Government of Uganda for buying new machines for roads in our district. However, as one of my colleagues indicated, we need to increase the allocation of money to the Road Fund. Since the time of its inception, the Road Fund has been given the same amount of money and yet every so often, we are increasing the number of sub-counties, constituencies and even district roads.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to request Members to make sure that we increase the money for Uganda Road Fund so that districts that have submitted their roads are considered. In the last Parliament, the Community Agriculture Infrastructure Improvement Programme (CAIIP) created a lot of good roads in our districts. However, they were access roads and they are not being given money. The money that is being allocated to sub-counties for access roads goes once in the second quarter and that is it. People are crucifying us that we only allocate money to UNRA and forget that the local people have to use these access roads to take their produce to the main roads to increase their household income.

Madam Speaker, I also would like to talk about the increase of money for Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP). We know that the majority of the population in this country are women. However, the money allocated to UWEP in our area is very little. In the whole district of Kamwenge, only 13 groups got this money. This money is not enough and we need to roll it out. Women have been tested and they have the capacity to use the money and pay back. We need the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to increase this money. If you consider the way money is being allocated in this country; in the last Parliament, we approved $100 million to Private Sector Foundation, Uganda. It is – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude. No one has touched that issue.

MS AZAIRWE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can the Private Sector Foundation Uganda make accountability for the $100 million? What have they done? We are talking about skilling Ugandans. We have the Presidential Initiative located here in Kampala but how many people from Kamuli and Kamwenge have benefitted from it? Can we distribute resources equitably if we are to fight and reduce poverty levels in this country? I thank you.

6.20
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to interest myself in two sectors: agriculture and education. 

Madam Speaker, you know very well that agriculture employs 95 per cent of all Ugandans. However, it is very shaming and unfortunate that in the 21st Century, we are still suffering from hunger. There is Operation Wealth Creation going on - Members have been talking about irrigation. I am of the view that we let irrigation continue but even if irrigation is not there, why doesn’t Government build silos in areas producing maize? As we talk, many maize producing districts are having a problem of where to sell their maize. On this, anybody can attest that tomorrow, it is unfortunate that people are going to suffer from hunger. 

I would suggest that Government helps us to build silos. If it cannot build them everywhere in Uganda, let them build them in districts, which produce maize. We shall be very grateful. 

Otherwise, this business of running to the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, every year, when hunger attacks the people - which ministry is also not ready and at the end of the day, Ugandans are dying. I stay on the border with Karamoja and every year, hundreds of Karimojong die because –(Interjections)– yes, this is very serious. People are dying. Even if in other parts of Uganda people are not dying, in Karamoja, people are dying –(Interruption)

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give the honourable member is that people may not die but if their animals die and they depend solely on these animals - when your food dies, immediately you also die. (Laughter) 

Honourable Minister for Water and Environment, the other time we resolved that the valley dams, which had been de-silted - Madam Speaker, when you are not in Kamuli, some of us represent you. We said that they should de-silt the dams in Kamuli, Butaleja and Ssembabule. Honourable minister, can you de-silt at least one dam in every constituency? That is the information, thank you.

MR BURUNDO: Madam Speaker, finally I would like to talk about education, which Members have already talked about. I had a motion on the Floor of Parliament talking about poor performance in eastern Uganda where Bulambuli and Kamuli were among the worst performing districts in Uganda. Unfortunately, I have not seen anything. 

My humble request is that we join hands, since you are seated in that powerful chair and I am also seated in this powerful backbench, and push the Government so that this time round, they help us to improve education in eastern Uganda –(Member timed out.)

6.25
MS SARAH NAJJUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the committee for the report. I am looking at page 50 under Ministry of Local Government. Parliament approved 13 districts and 200 lower local governments. These were gazetted but their operationalisation has been halted because of lack of funds. 

Madam Speaker, since they were approved by Parliament and the benefitting communities are aware of this development, I suggest that Government looks for money so that these districts and lower local governments start operating. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.26
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to give information on the same issue of the 13 districts and 200 lower local units. Those new districts affect my district of Nakapiripirit. We are supposed to have a new district called Nabilatuk and Karenga in Karamoja. 

I am a bit perturbed about their operationalisation because I hear that funds have come to a halt. After the two finance ministers have benefited from new districts and new constituencies, the people of Karamoja have been pledged. We know very well that having had relative peace in Karamoja, people have now settled. We are realising population growth in the area, people are farming and we are expecting that the few people who have gone to school will be employed in these new districts.

Therefore, we are requesting that these districts be operationalised and in the interest of equity, we should bring staff from the mother districts to come and act in these offices. After all, they will still be on the payroll. This will be as we wait for the ministry to get money to come and recruit new employees for the new districts. Thank you.

6.28
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and the committee for the two reports that were presented: the main and the minority reports. 

I would also like to make observations on UNRA. Whereas it is true that the absorption of UNRA is not very good, despite getting a lot of funds, and the Parliament wants to come up with a decision to reduce the budget on UNRA, I would like to suggest that before we go for this, we consider Malaba Bridge. It is one of the main entry points into this country, which is generating a lot of tax revenue and needs to be repaired from its very bad state.

It has taken over one year since Kenya finished fixing their side of the new bridge. On our Ugandan side, we are still using the old bridge, which is so narrow with accidents occurring on a daily basis. I have appealed to UNRA and the Ministry of Works to fix this side to no avail. Therefore, as we look at cutting their budget, let them first fix that bridge for the betterment of this country.

Secondly, I would like to make an observation on the cost of making roads. The cost is quite very high but we do not get value after realising these high prices in terms of time. It takes a very long time for the roads to be fixed. Remember the northern bypass, which was opened during the CHOGM time. However, to date the other half of the road has not been fixed. Why don’t we accommodate the high price of fixing roads in relation to timely completion of these roads? Maybe there we shall not have complaints. Rather, we shall get the roads fixed and we enjoy them for the betterment of this country and our people.

Madam Speaker, I also would like to make an observation on vocational institutions. It is good that Government is coming up to support vocational institutions and building many others in our constituencies and districts. However, there is a challenge that we must accept to live with and may be fix as soon as possible.

Accreditation and certification of these institutions is becoming a challenge. Very many of the companies that have come up here, most especially Chinese and other investors, are not employing our people because they say that the certificates we have are not accredited and recognised internationally. They go ahead to bring employees from very far to take up our jobs.

Madam Speaker, I would like to tell you that a few days ago, I was on a flight with many people who were coming to Uganda. When I asked them what they were coming to do, some of them were telling me that they are plumbers coming to work in the oil fields here. When I looked at them, they looked like ordinary people coming to do ordinary work that our people can also do.

Therefore, we must take it seriously that as we bring vocational institutions, we must also accredit them so that our people get certificates that can be accepted by these investors that we have. 

I would also like to make - (Member timed out.)

6.31
DR JAMES NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join others to commend the report. However, I would like to point out that if there is any issue in this country that has potential of a kind that no one can imagine at this stage, to disrupt this nation’s stability, unity and prosperity, it is this habit of stealing public resources.

I am sorry to note that a few of my colleagues have discussed this matter extensively yet it is that one single practice that is able to completely change the face of this nation. God knows how much of our revenue is being stolen every day and by people who we expect to look after this revenue on our behalf.

This House must be interested in this phenomenon that has potential to change the face of this nation; that threatens our stability, unity and security as a nation. Stealing of public resources is going on unchecked practically in every office. The only way to deal with this phenomenon clearly is to strengthen institutions that should be checking it.

Thirdly, when you look at the report and the Budget Framework Paper, the percentage share that should be going to these institutions is actually declining, indicating that the will to check this potentially dangerous situation that is worsening by the day is very low indeed. That is the tragedy of our situation; that this nation is walking while sleeping and the foundations that normally should strengthen our nation’s capability to become a civilised nation are being undermined. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, it is not only contested - and I am glad that every Member has spoken strongly about this. The truth of the matter is that there are critical sectors of our economy that have potential to spur growth. Everyone has spoken strongly about this. In fact, these sectors have great potential to provide forward and backward linkages that will spur growth in our land. We also have spill-over effects, which clearly would make this nation stronger than we are today.

The truth is, and I do not know what goes in the minds of those who plan for this nation. It is incontestable that agriculture, tourism, manufacturing and soon, gas and oil, are the five critical sectors that will change the face of this nation if adequate resources were invested. However, for some mysterious – (Member timed out.) 

6.35
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda County North, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. To begin with, I have heard Members talk about reducing money for UNRA. We need to go and study deeply about project money. Look at the money you allocate, it is money from ADB, World Bank, BADEA - money that is already tied, which you cannot touch. Loans are the money we allocate so how are you going to touch it? I sit on the Committee on National Economy and we have been approving these loans every day. The problem is, you approve loans and you do not approve counterpart funding. Then you start paying interest on loans that you are not consuming. That is why -

THE SPEAKER: But you are not right when you say that we do not approve counterpart funding.

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, the biggest issue we have been facing has been on counterpart funding. The money is too little -

THE SPEAKER: Yes, when you say Parliament does not approve, it is not us who do not approve. They do not propose.

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, I would like to go to the issue of road funds. Nearly every year, I spend around Shs 40-60 million buying murram for our roads up country. You buy new equipment, train people and you tell us that you have given us new equipment but you do not give money for murram. 

These people just come and scratch the top and make the roads impassable and in the end it is we, the members of Parliament, who repair them. Why can’t we get money for the murram roads and help our local authorities?

We are seated on a time bomb of power tariffs. While hon. D’Ujang’s ministry has done very well in power generation, consuming this power - you are bringing Karuma, Isimba and several hydro power generation dams and about 1,200 megawatts on board.

Currently, we consume about 570 megawatts but all that money - we signed a capacity agreement - whether you take it or not you will have to pay. This means that the cost of that power will be passed on to a few Ugandans who are currently consuming power. It is like having a taxi of six people and you share the cost of the fare to Entebbe. In case you sit in it alone, you will pay for that cost alone.

I would like to propose that Parliament finds money to put in the industrial parks. If you connected all the sub counties in Uganda, you would consume about 320 megawatts. However, one big factory can consume over 100 megawatts. Kampala Cement consumes 50 megawatts. Therefore, if you cannot get money to attract industries to come and consume power, then you are going to have constrained demand and people will not be able to use power. 

Madam Speaker, you do not need to go out to look for investors. One day, you should invite the people of Kikuubo; a plot of land of 15 decimals in Kikuubo is about $5 million. They are putting up arcades. The Chinese are coming to build factories of $2 million and we call them investors. Why don’t we attract our own people from Kikuubo to go into manufacturing? We can give them these incentives that we are giving to foreigners so that they start manufacturing and we develop our country. Thank you.

6.40
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba County West, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to express my pleasure at the consideration on page 39 for pest and disease control because my district, which is in the cattle corridor, has suffered the effect of Foot and Mouth disease. 

We have been worried about loss of the national herd because a lot of it is from that area. We also have ticks and we are suffering and Government hadn’t done anything to assist us. We are happy that this money has been included in the budget except that I thought there should be enumeration as to what is for pests and what has been allocated for the diseases so that we do not have problems working that out.

For the bridges, permit me to mention Akagali Bridge, which joins Ssembabule and Gomba. It is Rugusuulu and Kyai that are joined but the road descending to the bridge is in a very bad state to the extent that people who are descending toward the bridge face the danger of falling into the water. I call upon UNRA to quickly come to our rescue regarding that.

On page 51, for the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs committee on compensation to UHRC, I thought there should be a correction here. I do not think that the compensation resulting from human rights abuses should be sent to the Human Rights Commission because they would be judges in their own case. They cannot sit and conduct the tribunals and then have the money sent for them to distribute to the victims. I think it should still go to the ministry but be ring-fenced and given to them. That is what we said in the committee.

I noticed that on page 55, we left out an item to do with the Electoral Commission’s regional and office space because they wanted to construct offices in the regions and we had given them Shs 2 billion for the financial year 2018/2019. There was also relocation of their offices, which was considered but I pray that the amount is increased because they have to move as a whole.

The issue of tax remuneration was supposed to be considered in a phased manner and only one phase has been given. I pray that the committee considers that. I thank you. 

6.43
MR LAWRENCE BIYIKA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I would like to thank the budget committee for the report and to ask ourselves: what is our vision for this budget? What is our priority and what do we want to achieve with this budget? 

This is very important because we have our vision as a country and we have already put our commitment to the things we should do in order to reach our goals. Therefore, it is very important that we put our vision right.

Secondly, Uganda is an agricultural country and it is through agriculture that we can market and get money for education and for other sectors of the economy. It is really very important that in this budget, we give priority to agriculture. We have been talking about drought for the last one year and we have not put enough money for water for irrigation. We should know that the challenges that we faced in the last one year should be partly addressed by this budget. 

There are other priorities like the primary healthcare. We are talking about hospitals but if we can address primary healthcare especially access to water, hygiene, sanitation and nutrition; we shall be cutting the disease burden so that we do not spend the money from agriculture on medical care.

We have been talking about climate challenges but we have not prioritised tree planting, access to water to the rural community and the environment in general. Energy is doing very well as someone highlighted; we hope that by the end of this year, we shall be very proud of energy.

In the economy, transport is very important. There is no way you are going to develop agriculture without transport; so, the issue of access roads to access markets is very important. One of the priorities should be to develop agriculture, improve the market through improving transport facilities – for example the roads in Zombo District - that area is very fertile and the level of agricultural production is very high. 

We have a lot of coffee and matooke and this food can go as far as feeding refugees in Adjumani but we do not have good roads. Our neighbours have good agricultural production but cannot sell. That is why there is a problem with education in that district because parents cannot sell their produce to pay school fees. Therefore, if the 120-kilometre road from Nebbi to Vurra via Paidha is done, it will improve life for the refugees and the local community.

Finally, we have talked a lot about giving priority to the oil roads. I would like to kindly warn that we should not over borrow money to develop the oil sector. Otherwise the price of oil is going down because all countries are going for renewable energy. 

Currently, if you take the estimated amount of oil we have in this country of 6.5 billion barrels and 1.4 per cent recoverable, we are talking about raising $416 billion. However, if we over borrow, we are likely to make losses because many countries are embracing renewable energy by 2030 and nobody will talk to us about our oil anymore. 

Therefore, in order for us to develop, we should not over borrow - these oil roads, the airport - we should address them at a minimal amount. Otherwise, the price of oil is going down and we should do it quickly or else we shall make big losses with our borrowing. 

On the issue of - (Member was timed out.)

6.47
MR JOSEPH KOLUO (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Climate change is real and the best way to manage it is for the Government to plant as many trees as possible to avert the lack of rainfall. 

Toroma is surrounded by Lake Bisina and Lake Opeta but last year, we were affected by famine. People were just looking at the water without any way of getting it for irrigation. I wish there was a way the Government could avail simple technology to help people irrigate their crops. 

Secondly, Toroma is on a lower altitude and all the water coming from Karamoja goes through Toroma and Katakwi up to Lake Kyoga. All the valley dams are silted; they should be opened up so that with the next rainy season, the water can be used to help farmers.

Regarding education, my colleague talked about Soroti University. In 2015, hon. Jesca Alupo was pushing for the opening of that university even when it was incomplete. The university is now at 90 per cent complete. Why can’t the Minister for Higher Education open this university?

Lastly, I would like to talk about tourism. Uganda is the most beautiful country in the whole of Africa. We have resources but Rwanda is beating us. They are marketing Uganda’s resources based on what we have such as the source of River Nile. 

I appeal to the Government to consider tourism as one of the sectors through which we can earn a lot of money. We should invest a lot in the marketing and promotion of the tourism facilities and activities that we have in Uganda. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the issue of planting trees, Ethiopia has been planting 12 million trees a year. In 10 years, they are going to have more than 20 million trees. They have already earned $2 billion from the Climate Fund. We have earned nothing.  

6.51
MS ROSE LILLY AKELLO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaabong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report. 

Tourism gives us a lot of revenue in this country. However, in the National Budget Framework Paper, I have not seen where the Minister has allocated money to compensate the lives of the people who were killed by animals and the crops being destroyed by animals.

Madam Speaker, I live in a community around Kidepo National Park. During the last harvest, many people died. In one of the sub-counties, about five women were killed in the gardens. However, there is nothing that Uganda wildlife Authority or the Ministry of Tourism is doing to compensate their families or for the food being destroyed. All they do is to take a bag of maize flour and beans during the burial. Therefore, I interest the ministry to budget for compensation.

I would like to find out from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; in financial year 2014/2015, Kalenga-Biira Road was put in the budget and the feasibility study has already been done. However, nothing is taking place. 

Lastly, I would like to talk about the 13 districts that my sister talked about. The remaining 13 districts are from the northern and eastern regions. It is unfortunate that they are saying that there are no funds yet when new districts were created in the western region, funds were available for all of them. Are we unfortunate or are we not part of this country? 

I really request the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to do something about it because it can politically affect us as the Government. Thank you.

6.53
MS ROSE AYAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to commend the Committee on Budget for the work well done.

My comment is on the women empowerment programme. According to the report of the committee, this project has not received any allocation in financial year 2018/2019. This is a very appalling situation given the fact that the project was put in place to help the disadvantaged poor women access a source of funding for their livelihood. 

What will happen to the rural-poor if there is no allocation to this project in this financial year? What will happen to those women who are already suffering as a result of exploitation from the people - (Interruption)

MS KYINYAMATAMA: Thank you. Still on that issue, honourable members, you will recall that this was a pledge made during the presidential campaigns. Every rural woman is aware that there is money that is going to come from the Government. We mobilised our women who formed two groups per sub-county and waited for the money. 

Worst of all, the National Budget Framework Paper has not even budgeted for the few groups we expected to benefit. This implies that this fund is no more. The women are aware and well informed. What is going to happen? Honourable members, we cannot always disappoint our people. Thank you.

MS AYAKA: Thank you, honourable member, for this information. This is a very serious matter given the fact that women are already aware. Many of them who could not access these funds previously borrowed money from lenders, who ended up exploiting them. As a result, many have abandoned their homes, families have been broken and children are suffering. This is very serious. This money should be put back in the budget.

On the energy sector, my colleague previously commented on the issue of power generation in this country. We have only 23 per cent of our population connected to electricity yet this electricity, according to the records, is generated in excess. Since we cannot consume this excess, the tariffs keep rising. Currently, the tariff has risen by 24.9 per cent. This is as a result of failure to utilise what has been generated. 

It is ironic that we generate more electricity than we can utilise; worse still, even the few households that are connected to this power - the 23 per cent - cannot use this energy for domestic use such as cooking and lighting. Many of these within the urban setting use charcoal which results into degradation of our environment. We have already suffered a lot from the effects of climate change. There is a lot of deforestation. 

Recently, I was up country and every evening, I would find about 15 to 30 trucks fully loaded with charcoal from the northern side of this country. Everyday trucks leave with this charcoal to the urban centres. This means that electricity is unaffordable and even those who are connected cannot use it effectively for cooking and for lighting purposes.

Therefore, there is need to have many more households connected to electricity so that - (Member timed out.)

6.58
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and the chairperson of the budget committee most especially on raising the issue of the mismatch between the outcome indicators in the Budget Framework Paper and then the indicators of the strategic plans of ministries.

How do we expect to reach where we want to go, our vision, aspiration when in budgeting, we put outcome indicators that are weak and do not match with what is in the strategic plan and the vision?

Madam Speaker, when you look at the report, the ministries like agriculture, health, education and the East African Community, have the same problem. That means we plan to go to Entebbe Airport but we end up going to Kololo Airstrip and we think we have gone to where we wanted to go. 

I think next time, Parliament must crack the whip on ministries that have outcome indicators that do not match. They should be sent back and asked to do the right thing. When we talk about agriculture, we want to increase productivity but we have forgotten about irrigation. 

This means that we set activities that are not strong enough to help us achieve the goals and objectives and that must be the core of dealing with the Budget Framework Paper and that is the only way Parliament can help this country move to middle income status.

Madam Speaker, on UNRA, one of the challenges that UNRA has is donor funding and Government of Uganda projects. The ministry of finance will always come here with a Certificate of Financial Implication, then we pass the loans but when it comes to giving money to these departments - UNRA, Uganda Rural Electrification and other projects - they do not give them the money.

The bulk of the money that they need has not been provided for them to execute projects; how do you expect them to execute to the tune that we want when they have not been given money.

We also have another problem with the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, where there is the whistle blower, the administrative review and all these take time and we need to deal with them if we want to see faster performance of the budget in some of these sectors. If we do not do them, then we shall remain at the same place and we are not moving.

I would like to thank the chairman for advising Government to go ahead and implement a programme that was passed by this Parliament regarding the districts that are supposed to be operationalised this year. Kwania is one of them.

The ministry of finance sent Indicative Planning Figures (IPFs) to Apac District Local Government. The district budgeted for Kwania District and it even has the code but someone in the ministry of finance just thinks we need to raise money and do less talking. I think this is not how we run the country. It was passed by Parliament and we are speaking out asking Parliament to say “No”.

Finally, we have opportunity to benefit from the East African Community integration with a wide market and many activities to be done. Unfortunately, we have not done much to sensitise the people to create awareness even right from Parliament here, to ministries, to departments and local governments. People need to know about the opportunities that exist in the East African Community.

In addition, when you look at the budget of the ministry, it is like a conduit for money to Arusha and then they will remain with a meagre budget of about one billion. I am therefore requesting that when it comes to the ministerial policy statements, let us give enough money for the –(Member timed out.)

7.02 
MR PETER SEMATIMBA (NRM, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to commend the budget committee for this wonderful report. Both the majority and the minority reports have brought up interesting discussions in the House. 

I would like to use my few minutes to talk about the increased poverty levels in Uganda from the perspective of the domestic arrears. You will agree with me that the engine of any economy is the private sector. In Uganda, the domestic arrears have now gone up to Shs 2.9 trillion. 

Another way of looking at it is that money that would be the working capital of the private sector is tied up in domestic arrears to the tune of Shs 2.9 trillion and yet only Shs 300 billion or only 10 per cent has been allocated to dealing with that huge deficit. In short, it will take us 10 years assuming that we accrued no more arrears to cover that.

Therefore, I think one of the reasons this country is experiencing increased poverty levels is because the private sector is being hurt by having its capital tied up in domestic arrears. I would like to take this opportunity to call on the budget committee and ourselves to see if we can put more emphasis on getting rid of the existing domestic arrears so that the private sector can get a lot of that working capital and get itself going.

A working private sector means more people are employed, more taxes are collected by Government, everyone is happier and people are busy making money - improving on our security as people will have less time to and get involved in strikes.

In conclusion, I ask the budget committee to allocate more money to the domestic arrears especially bearing in mind that an analysis of the budget shows that some sectors have been allocated money which is a bit more than their absorption capacity and maybe some of that could be brought back to deal with the domestic arrears. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.05
MR GORDON ARINDA (NRM, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My biggest concern is in the health sector, whose budget has unfortunately fallen by 7 per cent. 

However, we need to recognise that in this country, we have about 290 health centres IV but many of them do not have operating theatres including Bushenyi Ishaka Municipality Health Centre IV.

I am informed that about 30 per cent of the health centres IV will not have operating theatres. I think as Parliament and the country, we need to prioritise the operationalisation of all these theatres in those health centres IV because these are very important. At least every constituency should have a theatre and an ambulance.

Madam Speaker, I have seen you running all over the country commissioning ambulances, which have been donated by members of Parliament. I do not think it is the duty of members of Parliament to run around donating ambulances. It should be the priority of the Ministry of Health to give ambulances to our health centres IV.

The other issue is on the salary disparities but this time, I am not talking about the civil servants but only the pensioners. Pensioners in this country have not had an increment since 2010 and it is very unfair. Many of them have not even had - after 15 years on pension, a pensioner is supposed to automatically get full pay but none of them has accessed that full pay. 

The ministries of Finance and Public Service need to prioritise this. These are our elders; they served this country and they need to be thought about.

The other issue is about climate change. About two weeks ago, I went to one of our hills in my municipality to check for water sources but we did not find any. Most of these hills are owned by rich men and it is very difficult to say, “Let us go up and plant trees.” I think that is where we probably need to support our President on the Land (Amendment) Bill because most these hills are owned by rich men and you can hardly find poor men up there. 

How do we plant trees on these hills which are not owned by Government or the poor people? How are we going to do it? We need to support the President on the Land (Amendment) Bill so that we are able to go up and plant trees to enable us have forests and water. Otherwise, Madam Speaker, we are seated on a time bomb in this country. Climate change will be the biggest challenge to mankind –(Member timed out.)

7.08
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. As you have observed, every Member who stood up to talk has talked about allocations, reallocations and supplementaries. 

The Office of the Auditor-General has made several reports on many Government agencies citing corruption and unless this is tackled directly to find a solution to the increasing corruption in many agencies, we shall keep on lamenting. Our resource envelop is very small; all we have to focus on is how we are going to increase our revenue base. Let us address corruption in our agencies so that we move ahead.

Secondly, I also strongly support the proposal to exempt taxes on all irrigation materials and equipment to improve on agriculture country-wide. This financial year, the President moved all over the country demonstrating bottle irrigation, trying to show people that you can irrigate in the cheapest way possible. With taxes on irrigation equipment, we cannot achieve irrigation the way we have planned it. We need to remove taxes completely on all irrigation materials and equipment and that way, we shall improve on agriculture as other countries are doing. Every time we have the drought all over the country and people complain; it is time we changed the way we do our farming.

I also support the proposal to increase on the allocation for SACCOs as many of our rural people countrywide prefer borrowing money from their SACCOs within other than going to the banks with high interest rates. Sometimes they have the emotional- fear of borrowing from banks because some of them think banks are always after their assets. Therefore, I urge that we increase on the funding for the SACCOs to help our rural people because they prefer them to the banks.

Madam Speaker, we are creating many municipalities; Lugazi Municipality where I come from and many others have been created. The rationale of creating the municipalities is to improve on service delivery and also to facelift our country. When we got some funding from USMID, the old municipalities were allocated some money to work on their roads. 

The new municipalities – for instance, in Lugazi, we do not have a single tarmac road apart from the main highway. When I say I am from a municipality, people think I am coming from a well to do constituency but I am similar to these rural municipalities like Kachumbala. Therefore, it is my appeal that we allocate at least 10 kilometres to each new municipality so that we can also improve on –(Member timed out.)                     

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on a fresh note, I would like to commend the USMID programme in Arua. We went for the NRM celebrations and the roads are really good in the municipality; something good was done in Arua. 

7.12
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the Budget committee for coming up with this report amidst the pressures of time. 

We are debating and discussing the budget with the ultimate purpose that service delivery is given to the people. Unfortunately, for the case of my place Kibale, whereas the Minister of Local Government feigned ignorance of where Kibale belonged in the beginning, they went ahead to lamp the Indicative Planning Figures (IPFs) for Kibale under the new Butebo District. In this financial year, the people of Kibale have suffered; they have not got the services and those who are working have not been paid salaries.

However, even after the matter was resolved, as we speak, again the Ministry of Local Government has refused to respect bringing back the IPFs of Kibale from Butebo to Pallisa District. I appeared before the committee and they are not willing.

In this current financial year, the ministry of finance advised the CAOs of Butebo and Pallisa to enter a Memorandum of Understanding so that the funds are transferred to Pallisa but the Ministry of Local Government refused those people to enter a Memorandum of Understanding. 

Therefore, even with this budget we are discussing, if this issue is not rectified, the people of Kibale County are going to suffer. I, therefore, appeal to you, Madam Speaker and Members, that this matter ought to be rectified before the people suffer and this is about respecting resolutions of this House.

We have a problem; there are some Government ministries and agencies that do not seem to respect the recommendations and resolutions of Parliament. I think we need to style up here. 

Having looked at the Budget and what we have, there is something which is a very big problem to this country and that is security. Right now, we are experiencing a lot of security lapses but when it comes to budgeting, the security areas are not appropriately funded. I would like to take specific concern about the Internal Security Organisation, which is mandated by the Constitution to gather intelligence information. 

Madam Speaker, I saw the team that appeared before the sectoral committee. The Internal Security Organisation had asked for about Shs 220 billion to purchase vehicles, motorcycles and facilitate themselves but the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had allocated Shs 19 billion to these people. I think this is why we have problems with our security and that is why you hear that the boda boda 2010 have taken over – (Member timed out.)     

7.16
MS CAROLYN BIRUNGI (NRM, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My biggest concern is about water transport and ferry services for the island districts. 

I represent Kyamuswa County in Kalangala District and this constituency has suffered for 25 years without a ferry or ship yet Government has been promising ferry services year in and out. 

I have been disappointed and I tried raising my concern with the Ministry of Works and Transport and they promised that in financial year 2018/2019, they will buy a ferry for Kyamuswa County. However, when I read through the report of the Budget committee, I did not see this item.

I, therefore, beg, Madam Speaker, that the Budget committee picks this item of provision of ferry services for Kyamuswa County in the financial year 2018/2019 and I request that the chairperson allocates money for it. Thank you.

7.18
MS IDAH NABAYIGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add to what the Member of Parliament for Kyamuswa has said. For decades, Kyamuswa Constituency has lacked transport facilities. For the case of Jumba, we are covered but we expected this issue to be in the National Budget Framework Paper for the next financial year. We have read the report and there is nothing and we pray that the Chairperson of the Budget committee adopts it.

Another issue is about the fisheries sector. The Budget committee left a disappointing comment. They said that the fisheries sub sector has not been prioritised this financial year but we know that in 2016, the Government of Uganda got $121 million from the fisheries sector. 

Of the Shs 27 billion which was requested, only Shs 5 billion is allocated to the fisheries sector. We know that today, the UPDF have operations on the lake and these people are not well-facilitated. They have support staff that are not paid and this means that we are tempting them to be corrupt. Therefore, I beg that these people be facilitated and that the budget is increased to ensure that they operate well and the operation is successful.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, about the salary; I was a senior personnel officer in Kalangala District before I joined Parliament. Every financial year, there was salary enhancement in the budget but I wonder what happened to the Government. Therefore, I beg that we should not just enhance a few people’s salaries. We should consider full blast salary enhancement to the different categories of people. I beg to move.

7.20
MS MARIA GORETTI AJILO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank the committee for the report. I will start with the revival of the Cooperatives movement. It is quite disappointing that we are talking about going towards a middle income status and agriculture being a backbone but priority has not been given to the cooperatives movement. We have a Shs 20 billion unfunded priority to revive the movement. 

There has been a plea for the cooperative bank, which is the farmer’s bank and which is the credit line finance for the farmers to be funded. This has not been done and about two weeks ago, I watched the cooperative movement leaders in their conference, I think in disappointment and frustration say, “Now to revive and re-capitalise the bank, let us contribute from our membership so that we can fund the bank.” That was quite frustrating. For how long are they going to collect money to capitalise the bank? 

I think Government should take it seriously. The cooperatives are the only way we can have farmers organised so that agriculture can have meaningful productivity that can push this country forward. 

In addition, talking of zoning, the Teso region has been zoned for citrus production. The factory is due to start work but from what I know, the farmers are getting frustrated because of the high cost of growing fruits. How I wish that inputs like fungicides and pesticides could be subsidised so that farmers can easily acquire them to produce. 

Right now, they are saying that if that factory starts operations, there is only a 50 per cent stock of oranges that can run the factory. It can even run for only three days and close because the fruits are not enough. The farmers are getting frustrated and discouraged; they are not growing to support this factory. In the end, this may become a white elephant.

On the issue of food storage - the silos - we have sung on the Floor of this House about silos. In Kaberamaido, there was a good harvest last season but you should see how much the farmers are selling their produce in the market - very meagre rates. This would have been the time when Government would buy this food from the farmers and store it in the silos for a time when there will be famine. However, there is no such thing, Madam Speaker.

7.23
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to commend the committee for a good report but I have got some observations.

In 1999, as a young boy, I walked to Budumba where His Excellency had come to address a gathering. Among the promises and pledges he made was to tarmac the road of Namutumba-Budumba-Butaleja and Nabumali and to construct a bridge over the streams of Kisilo and Buwesa. 

Madam Speaker, the Namutumba-Budumba-Nabumali Road is a very strategic road that connects to Lwakhakha Border and this border brings in goods from Kenya and in a way, it contributes to the GDP of the country. Since 1999, this road has been at the level of engineering signs. I would like to know whether it is a deliberate move by Government not to have this road tarmacked. 

Madam Speaker, yesterday you guided very well that under objective No.7, development must be balanced. Our people in Busoga and my constituency in particular, depend entirely on agriculture and most of the agricultural produce is sold in Kenya. The easiest route to Malaba is through Kisilo-Buwesa up to Tororo. When that bridge is constructed, my people of Busiki and Busoga generally will benefit since it will be easy for their goods to be transported to Kenya via the Malaba border.

Madam Speaker, I have perused through the report and that bridge is not among the priorities for the financial year 2018/2019. I would like to urge Government to prioritise this bridge. Fortunately, the budget for the sector has been enhanced. 

Finally, it was also a presidential pledge that has been on for more than 16 years that the Kaliro-Namutumba-Bugiri-Muterere Road will be tarmacked. This road connects over five districts but it is not anywhere in this report that it will be constructed.

Madam Speaker, about SAGE - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.

MR AKAMBA: The Government is not doing a favour to the elderly on the issue of SAGE. These are people who contributed to the development of this country but they think they are being discriminated against when they hear that in other districts the elderly are getting money and they are not. It is a constitutional issue because under our Constitution, people are not supposed to be discriminated against. In the budget of financial year 2018/2019, the issue of SAGE should come out clearly and it should be rolled out nationally. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Centenary comes, I just want to inform hon. Akamba that 95 per cent of the roads in the Busoga sub-region have been under design for the last 20 years. (Laughter)

7.28
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have only one concern about the urban councils which have suffered a setback in terms of their local revenues because of the presidential directive which was given, aware that most of these urban authorities collect their local revenues from the taxi and bus parks. There was a directive that was given deterring these urban authorities from collecting these taxes. If I give an example of Kasese Municipality, we were collecting Shs 370 million annually from the taxi parks, which revenue we have lost and there is no equalisation grant that has been given to cater for that revenue shortfall. 

We were also given an opportunity under MATIP (Markets and Agricultural Trade Improvement Project) to construct our markets but we have been waiting for the last many years. In the last six months, they had told us that the project was going to commence. The municipal authority was not able to collect revenue from the current market because the vendors were anxiously waiting to relocate. As a result, we lost Shs 160 million in revenue. Right now, we have so far lost, in Central Division, Shs 530 million which has not been given to us from the central government. The business at the urban authority is paralysed and we cannot even collect garbage. 

Therefore, I would like the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and government to address themselves to this issue and find a way of looking for resources to cater for these lost revenues of the urban councils by availing an equalisation grant. Otherwise, we shall not be moving in the next financial year. Thank you.

7.30
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My first issue is on health. The health budget has gone down yet we know the strike by doctors was not just about their salaries but also about equipment in the health facilities. For example, Gulu Regional Referral Hospital does not have even an ambulance. 

We were very happy that the X-ray machine put in Gulu Regional Referral Hospital would start to serve people but to-date we still have to continuously support our people to go to private clinics and institutions just to get X-ray services. In order for our doctors to work well, we need those facilities. However, if the budget goes down I do not know if we are going to meet that requirement, apart from accommodation.

We also talked about what they call “CHEW” (Community Health Extension Workers) and accordingly we were told that these will be civil servants at village level. If we really think about improving the health sector and we continuously bring the budget down from 8.3 to now 7.4 per cent, are we going to meet all those? If you go to health facilities right from health centres III – because I think there is a question mark on health centres II – you find that we have a lot of frustration. How can we help our people to get health services? You know health is about death – people dying. I do not know if we are going to continue lowering the percentage yet the Abuja Declaration also put us at, at least 15 per cent of the national budget. We are not doing well.

About roads, I have seen somewhere the report talks about low-cost sealing, saying “...instead of giving dust to our people, let us give this low-cost sealing.” And there was a gap of Shs 50 billion. I do not know about this low-cost sealing if it is like what they put somewhere in Gulu – on Gulu University Road – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.

MS AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. That low-cost sealing is very bad. It is better we go in for maybe first class murram other than this low-cost sealing unless that one of Gulu was the one which was not done well. Please, if we want to help our people we really should help them. 

When we talk about unemployment, you see that they put unemployment to be at 9.2 per cent. I do not know whether it is formal or informal. For me, it looks like they need to research more because unemployment cannot just be at 9.2 per cent. It is a little more than that. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.34
MS JULIET KYINYAMATAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to first of all commend the committee for a very good report. My major concern is on agriculture, specifically irrigation. When you look at the report you find that agriculture has not been given any allocation in specific amounts. It just talks in general terms and it has a lot of things embedded in it. 

First of all, there should be communal land in our villages where you can have enough source of water for irrigation. Yes, you can use the water bottles but if you cannot have access to water what are you going to use the water bottle for? 

Secondly, we do not have enough excavators to do valley dams in our villages. Without water, you cannot talk about irrigation and it is the major problem everywhere in this country, including Rakai where I come from. It is a very important issue and government has to know that we need water for irrigation everywhere in our rural settings.

The second issue concerns entrepreneurs in our villages and quick access to funds. We have been singing about SACCOs and how SACCOs are going to help our people and how it is easy for them to give money to our people. But there is no allocation for SACCOs in this budget. This is the song we have sung for the last two years we have been in Parliament - for people to join SACCOs but there is no money allocated. I think it is not about writing down what we think but what we can. The Youth Fund is not functioning. There is no fund allocated to the women’s fund.

Madam Speaker, the other time when you came to Rakai you remember what women said: “Rt. Honourable, you are here. You are our fellow woman, our money, our money.” The SACCOs have failed, the women’s fund has failed and the elderly fund has failed. 

I think there are some programmes that we need to be sincere about and admit that we cannot handle. Otherwise it is not just about seeking solutions that are not going to work. For the issue of SACCOs, it is very important that maybe we should not pass the budget without those funds because they are very important. There is no way we are going to fight poverty when our people cannot access credit. Credit in banks is very expensive.

Madam Speaker, the ministers are here. Please, our people are doing badly. Thank you very much.

7.37
MS RUTH KATUSHABE (NRM, Bukomansimbi County North, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is on health. We have very many health centres IV in different sub-counties that are just on paper but not functional. In my constituency, we have Bigasa Health Centre IV. It was just upgraded as a health centre but it has no doctors and there is no facilitation and yet is supposed to cover a large area.

My second concern is about pledges. Since 2006, the people of Bukomansimbi North, especially in the sub-counties of Kigangazi and Bigasa have been facing a problem of water for domestic and animal use. Since 2006 up to now, we have not had water. There was also a pledge for a bridge that connects Bukomansimbi to Gomba and Ssembabule. However, since then, it has not been constructed. The President had promised but it has never been fulfilled. I do not know if it is the ministries or it is somewhere else. Otherwise, I request to be included in the coming budget.

Madam Speaker, I would like to also request the Ministry of Education and Sports to upgrade some of our schools. We have one government school in Bigasa - Kigumba Secondary school - but it stops only at O’ level. When students complete senior four, they just drop out because some people cannot afford to take their children to boarding schools. Therefore, I would like to request that it should be upgraded to a higher level. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.39
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me this opportunity to comment on this report. First of all, I would like to thank the Budget Committee for this very robust report. It sounded in evidence very precise and all issues presented are well justified. It is anchored in the desires and aspirations of Members of Parliament and in the interest of the people that we represent. 

However, what I have noted is that it is very critical of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The same criticism keeps coming year in, year out. We see a lot of criticism around the microeconomic policy framework, issues concerning the GDP growth, domestic revenue mobilisation and the budget estimates. These same issues have been coming year in, year out and we are not seeing any response from the side of the government and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This makes me wonder whether actually the time we spend discussing and recommending on the framework paper in our committees, is justified. 

More fundamental, which should have been raised as a procedural matter, is that Parliament does one thing but someone somewhere decides on what should be given to the different agencies. A member has just pointed out that money was allocated for sub-counties but it was not given. We know that money was given for instance to the Ministry of Water and Environment as a development budget and we know that that significantly affects the production and productivity in this country, which is one of the priorities of Government. However, the ministry has received only about 30-36 per cent of their development budget. Therefore, you begin to wonder if the time we spent discussing these issues is justified. Otherwise, what is it that we are getting wrong which is probably making it difficult for those in the Treasury to act according to what Parliament has appropriated?

Finally, in view of the fact that departments and agencies are not getting the money that is appropriated by Parliament and the fact that the report is indicating there is a significant departure between the outcomes that we had in the last financial year and what is being reported and how difficult it is to track progress, I wonder whether there is adequate performance management on what is happening to ensure that we are getting value for money – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 62 members have contributed to this debate. I think it is an appropriate time to end the contributions from the Floor. We shall be receiving responses from the Government. I do not know how much time they require but I was told that the Minster of Works and Transport – how long will you take to respond? [MEMBERS: “Quorum.”] – you have quorum to listen. Just listen to the responses. Two minutes, minister. 

7.44
THE MINISTER FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Ntege Azuba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the Budget Committee for the report that has been presented and hon. Kivumbi, for presenting the minority report, raising concerns, which we will address in due time. By the time we come back, some of them will have been addressed. I will allude to some of them in my response.

Madam Speaker, I would like to start with the issue of absorption of funds by Uganda National Roads Authority. First and foremost, Government of Uganda funding absorbs everything and we remain with debt. The problems of absorptions come only on externally funded projects and we have very many reasons for that. I do not know if we have time to take you through but all these have been narrated to you. I will just give a few examples. 

Madam Speaker, for external funding, we have a problem of design and preparation as well as compensation. Many of the projects that have been ongoing, the contractors were on site before the designs were completed -(Interjections)- When Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) got these projects after funds were obtained two or three years later, they had to do a design review. Already, there is a contractor on site. What happens is that it leads to delay and the project cost goes up.

However, as a ministry, I would like to report that UNRA has adequate in-house capacity right now. The remedy is to ensure that the contractor does not go on site before designs are completed. The in-house team can now design internally. That I do not think will be of a problem as we move on. We will ensure that the project cycle processes have been mapped - (A Member rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you allow the minister to finish?

MR ISIAGI OPOLOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your indulgence. I am perturbed to hear the minister confirm that UNRA has internal capacity to do these designs, but in our interaction with UNRA, the UNRA team confirmed that they do not have internal capacity. The director and the whole technical team appeared before the Budget Committee and gave all the challenges they have and design was one of them.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, honourable. Actually, the same team appeared before the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and we asked them why the Northern Bypass has been actually delayed, to the extent that the first phase was completed but even right now, they are still dilly dallying with the second loan. 

They did say that one of the challenges that they have, Madam Speaker, is that they do not have designs and they did not even procure land at the roundabouts for them to be able to handle the flyovers. So, what is it that the minister is alleging that UNRA has the internal capacity and yet they cannot even build designs of this already done phase on the Northern Bypass?

THE SPEAKER: I thought you said they said they had not acquired the land for the roundabout? Isn’t that what he said?

MR NZOGHU: Together with the designs, Madam Speaker. They do not even have the designs.

MS AMONG: Madam Speaker, UNRA also appeared before our committee and we asked UNRA why they are spending more money on litigation. They confirmed that much of the money they spend is paying for idle time and idle equipment, because this equipment goes to the site and then the contractors charge them for the idle time and idle equipment. Why? This is because they do not have the capacity to have the designs in time and they even give out contracts when they cannot give the designs in time.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, that shows the big problem we have. I am sure that – 

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Just a small one. Madam Speaker, I am happy she was a former chairperson of UNRA. Are you not the one?

If it is true that people are going before the designs and before the compensation, then there are people who do not like Uganda. If I am signing an agreement with you, I say, “You are giving me this land and you must ensure that it is free from encumbrances.” To do a road, you must give somebody a road to work on when there will be nobody to stop him or her from working.

Now, if you are giving somebody a road which has issues, it means you are colluding with the contractors to rob us and this is very dangerous. These are just criminals on the block, walking here, coming to tell us –

THE SPEAKER: No, no, no! Honourable members, let the minister answer, please. We have had a debate. Let us hear from the minister. (Ms Ogwal rose_)- you spoke.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: No, I did not. Just a small question.

THE SPEAKER: You are now grabbing? (Laughter) Hon Isiagi, have you not completed?

MR ISIAGI: Madam Speaker, let me conclude. I would also like the minister to clarify: The UNRA technical team also gave us clear information on how they have contracted people to design, cost and build. The same contractor is the one even to cost. Actually there is a big problem; so let the minister clarify for us all that.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, one of the running complaints in this House in respect to loans, especially to UNRA, is that they go with the component of capacity building. They told us that the engineers said there is money for capacity building in what we have been borrowing; what has happened? Minister?

MS AZUBA: Madam Speaker, as a minister, I am ensuring that there is capacity building and there is a design team and the design team is working. However, there is much backlog. That is why in many cases, they are procuring consultants and with our knowledge. That is why I said going forward, we are going to use internal capacity. Where it is not possible, we will procure but ensure that no contractor goes on site before the designs are complete. That is one of the major reasons there are delays on the roads.

Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: I think the minister is being very honest and has confirmed that the high cost that has been highlighted by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi is actually true. That is what you are trying to tell us. The clarification I want from you, hon. minister, is to tell us; now that there is a pitfall, is there a deliberate act by people who are supposed to execute the work, who actually send contractors before the designs are ready? 

They know that there will be a cost and who will be responsible for that cost? That is what I am asking. I need that clarification because now that we know those who are inflating or those who are causing inflation of the construction cost, who is culpable? Have you ever held anybody responsible to refund the people of Uganda for the high cost that we have incurred for their lack of competence, for their negligence and for their deliberate act? Can you clarify, please?

MS AZUBA: Madam Speaker, at the beginning I said most of the roads that have been done have been there for over three or four years. That is why I am saying when the new UNRA came in, these roads were already in place and some of the contractors had been contracted.

I am giving hope that things are going to change because we have realised that part of the problem is with the contractors going on site before the designs are ready or before the design reviews. We need the time. If the designs have been there and it has taken more than one or two years and the contractor is procured, you need to do a design review. So, we are ensuring that the entire project cycle process will be mapped to ensure that these bottlenecks do not re-occur.

The other issue is procurement. We all know about administrative reviews. What also disappoints are the whistle blowers. Whistle blowers are also being treated as if they are also for administrative reviews. These whistle blowers – actually I have noticed they come mostly under one line of funding, but fortunately, Government is reviewing the law to ensure that even if there are whistle blowers, work projects can move on and the issues are dealt with concurrently.

For example, Bulima-Kigumba Road took more than two years, Entebbe Expressway has also gone through the same and that is because of administrative reviews and whistle blowers. It is continuing. For example, even Kapchorwa-Suam Road now, there is a whistle blower. It is a big issue.

Madam Speaker, the other problem is land acquisition. Mostly, there is inadequate release of the funds. However, at the same time, when we talk about land acquisition, it involves many other departments for which we have no control. For example, the Chief Government Valuer - there is a lot of bureaucracy in the administration where the person is. I believe the whole process needs to be reviewed.

The other one is counterpart funding. The development partners, honourable members, require government funding. At times, some of the government counterpart funding does not only cover land acquisition, it also covers areas where the civil works are not catered for 100 per cent. Therefore, when the amount coming from Government does not come in time, the pacts are affected when the contractor is already on site.

Madam Speaker, what has been happening is that if we attained 30 per cent of the land acquisition, then we would allow the contractor to go. However, if the funds are not coming and you have allowed the contractor to go and yet you cannot continue with the procurement of the counterpart funding, then it would make the project delay. 

The other one is external financing. The funds are released according to the projection done in the project appraisal. When it comes to starting the work, some of the needs could have changed when the funds have been signed for already. What happens is that even before we start the work, you will know the amount of money projected to be released and it would be released. However, at the beginning, you will also know you may not absorb that amount of money.

Therefore, the other issue is mobilising. Some of the delays come from the contractors themselves where the contractors take a lot of time in mobilising. I do not want to say that UNRA does not have any fault but the issue here is taking stringent measures, serious sanctions and enforcement of those sanctions where there are delays. 

A member gave an example of Jinja Bridge; that is a very good example, Madam Speaker. The project appraisal was done and there has been inflation in the end and there was an increment in the amount of funding needed. It also affects the cost of that bridge.

Madam Speaker, we need the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to increase funding to Government of Uganda. The funds that are coming through external financing are committed. Actually, I would like to thank hon. Tayebwa for pointing that out. I do not have to go into the details. They are committed to various projects. Even if you have one project lacking funds and you have another one where funds are delaying, you cannot reallocate that money. Therefore, those are some of the conditions.

I would suggest that Government of Uganda increases the funding for the roads so that we can do more roads.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to close. Honourable Minister of Works and Transport, please, conclude and the Minister for Health will come in. The others will speak tomorrow.

MS AZUBA: Madam Speaker, the other one is the issue of road units. I do appreciate the concern of the Members about the costs of the roads in Uganda. The issue, at times, is that the Members compare things that are not alike. I will give you two examples. The Ministry of Works and Transport conducted a study in 2013 and 2014. They compared Thika Road and Entebbe Expressway and Katuna-Kigali Road which was a rehabilitation and Mbarara-Katuna Road. What came out is that it was difficult to compare the roads because Katuna-Kigali was rehabilitation and the design period is 10 years while Mbarara-Katuna is a reconstruction with a design period of 20 years. When you look at the surface, they look similar but the costs have to be totally different.

Now, when you go to Thika Road, the length of the road is almost the same but the cost in Kenya was higher than in Uganda - (Interjections) - Madam Speaker, please protect me. I said that I am concerned and I agree the roads in Ethiopia are cheaper. We are setting up a committee; a very independent unit to benchmark and examine the prices and extent of this concern for the neighbouring countries and present a detailed report.

Madam Speaker, another thing I would like to highlight also where we are not comparing is cement. Cement in Nairobi costs cheaper than in Uganda. Asphalt is double the price in Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, the third issue I would like to address about what members talked about is community roads. We have issued road equipment to the districts and we have trained 951 operators. Therefore, we have properly trained operators. 

THE SPEAKER: Have you given the districts fuel to do that work?

MS AZUBA: Madam Speaker, it is true that we have not given fuel to the districts. We realised this setback and we have increased the amount in the budget for the financial year 2018/2019. We are also discussing with Uganda Road Fund - (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, you tried your best to help the minister but unfortunately, she was not following. Now that she has insisted on facts which she has as the authoritative minister in charge of that sector, can she bring to Parliament those facts so that we can compare with the ones we already have. We already have the data in our hands; so, can you, to prove that what you are telling this House is correct, come tomorrow with the facts? Otherwise, our rule does not allow you to make a statement on the Floor of this Parliament unless you can verify. Therefore, are you in order to misguide the House with falsehoods? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue is extremely serious because even in the Ninth Parliament, our committee looked at it and said our roads are extremely expensive. Now, if you say you have the information showing why this is higher, we would like you to present it here so that this country can know how we are spending this money. (Applause)

MS AZUBA: Madam Speaker, much obliged. My only concern is that tomorrow I have issues that concern my health and I will not be in Parliament -

THE SPEAKER: When we meet tomorrow, you undertake and they bring them to this House before the middle of February. 

MS AZUBA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I will give you a fortnight.

MS AZUBA: Madam Speaker, much obliged. We have the report. Therefore, in conclusion, I would like to answer a few questions -

THE SPEAKER: Are they individual questions now?

MS AZUBA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for letting me address some of the issues that the Members have raised and I will produce those reports.

THE SPEAKER: We would not mind if you sent the full text of the motion of what you wanted to say. You can also send it later for the record and the use of the committee.

MS AZUBA: Much obliged.

8.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate Members for the issues they have raised. But you will note that this is a budget framework paper and some of the issues will be captured in the ministerial policy statement.

The finance minister will respond to some of the issues; so allow me to just tackle three in just a minute. One is on the issue of Busolwe Hospital; I would like to inform the House that there has been a lot of information on social media regarding the state of Busolwe Hospital – (Interjections) - some renovation has been done there.

Regarding Busolwe Hospital under the Spanish debt swap, we had proposed to renovate both Busolwe and Kawolo hospitals and we had about €17 million for these two facilities. Kawolo hospital is almost complete and there is about $6 million available to renovate Busolwe Hospital and of course provide the equipment.

Regarding the facilities in sub-counties without health centres III, you may recall that this House passed a loan under the World Bank and we are now finalising the selection of these sub-counties without health centres III. Therefore, part of this money will be used to tackle this challenge but we will be looking at the hard-to-reach, island districts.

Regarding the Hepatitis B treatment, allow me to indicate that treatment is now available at the regional referral hospitals. Those - (Interjections) - yeah, it is free of charge and those who are in need do not have to travel to Kampala.
Previously, we had only two treatment centres and that was Adjumani and Mulago. However, currently all the regional referral hospitals provide this service and it is free of charge. We hope that before close of the next quarter of this financial year, we shall roll it out to some selected general hospitals.

Lastly, regarding the issues of the HIV/AIDS drug stock-out, I would like to indicate that we had a challenge in the period of September-December. However, this matter has since been resolved and we now have enough stock of the HIV/AIDS drugs in the country.

The issue of ambulances, X-rays and so on; we shall address them in the ministerial policy statement. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much. The other ministers will speak as they come in tomorrow. Honourable ministers, we expect you to respond to the proposals made especially, in enhancing the budgets of agriculture and water. We want answers on the Hansard. 

Honourable members, the House is adjourned to 2 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 8.12 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 1 February 2018 at 2.00 p.m.)
