



Tuesday, 9 January 2018

Parliament met at 2.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this first sitting in the year. Happy new year! (Applause) I hope the festivities and the holy season have been able to renew your faith and commitment to the service of the people of this country. I am really looking forward to doing serious business for this year to its end.

Honourable members, I wish to warmly welcome you to this sitting and congratulate you upon entering 2018. We waited for this year; it is finally here. As we begin this year, I urge Members to work together across political divides to fulfil the expectations of our people. As parliamentarians, in carrying out our oversight, representation and law-making responsibilities, we should promote harmony, understanding, cordiality, dialogue and engage ourselves rather than do the contrary.

The year 2017 was, in a way, very challenging to the Parliament of Uganda and collectively as parliamentarians, we should not allow any ugly and unbecoming incidents to re-occur in this House. 

I urge the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business together with the Leader of the Opposition and all the whips to dialogue and see to it that we do not only execute our responsibilities effectively and efficiently but also endure and ensure that the Government side, the Opposition side and independent Members coexist because they need each other and cannot live or act in isolation.

On a sad note, honourable members, the country and indeed some Members have lost their dear ones. The retired Archbishop Dr Livingstone Mpalanyi Nkoyoyo passed on a few days ago. He worked tirelessly for Buganda, Uganda and the Greater Anglican Community in promoting harmony, peace and development. 

I have also learnt of the passing on of Dr James Makumbi who served, among others, as a health practitioner, parliamentarian and minister in the Government of Uganda for a very long time with honour and distinction.

I have also learnt of the passing on of the beloved father of our colleague, hon. Joy Kabatsi, the Minister of State for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (Animal Industry). 

On behalf of Parliament and on my own behalf, I wish to convey our heartfelt condolences and to pray for their souls to rest in eternal peace. In honour of those mentioned and any other Ugandan who has passed on in the recent past, I ask us to rise for a moment of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On a good and happy note, I congratulate all Members who have received blessings, in one way or the other, for adding members to their families, graduation and weddings and so on. (Applause) I wish to congratulate the hon. Herbert Kinobere, the MP for Kibuuku, for registering a new-born baby girl in his family. Congratulations! (Applause) When he posted something on the chat group he said, “Both the mother and the child are doing well.” I asked him, “What about the father?” (Laughter) He laughed and later responded, “The father is also doing fine.” (Laughter) 

Many times we only talk about the mother and child; what about the father? I have seen fathers who have fainted in labour suites - (Laughter) - who risk going there thinking they are going to be compassionate with their wives but when the things start happening, they become patients in the hospital. (Laughter) So, we should also confirm that they are actually fine.

Honourable members, some of you who have decided to keep quiet about these blessings, we congratulate you nevertheless. Of course, hon. Acon in a rather by-the-way manner communicated that he had also got a baby in is family. Congratulations, hon. Acon, for adding to the population of this county. (Applause)

Honourable members, on the 18 December 2017 some Members of Parliament were suspended for various reasons. Hon. Ssemujju Nganda (MP, Kira Municipality), Hon. Gerald Karuhanga (MP, Ntungamo Municipality) and hon. Anthony Akol (MP, Kilak North) were suspended for three days. They are serving their suspension as required by the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and will be free to attend the sittings of Parliament and committees from tomorrow, Wednesday 10 January 2018. 

Hon. Allan Ssewanyana (Makindye Division West), hon. Jonathan Odur (Erute South) and hon. Mubarak Munyagwa (Kawempe Division South) were suspended for seven sittings, effective 18 December 2017. This means their suspension still stands and they are expected to return to Parliament on Wednesday 17 January 2018 and that should be next week. So, honourable members, please, respect this ruling; it will promote harmony.

Honourable members, as you may recall last year the Parliament of Uganda launched the annual Parliament Week with the intention of enhancing public engagement with the Legislature. I thank you for embracing last year’s event and wish to inform you that this year’s week-long activities will commence on Sunday, 21 January 2018 with a fundraising walk, whose proceeds will finance the establishment of a special community centre for people living with albinism. This is in keeping with this Parliament’s commitment to the cause of people living with albinism. 

Last year we collected a total of Shs 35 million. We hope to do even much better this year. It is on account of this that we invite you and all our stakeholders to contribute towards this important cause. 

The programme for the Parliament Week is as follows - of course I have already mentioned Sunday 21st, which is the launch and the fundraising walk: On Monday 22nd we will have a thanksgiving ecumenical service, the launch of the departmental exhibitions and the meet-your-MP session. 

On Tuesday, 23 January, Parliament will host a civil society workshop under the theme, “The voice of the people: a reflection of the 10th Parliament of Uganda.” On Wednesday, 24th January, the Parliament tours and the meet-your-MP sessions will continue, while the public-parliament sitting whose theme is, “Budget allocation and its impact on the standards of living of Ugandans” will be held on Thursday, 25 January. You are all invited and encouraged to attend the activities and avail yourselves for the meet-your-MP sessions and to invite your constituents to come and participate in these activities.

Honourable members, further communication but before that, I want to thank the Director and the entire Directorate of Legal and Legislative Affairs for their initiative. For the first time, we have gazetted our rules of procedure. (Applause) I want to thank hon. Ongalo for the work he did to improve on these rules.  They are now gazette - (Applause) - that means the public can now have access. One can go to Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation (UPPC) and buy themselves a copy so that they can know how we do things in this House. This is the gazetted copy of the Rules of Procedure, which is the same with the reprint that you have with the maroon cover, which I see the Government Chief Whip holding and whose copy I have here. Otherwise this is a gazetted copy and if any of you wants the gazetted copy of the Rules of Procedure, they can pick it from UPPC at a fee. 

Honourable members, we passed a law in this House and that law was sent to the President and acting under the authority of Article 91 (3) (b), the President returned that law to Parliament. Our Rules of Procedure are clear about what we do with laws that have been returned, if you look at your Rule 142 of the rules as they are now. I am required to read the text of the President’s letter and this request by the President is required to be resubmitted to Parliament and forwarded to the committee for handling.
 
Since the rules are very clear about what happens, I am therefore, directing that tomorrow, the minister responsible for this particular Bill should come and lay, on the Table, a copy of that Bill and explain to the House the concerns of the President in bullet form or in an organized way and then thereafter, we make the referral to the committee. That’s what Rule 142 says. So I have in command from the President, acting under Article 91 (3) (b) of the Constitution and I now read the letter from the President. There is a timeline provided in our rules and this letter still conforms to the 14 days provided in our rules because it was received by the Speaker of Parliament on the 2nd day of January. So we are within the 14 days and there are no complications. It was authored on the 21 December, 2017.

The letter reads: “The Rt. Hon. Rebecca A. Kadaga, Speaker of Parliament of Uganda, Kampala.
The National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill, 2012
I am writing in connection with the Biosafety law, which in fact, means ‘genetic engineering’. Why was it not so named clearly? 

Coming to the details, I have heard that the following points may be inimical to our future:

There are ancient crops and livestock with unique genetic configuration. Examples would include millet, sorghum, beans, the Ankole cattle, the enkoromoijo cattle...” he writes - (Laughter) - I am going to read in the English language. The letter continues: “…Ugandan chicken, etc. These products have got specific genetic makeups which our people have developed for millennia through the selection of seeds and good bulls and he-goats. Using the new science of genetic engineering, one may add an additional quality - drought resistance, quick maturing, disease resistance, etc. This law apparently talks of giving monopoly of patent rights to this adder and forgets about the communities that have developed original material. This is wrong. Yes, we appreciate the contribution of the adder. However, we cannot forget original preservers, developers and multipliers of the original materials. This must be clarified. (Applause)

There is apparently reference to a plan to have these genetically modified materials in the irrigated areas of Mobuku. Why have drought-resistant seeds in irrigated areas? Is this a hoax?


We welcome genetically modified seeds. I cannot accept the logic of Pope Urban VIII, who excommunicated physicist and astronomer, Galileo Galilei for saying that the earth was spherical, contrary to the uninformed Pope’s belief, following existing knowledge of the time that the earth was flat. However, to be on the safe side, the genetically modified seeds should never be randomly mixed with our indigenous seeds - (Applause) - just in case they turn out to have a problem. There should, therefore, be no cross pollination between the GMO seeds and our indigenous seeds. The law, therefore, should clarify that green houses will be used to imprison the pollen of the GMO seeds or distances should be stipulated so that there is no mix up.

Effluent from the GMO material should never mix with our organic materials. The law should clarify that.

Use of poisonous and dangerous bacteria as the inputs in genetic engineering must never be allowed.

The labelling must be clear and failure to label the GMO products clearly should attract severe punishment.

Using the term ‘modern biotechnology’ is vague. What if they start cloning humans? Genetic engineering for crops and plants must be clearly stated and so should the genetic engineering animal species such as controlling disease, etc.


The law should also not prescribe the home of genetic engineering to be the Ministry of Science and Technology. That should be administratively decided by the President, in accordance with safety and effectiveness of developing the science.

By copy of this letter, I am asking the Minister of Agriculture on whether National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) has already released some of these materials to the public. How will NARO stop the contamination of our indigenous seeds without the precautions mentioned in this document?

The consumer must be protected. If a developer of GMOs produces dangerous material that harms the environment or the people or animals (wild or livestock), that developer must be held accountable. 

Again, by copy of this letter, I am directing the Minister of Agriculture to work out, maybe with NARO, a plan for Noah’s Ark where all our unique, indigenous materials (for plants and animals) will be kept uncontaminated with any GMO for future use if there is any crisis within the modernization efforts.

Finally and, therefore, I am requesting the Parliament to reconsider the points I have noted above and review the following clauses of the Biosafety law: 

The Title to the Law
Sections 3, 15, 16, 25, 26, 35 and 36.
Yoweri K Museveni,
President.”

That is the letter that the rules require me to read to you and I now direct as follows: the person in charge of this Bill should have the original text of the Bill as sent to the President laid before the House tomorrow, and make a statement on the motion regarding what the President has requested in a fair detail before we refer this matter to the committee, which must handle it within two weeks before reporting back to this House for us to take a decision on whether to adopt the Bill as it is or incorporate those recommendations made by the President; it is so directed.

Madam Clerk, please extract and forward to the minister, the copy that you sent to the President because that is the only copy. I do not think anybody else has a copy. Give it to the minister so that he is able to lay it before the House tomorrow afternoon. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising; I thought this was a Government Bill that was cleared through Cabinet, which is chaired by the President. So, what happened? Was this Bill just smuggled or what? The procedural issue I am raising is: why would a chairman of a committee return his own Bill to the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairman of -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: When I said chairman of the committee, I meant chair of the Cabinet - Cabinet is a small committee somewhere. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I think you wanted to say something else. (Laughter) 
Honourable members, Bills are read for the first time and sent to committee whereupon they are opened to the public. They are discussed, some parts are removed, added and others left. By the time they are passed by this Parliament one can hardly recognise their original text.

Therefore, it is possible that these issues being raised could have come through those processes and the hon. Nandala-Mafabi knows this. That is why I am saying he just wanted to say something. Let us proceed that way from tomorrow and onwards.

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising under Rule 217 of our Rules of Procedure. On 16 November 2016, this Parliament received, considered and adopted the report of the sectoral Committee of Natural Resources on sand mining in Kalungu, Mpigi and Wakiso districts. 

The report highlighted how sand mining had led to massive degradation of Lwera wetland, Kyewaga Central Forest Reserve and Lake Victoria. This was attributed to the use of unauthorized sophisticated dredging machines and methods, abuse of certificates of approval from National Environment Management Authority, the impact assessment sand mining permits as well as restoration orders, inadequate environment inspections and enforcement.

Mr Speaker, among the resolutions was that land titles issued illegally in respect of Lwera wetland be cancelled and the Minister for Lands, Housing and Urban Development reports to this Parliament within three weeks.

Another resolution was that National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) stops sand mining activities and institutes legal actions against persons or companies involved in illegal sand mining activities.

It was also resolved that NEMA and the Ministry of Water and Environment should report to Parliament, within three weeks, on the progress of restoration of ecosystems degraded through sand mining and the Ministry of Water and Environment would, with immediate effect, revoke river degrading license issued to Mango Tree Group limited and that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development undertakes a comprehensive study on sand mining by 20 October 2017 to establish the regeneration rate of sand in Uganda.

Mr Speaker, it should be noted that the resolutions remain unimplemented and no report has ever been made to show the progress Government is making on implementing those resolutions of Parliament. This may explain why there is increased and massive sand mining and subsequent degradation of Lwera wetland.

Mr Speaker, if you move around the Lwera area -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you still on procedure?

MS NAMAYANJA: Yes, Mr Speaker, you realise that there is massive degradation of the environment. The machines we were talking about have been brought back and are causing disaster. Rule 217, provides that the ministry concerned submits an action report on the actions taken. That is the procedural issue I wanted to raise. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the minister in charge of this sector present?

2.34
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Florence Namayanja for having raised this important matter. I remember Dr Kitutu came here and gave a report about sand mining. I also remember that the lands minister gave a report in Cabinet to the effect that there would be a cancellation of land titles. The minister of state from the lands ministry is present; he can now give the House a report on how far they have gone.

However, because this is a multi-sectoral issue where we have the environment, energy and lands coming in, is the reason I stood up to give that clarification and request hon. Baryomunsi to come and specifically tell us how far they have gone in regard to the cancellation of land titles.

Meanwhile, I will have to instruct the other ministers also to come and tell this august House how far they have gone in implementing the recommendations that fall in their dockets. 

2.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HOUSING (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I thank the honourable colleague, for raising the matter. The cancellation of titles is a process in accordance with the law. It requires the commissioner to issue a notice and within 21 days, there should be a chance given to the parties involved. 

What I can say for now is that I do not have the facts on how far the process has gone and so I request Parliament to give us up to Thursday so that we can come back and brief the House on how far we have gone in terms of that process of cancellation of those titles. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the cancellation of titles is the end of the process. Stopping the activity does not have to wait for the cancellation of the titles. Does it? Even if it is your land whose full title you have, you cannot carry out an illegal activity on it! 

Therefore, cancellation of titles should be the end of the process but the activities, as clearly guided by Parliament; you should have done something about it.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Yes, you are right, Mr Speaker. That guidance, ideally, should have come from the Minister of Water and Environment, particularly National Environment Management Authority (NEMA). Therefore, I will need to consult with the relevant minister there. Otherwise, our part as Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development was to initiate the process to cancel the titles. 

Therefore, I beg that you give us time to consult with the Minister of Water and Environment so that we can give a comprehensive report to this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, can you extract the actual resolutions so that when the ministers are coming back on Thursday, they may respond to those issues on the provision of the rules as cited by the honourable member on actions taken regarding what we said here. We do not sit here and talk to ourselves. When we make some guidance, you should at least tell us that you were incapable of implementing this one but implemented the other. It is just courtesy of public work. You should be able to tell us that although Parliament recommended this or passed such and such a resolution, we were incapable of implementing it. That way we will know you have come back and told us you have not implemented it. Otherwise, if you just go and sit and we don’t get to know what is happening, it is not right, honourable minister.
 
Therefore, Clerk, please extract the actual resolution to submit to the ministers responsible so that Thursday afternoon we can hear the full response on the action taken. 

MR NANDALA-MAFAIBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have raised a very important issue. However, through you, I would like to seek clarification from the minister. I know hon. Dr Baryomunsi very well. He even came to our place in Kyambogo saying he was going to act but up to now, he has never acted on somebody who blocked a sewage line – (Interjection) - you came to Kyambogo.

Therefore, the clarification I seek is: have you been to the site to confirm what is taking place ever since Parliament directed that this activity stops? Have you been there to see whether it has or not? Or you are just here speaking, speaking and speaking without doing anything. 

Mr Speaker, for hon. Dr Baryomunsi to understand very well, I want to, through you, ask him to tell us clearly whether he has been to Masaka to assess those activities or not. If you have not been there, come and tell us. I know you have been so much involved in the “age-limit” issues but now, can you tell us -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when you come back on Thursday, please tell us if you have been to Masaka.
 
DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, the cancellation of a title does not necessarily require a minister to physically go to Masaka. 

On the issue of Kyambogo, I would like to say that this wasn’t a matter that had been processed through Parliament. It is hon. Nandala who requested me to intervene in it. I physically visited Kyambogo and thereafter, I instructed Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) to handle it. To my knowledge, it has been successfully handled.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, when you are raising matters, please raise those ones, which we have discussed here. Otherwise, we are going to end up with too many things that happen outside. (Laughter) Yes, point of order.

MR BUTURO NSABA: Mr Speaker, I just wanted to remind the minister and hon. Nandala that you had already ruled and we expect to come back to this issue on Thursday. I felt that this would end the matter for now. Thank you.
 
2.40
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker and happy new year, colleagues. Before we broke off last year, I did raise a matter following what we resolved when we were passing the Finance Bills because the minister of state for finance – hon. Bahati had convinced the House that when we waived the corporation tax from Bujagali, the cost of power would come down.
 
Mr Speaker, if you still use the old system and looked at the powers bills, the rate have only reduced by -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, on what matter are you specifically rising?

MR OKUPA: On the matter of national importance, which I had raised last time and Government had had to lay -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, these are basically procedural matters. For that, I know how I am going to handle. (Laughter) 

MR OKUPA: It is because of the pain that we have gone through, Mr Speaker, and I am sorry. However, on humanitarian grounds, may you allow me to raise this matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That is the concern. We do not want to take it that we were duped into waiving or exempting Bujagali from taxes, it is because we were told that the power tariffs would come down – it has come down by only three cents if you look at their invoice. Therefore, can the Minister of Finance and Planning and Economic Development tell this country what happened since he had told us that the cost of power would come down? I remember we had agreed that it would be from the thirteen to about five cents. We want to hear from Government why what they promised us has not happened.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we waived corporation tax many months back. Have the power costs come down?

2.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, the action that Parliament took regarding the corporation tax was part and parcel of the work we are doing to handle Bujagali in relation to power tariffs and we have not closed that matter. Therefore, I request that I come back here on Thursday and update the House and the country on this particular issue.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister said - because I remember asking, “When is this going to take effect?” and he told us that from mid-night of that 1st of July. So, I am surprised - (Interjection)– we shall read the Hansard. You are pointing at me with one finger; I will also do the same to you. 

Otherwise, when we read the Hansard, we get to know what the honourable minister told this House because the Chair at that time asked when it would take effect. It is now six months down the road – anyway, let us wait to hear from him on Thursday. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This matter is coming back on Thursday, so let us proceed with business. In the public gallery this afternoon, we have the former Member of Parliament for Butambala County and current Chief Executive Officer of the Insurance Regulatory Authority of Uganda, the hon. Al-Haji Kaddunabbi Ibrahim Lubega. Please join me in welcoming him. (Applause) I think he has come because there is a motion to be discussed but in which he has interests. 

2.46 
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI-SEMAKULA (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the outbreak of Congo Fever in Nakaseke District. This disease started early September and so far 22 people have been confirmed to have contracted it; eight of whom have died. 

Nakaseke District has created an isolation camp at Nakaseke Referral Hospital. However, there is a very big challenge associated with such kind of scourges whenever they occur in an area and that is the issue of funding.

My prayer is that Government comes out quickly to save the people of Nakaseke. I rest my case. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister -

2.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES)(Ms Sarah  Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is Ministry of Health, which is responsible for running the health activities in this country and we are responsible for declaring outbreaks once we have confirmatory tests. 

Mr Speaker, we have not communicated that information and therefore, it is not proper for any other person to come up and communicate information that is not correct; we should not alarm the population - (Interruption)

MR OCHEN: Mr Speaker, point of order. In this country we have a health system that runs up to the grassroots and that system is supposed to be responsible for updating the Ministry of Health on what is happening on the ground?

If that system is not doing its part and the people of Nakaseke take it upon themselves, through their elected representative, to raise such a matter in this Parliament, is the minister in order to subdue the voice of Nakaseke in this august House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, for you to raise a question in this House it requires that you give notice but the rules provide an exception that where the matters are so urgent one does not require to give a notice. (Applause) And this does not only apply to ministers but to every Member of this House. If there is a matter that is so urgent that one does not require to give notice, the Speaker will allow such a Member to raise such a matter. 

The question is: are there people dying in Nakaseke arising from the matter that the honourable member has raised? If it is so, I think it is just out of courtesy – because what we do here is courtesy to each other. If the minister knew that such things were not there she should have replied that they are aware but not to the scale the Member is reporting. So, the minister is not in order to say that nobody else can talk about such matters. (Applause)

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am speaking about declaring outbreaks because the Ministry of Health normally declares outbreaks after confirmed cases have been noted. 

Mr Speaker, we have not registered any deaths from the Crimean Haemorrhagic Fever in Nakaseke District. We had it sometime in August and we informed the country accordingly. As we speak, all the cases tested were confirmed negative. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR OSHABE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, the Member of Parliament for Nakasekke has indicated - and taking him on a point of ignorance because he has talked about Congo Fever - I think he must have heard it from someone.

Therefore, honourable minister, can you tell us why the 22 people have been cordoned off in Nakaseke? If it is not about the outbreak of Crimean Haemorrhagic Fever, tell us the reason so we get to know. Thank you.

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, the Crimean Congo Viral Haemorrhagic Fever does occur normally in the cattle corridors and you are all aware that Uganda has the challenge of ticks. Yes, there were suspicious cases reported. However, so far the samples collected from those who had been admitted have all turned out negative. However, since this matter has just been reported, can I come back to the House with a statement, maybe tomorrow, giving further details?

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for the honourable minister –(Interjection)– I raised a point of order when she was still on the Floor and she is still in this House and the Speaker allowed me to raise it - to continue insisting and misleading this House after you guided rightly that the only thing she should do was to answer, yes or no? 

The honourable member from Nakaseke asked whether the Crimean Congo Viral Haemorrhagic Fever has been identified in that district and called upon Government to rescue the people there. As you may be aware, over the weekend a number of people watching television news saw what is happening in Nakaseke, I inclusive.

Therefore, is she in order to continue pretending to be ignorant about what is happening in her ministry and denying what members are informing her and wasting our time?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think that particular matter has been overtaken by events. The minister said the matter has just come to her knowledge now; she will come back to brief the House about the situation.

She has admitted that there might be gaps in the information that she has as of now but which she needs to verify and then come back. As to whether she is not in order to continue not knowing, I find it difficult to rule on. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, the minister stated that of the cases they tested all were found negative. What were they suffering from? Can she tell us what they found and if it was not the other disease which the honourable member reported, what cases were they?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we deal with that when she comes back?

MR OKUPA: No problem, Mr Speaker.

2.56
MR FRED TUMUHEIRWE (FDC, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Happy new year to you and to the House! I rise on a matter of very urgent national important under Rule 53 (1) regarding the state of our rural roads. 

Mr Speaker, by the Grace of God our country received a lot of rain although in some areas it came with devastating effects. Quite a number of rural roads have been broken down due to those heavy rains and lack of periodic maintenance.

Mr Speaker, whereas we appreciate the new roads equipment that has so far been received in all the districts of Uganda and despite the availability of this equipment, there has not been any increment on the fuel budget to enable the equipment to be put to good use. 

Mr Speaker, in Rukungiri, we suffer a quarterly budget shortfall of 40 to 50 per cent. This leaves most of our road network impassable, poor and in urgent state of repair. I also believe this is the case across the country.

Mr Speaker, there is urgent need for Government intervention in fulfilling the budget provision so that the districts can have enough money to repair these roads. However, the Government should also make another budget provision so that the districts can utilise the new equipment for the rural people to utilise these roads so as to access the markets for the development of the economy.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have the equipment but with no fuel?   

2.57
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, before we took a decision to purchase these machines, we identified a problem and we were convinced that when we purchased these machines, our roads would improve. This was because we had problems in almost every district where by even people who could contribute fuel to work on the roads could not due to the high prices in hiring these machines. We now have the machines and we do not have enough fuel.

It is for us who appropriate the budget to make sure that according to what we have in the kitty, we appropriately put the money in the budget. Otherwise, the problem of lack of machines was solved and some of us have been using them to work on the roads. I appreciate that we do not have enough money to work on all the problems; we just take priority and so, it is with us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the way forward from what is happening? If you have no information, please pass it to the person who has it because there is no fuel in the machines? Time for lamentation is over; time for action is now. What is the way forward?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, we have the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development here but I thought I should begin by giving background on why we procured these machines. On the issue of putting enough money, the finance minister can guide us, but we are equally responsible because we appropriate funds to these districts.

3.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, as you may recall, we provided for Shs10 billion this financial year to do the maintenance of these machines and we intend to maintain that figure in the base so that it can cater for issues to do with fuel. 

Now that the machines have just come and maintenance levels are still low, that money can be utilised to fuel them as we move forward. We will, therefore, take it up with the Minister of Works and Transport to ensure that what is already provided for, under maintenance, can be used to cater for the urgent need of fuel. I thank you.

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable minister. The clarification I would like to get is in regard to what hon. Tumuheirwe talked about concerning rural roads. However, I stand here as a resident in Kampala where the roads here are in bad state, especially in Makindye where I reside, sometime we do not have where to pass. 

Therefore, I would like to get clarification, whereas the ministry will come here to clarify on the rural roads and because we are talking about roads and works, I would like to get the plan for the Government in regard to addressing the heart of a city and the nation, which is Kampala in having good roads.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister responsible for this sector is not present. However, when the minister comes, we will need to be helped. We have UNRA, what length of road network is covered by UNRA? 

Secondly, we have District Urban Community Access Roads (DUCAR). Who is responsible for these? How much money is given to UNRA and DUCAR? The bulk of the roads are in DUCAR - the bigger percentage of the roads are in this sector but how much money is allocated to it? 

Can the minister clarify on these concerns when he comes so that we see if there is unfairness in the distribution of the resources that we have, then we might have to review so that the District Urban Community Access Roads can also be supported sufficiently because they are not under UNRA.

So, when these matters come, please draw them to the attention of the minister concerned because we need some clarifications on these issues given the fact that most of the complains are with the District Urban Community Access Roads not with the UNRA roads. In my experience - I have presided over these matters for a while. We will get more information when the minister comes back – please, there is procedure at the moment. Let us proceed with the items on the Order Paper.

LAYING OF PAPERS

ANNUAL PERFORMANCE REPORT FOR THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR THE PERIOD ENDING 31 DECEMBER 2017

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the annual performance report of the Auditor-General for the period ending 31 December 2017.

ANNUAL REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE RESULTS OF AUDITS FOR THE YEAR 2017

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the annual report of the Auditor-General on the results of audits for the year 2017.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the records capture those two reports and they stand referred to the appropriate committee for review and advising the House on the content of these documents and how we will proceed with them.

PRESENTATION OF REPORTS BY PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATIONS ABROAD

A REPORT OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE ON ITS TWENTY-FIRST SESSION, HELD IN PARIS FROM 30TH NOVEMBER TO 13TH DECEMBER 2015

3.06
MR LAWRENCE ONEGIU (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Conference of the Parties to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change in the 21st Session, which is also held together with the session of the Conference of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, which was held from 30th November to 13th December 2015. This is what came up to be known as the Paris Agreement. I beg to lay.


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MR ONEGIU: I also beg to lay at the Table, Implication of the Paris Agreement for Uganda relating to the Conference of the Party.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR ONEGIU: I beg to lay the Paris Agreement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the Paris Agreement.

MR ONEGIU: In relation to Rule 33 (2) of Rules of Procedure, we are required to make some comment especially on the recommendation. The Conference of the Parties was held in Paris and it became the Paris Agreement, which others call the Paris Climate Accord and Paris Climate Agreement. This was held for the 21st time since 1992. The Kyoto Protocol was held for the 11th time since the meeting took place in Kyoto. 

This agreement focuses on cutting greenhouse gases by countries that are party including Uganda. It was negotiated by all the 196 countries and on December 12th, it was adopted. The Paris Agreement was open for signature on 22 April 2006 on the Earth Day at a ceremony in New York and several states ratified it. The required number of countries to sign was reached before the expected date hence the agreement went into effect on 4 November, 2006. 

Key aims of the Agreement were three:

Holding the increase in the global average temperature below two degrees and also putting effort to limit the temperature increase by 1.5 degrees by all countries.

Increasing the ability to adapt to the adverse impact of climate change and foster climate resilience and low carbon economy development pathway. Climate resilience in this case will mean adapting to it and so living with it even if we are doing agriculture or roads - we have to make them resilient to climate change impact. 

Lastly, the aim was making finance flow consistent with the pathway toward the low carbon gas emissions and climate resilient developments.
There are funding initiatives including the Green Climate Fund, the Global Environment Facility and the Adaptation Fund. Countries must negotiate for these funds, must lobby for them, must develop proposals so that they can access them to address some of these challenges. 

Fortunately, Uganda has made some progress along that line. We have developed our nationally determined contribution, which is what we have planned to do to address the climate change challenges. This is the nationally determined contribution. We have also developed the Green Growth Strategy. We are also in the process of developing the Climate Change Bill. We have also launched the REDD-Plus Strategy and we also have Renewable Energy Policy. These policies must be fast-tracked so that we can be able to address the challenges of climate change affecting especially the 68 percent small holder farmers here in Uganda living on less favoured land; infertile soils, drought prone, landslide-prone.

These challenges can be addressed if we can implement some of these strategies and initiatives we have developed but more importantly also, the development part by the global communities is towards renewable energy. So, we need to be a party to that. One of the initiatives is the International Solar Alliance. The document has been lying with us for almost six months. We need to sign that so that we can have solar for irrigation, for lighting, which will not only prevent women from suffering from in-door air pollution but also for pumping water for home use. This will help even in education, instead of children going to fetch water in the time they should be revising. 

We need to intensify tree planting on fragile eco-systems and also bodies like the National Forest Authority should intensify tree planting in the forest reserve. I think that will be very important.

Mr Speaker, this is presented in relation to the Paris Agreement or the Conference of the Parties sitting on its 21st time and 11th time to the protocol in Paris. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a debate without a vote. It is open debate from the report that has been presented by the Member and we will have a limited debate on this. However, this debate will not lead us to a decision. It is an informative debate and debate starts now. So, I do not have to frame any questions. We will start from Mbale Municipality then we will come to Bunyole, then Ngora.

3.12
MR JACK WAMANGA WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mbale and Elgon zone has suffered a lot from the climate change. We have had landslides and we have lost people. One of the biggest problems in this country, I do not know whether they addressed this issue - the issue of gas emissions in the atmosphere and the gases that come from old vehicles. Our neighbours in the region have banned vehicles that are more than five years. They do not enter into their countries. And these vehicles use lead fuel. And they emit gases into the atmosphere, which cause a lot of problems. When you go to Mulago Hospital now, we have many cases of Cancer and some of these Cancer cases come from gas emissions, from these old vehicles. This country has become a dumping place where we have got many places where old vehicles are being held. It has become a market place yet these vehicles are a danger. They cause problems. 

Therefore, I am wondering how Uganda is handling the issue of gas emissions from old vehicles. When are they going to stop these vehicles that are more than five years from entering this country? Ugandans are suffering without knowing this big problem. Was this issue addressed in the Paris Agreement? Or how has Uganda handled the case of stopping gas emissions from old vehicles?

3.14
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the chairperson of the Parliamentary Forum for Climate Change where I belong. As hon. Wamanga stated, when landslides are in Bududa, in Butaleja, we get the wrath because all the flooding comes to Butaleja. There are points, especially on the tree planting, I do not know whether the technical officers or the ministers in Government are deliberately failing this Government because just tree planting! Right now, we are in a dry spell. We are all aware that rains are coming around March but National Forestry Authority and NEMA are not bothered about giving tree seedlings. When we were young, we used to have wood lots at schools. Even when LUWASA Project came, they used to have wood lots at water sources.  I request Government to prioritise tree planting. That is where we can get water perforating into the soil. 

Finally, I saw on TV two days back when the people of Buliisa had not been compensated where they are going to construct the oil machinery and refinery. With this new technology coming on, where vehicles to be manufactured are for solar and others electric, where will Uganda sell the oil? Why can’t Government prioritise the construction of this oil refinery and we use the oil? Otherwise, when we dilly-dally, we shall produce the oil and there are no vehicles to use.

Therefore, I want to request the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - why can’t we compensate these people so that construction goes on? 

I wish Government prioritised tree planting. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.17
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to commend hon. Songa for presenting the report. 

As you realise, Uganda is one of those countries that ratified the UNFCCC Climate Accord. As an environmentalist, I feel that we are still lagging behind in terms of the modus operandi in the domestication of this framework at the country level.

Among the 54 countries of the African continent that ratified, different countries have put modalities in place in trying to address climate change. You could borrow an example of Kenya. It has put up a timeframe and a framework in terms of the implementation because as low developed countries, we face the damage of climate effects more than the developed countries. 

Already, at COP 21 a lot of money has been put aside from Paris when they were ratifying this agreement for the developing countries to benefit. Modalities were put in place for them to follow in terms of accessing the Green Climate Fund. I am sure even when we talk about pollution as a country, we get more effects from the developed countries - America, China and those other countries.

Therefore, a lot of funds have been put in place but I do not see Uganda accessing these funds. In terms of domesticating the framework, I would like to see the Ministry of Water and Environment coming up with a smart plan in terms of domesticating the Climate Accord including setting up a national climate fund.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, you act locally but impact globally. As a country, we came up with a ban on kaveera but up to today, this very Parliament has not done anything. We are still using kaveera. In Rwanda, when I am flying there, they check my baggage to see whether I have any kaveera –(Interjection)- in my suitcase. (Laughter)

However, in Uganda, the law was passed – (Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I think that as we pass laws in this House we should also put in place modalities for -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Members are concerned. Do you sometimes have kaveera in you? (Laughter)

MS AMONGIN: Mr Speaker, that was a slip of the tongue. I would like to say that when we make policies, we should be knowing how these policies would be implemented. If we carry on the ban on kaveera- (Interjections) I think hon. Wamai you are burning, let me allow information.

MR WAMANGA WAMAI: Thank you, honourable member for giving way. I am a member of the ACP-EU delegation from this Parliament and when you talk of Uganda getting assistance, the EU gives Uganda money to plant trees for carbon exchange. I thought that information was very important for you.

MS AMONGIN: Thank you for that information. I am aware of the EU fund. Mr Speaker, as Uganda, we still run a department of climate change, we need a clean climate policy that should be well equipped to ensure that we address our issues locally in terms of implementing all the things that we pass on this Floor. All issues that we are talking about tree planting are small things but they impact globally.

If we say that we ban kaveera, it should be implementable. We should be putting up a plan on how we can now transform to another way of carrying out these things.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, as I conclude, as a member of the Pan African Parliament (PAP) and as the leader of delegation of Uganda to PAP and as the chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture and Natural Resources, I think it is high time my country took a leading role in ensuring that there are key policies put in place in addressing climate change so that we become role models on the continent in addressing and domesticating the Climate Accord. Otherwise, we will keep attending the UNFCCC conferences and there will be no impact on the ground.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.22
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Climate change is one of these crosscutting but very fundamental issues with regard to our well-being. Uganda is expected to be one of the countries that will be hurt and hit most if no action is taken with regard to mitigation of climate change effect.

The major problems we experience through climate change are as follows: constant drought - you all remember and see, you almost touched drought and its terrible effects on our people. Floods - at one time, one third of Uganda - eastern and part of central and part of north was under water. Three months down the road, those same places were completely devastated by a long drawn out drought. It is also followed by landslides. It no longer rains. It pours - you hear now Egypt celebrating that they are getting a lot of whether - yes, they are getting it because most of the water that was being retained in Uganda in these other catchment areas is no longer kept there and it just rolls to the Mediterranean.

This is why there is a lot- we are celebrating that we have a lot of water in lake Victoria and putting up huge dams and projects on River Nile but give it more ten years, if no action is taken, I can assure you, from the science that we have been told and given, we are likely to get a disaster of all disasters through drying of the mighty River Nile - (Interruption)

MR OLANYA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for giving me way. I want to inform the Member that we have a certain factory in Jinja that uses charcoal or firewood. Therefore, most of our trees especially in northern Uganda are being turned into charcoal and if you look at the number of Lorries that carry bags of charcoal from northern Uganda to Jinja, it is very alarming. Therefore, we need to see the way of controlling such kind of factories. Thank you.

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you for that kind of information. I was actually coming to that as one of the biggest problems we are going to face - unregulated charcoal burning. For goodness sake, this House should put its feet down and say, “enough is enough.” You do not know how much I clapped and jumped up and down when I saw a chairman from northern Uganda trying almost single handedly to stop this menace and we are here talking, ministers, Prime Minister and everybody here and we cannot see the danger that is coming.

I think it is high time honourable colleagues –(Interruption)

DR BUKENYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened to my colleague hon. Byarugaba who has talked very well but I also know that he is the Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources and he was given responsibility by this Parliament to guide the policy of the Ministry of Water and Environment. I would have expected him to come and make a presentation on the way forward and I am sure the whole House would support him. Is he, therefore, in order to start lamenting in this House when he has a big office like that? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Probably, that is exactly what he was going to do with the report. (Laughter)

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I knew you would rule wisely like that. (Laughter) For sure you know that we almost shouted our voices dry. For sure, you know that the Committee on Natural Resources brought to this very august House a report touching on some of these issues I am raising. We made recommendations. That is where my powers stop. 

The minister should be coming out very clearly. I do not initiate policy. Thank you very much but let us all agree to take concerted effort to fight some of these seemingly simple but very devastating ills if we do not take any action.

Finally, Mr Speaker, there is a problem of budgeting. We all know very well that there is a tree planting fund. Maybe it would serve us best if we were told why this tree fund has never been put to use. Why have we not implemented that? Maybe the Executive could also come out clearly and tell us why the tree planting fund has never been put to its rightful use. Thank you very much.

3.28
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairman of the forum for this report. In my view, as an environmentalist, I think a lot has been said. We need to change strategy and I think we also need to include sensitisation of our people to appreciate and even participate in the mitigation and adaptation of the effects of climate change.

We keep on thinking in terms of getting money but if we get the funding, what do we do with it? I think the people must appreciate that the little fund that this country gets must be put to good use. I must thank the National Forestry Authority which has distributed seedlings to Members of Parliament. 

We have given out seedlings but the people do not look after them well. There is climate change. People do not take it seriously because the seedlings are given for free and maybe others do not even know how to go about watering those seedlings. 

For instance, in my constituency, I have received seedlings but when the dry season comes, people just let them die. Every year we are asking for seedlings. We need to sensitise the population to appreciate this.

I would also like to thank the Ministry of Works and Transport which has adopted the policy of planting trees along the newly constructed roads. I particularly thank Gen. Katumba Wamala, who is working tirelessly to implement this bringing tree planting to a different level. Apart from sensitising households, major Government infrastructure projects should include the tree planting. There would be no harm if all the approved house plans have the element of trees so that we cannot approve a construction plan without the element of trees. That would bring it to another level.

I also think that as a country, we need to quickly ensure that what we decide as Parliament must be put implemented. My colleague talked about kaveera and indeed the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) is struggling. You see conflicting interests. Government looks at profits rather than environmental redemption and at the end of the day, we lose out. They come and say we are losing revenue and they do not know that we are losing the future of Uganda. 

We have put into place the tax on used vehicles, as my colleague was putting it, but that money has never been given to NEMA yet they are the ones who are checking the excesses of these bad vehicles. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is holding onto it and this is a government arm.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, until we put this right, we are going to keep on lamenting. We expect money from abroad and the money comes and we divert it; that will not help us. My special appeal is that the climate change effect is real, it is non-discriminatory and will be for all of us. As a country, let us quickly make it a priority. 

I would like the forum to increase on the sensitisation and I would like this Parliament to have a full committee on climate change to fast-track mitigation of the effects of climate change. This will take us to another level. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have only six minutes for this item. I will have the members from Kasilo and Rwampara counties.

3.33
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Mr Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank the honourable member who has taken this initiative to really give us a brief regarding the issue of climate change and to lay the document at the Table. We think it would have been the Ministry of Water and Environment to do this but it has been done by the forum and not even the committee of this House. I would like to thank the member for doing this but the ministry should take its part and keep doing what it is supposed to do. 

I am happy that the minister has come in to hear and pick the concerns that Members have in regard to climate change. I think we must also do things timely because the honourable member is laying the document on the Paris Agreement, which happened about two or three years ago today. What has the ministry been doing? This must have been done much earlier. The chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources is there lamenting. Yes, chairperson, when we make recommendations and Parliament adopts them, you must follow them up. You must keep waking up the ministry officials by asking, “How far have you gone?” You could possibly do this quarterly. 

However, if after the approval by Parliament you keep quiet, we shall keep on bashing you because you are our eye on the ministry. Therefore, honourable chairperson, please, I would appeal to you to put to task the Ministry of Water and Environment to make a progress report, possibly quarterly, regarding the matter of climate change such that we are able to follow up. 

There was the Bonn Agreement in November but we have not yet received a report on what we discussed. Are we going to receive it after another two or three years? Can we have these things timely reported to this House?

Mr Speaker, hon. Namayanja raised the issue about non-implementation of the resolutions of Parliament when we raised the issue of sand mining in Masaka. The minister is now here. We would now re-echo because these are all matters that relate to climate change. We make the resolutions but the implementation is not done. I think the ministry should take the resolutions of this House seriously. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.36
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to dwell on one area. We have been talking about climate change as a country. I was in the Eighth Parliament and a member of the forum. We are just theoretical. We would go to international conferences, talk and come back and do nothing.

Mr Speaker, since 2007, I have been involved in community tree planting and people can respond. Last year when we held the ministry review workshop, I managed to share a thematic area of biomass and I found that we need to change some of the aspects on the biomass area alone. I would like to dwell on that one.

Mr Speaker, you know that our country has little energy, we are very poor and not about to leave charcoal burning. We are not about to ever do that and nobody should deceive us that we are going to ban tree burning.

However, what I found out is that we just need to go to the economics of it. Where Government now had opened up, we have several private investments in tree planting. Many Ugandans have a lot of money and they are investing in tree planting where they are supported.

Therefore, we should look at these aspects in terms of sustainable development and survival.  We have an opportunity that in Uganda, you can grow trees in three to four years for bio-fuel, charcoal and anything.

In a country like Somalia, the Al-Shabaab depend on wood which they export to Yemen. To get a one metre tree in Somalia takes 10 years and yet that one metre of tree here is got in one month. We need to look at the economics so that we grow some trees specifically for commercial purposes. If there is a charcoal factory in Jinja, it is well and good. Let us plant more trees for that factory and also balance the environment. 

Mr Speaker, I went to National Forestry Authority (NFA) recently when they advertised for land to plant trees. The response of Ugandans who want to plant trees is overwhelming. Therefore, my view is, we should look at the opportunities we have, avert climate change but also look at development and money to support the private sector.

If I have planted 10,000 trees, let me be authorised to sell 5,000 as I keep planting so that we keep the balance and do the economics and get the money. That is the way to go because Government shall never get enough money. 

The donors are not willing to give us money, hon. Winifred Masiko is here and she is my witness. We have attended meetings with these donors and we know that they will never give us money. They just go around us. Therefore, it is us to wake up, look at the little money we have, invest appropriately, and use our opportunities.

In the ministry, they have the technology that can help us make very good charcoal and very quickly. Let us make good charcoal for export and plant more trees since we have good climate so that we also benefit from both the available money and balance it with the environment. Otherwise we shall get nothing from lamenting here or going to the donors. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have something to say on the subject?

3.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Mary Kitutu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am sorry I delayed in the hospital - and I have to go back because I am still sick. However, since it is my obligation, I had to be here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sorry. 

MS KITUTU: Thank you very much. The subject of discussion, I agree, is a very important one. Climate change is an issue and I must thank my colleague who was in Paris. I was supposed to be there representing the Government; however, due to pressing issues in the country and also related to climate change, I could not be there because I had to present the Bill here, which I thought was more important.

However, all in all, as a country or as a ministry, we are working hard and I request Parliament to work with us as a team. I have listened in about the fund and it is true, under the law that we are supposed to have a fund which we are supposed to operationalise and we are working on it.

However, we have not just sat. Within the ministry, we are putting together a budget of Shs 15 billion to support the tree planting which NFA normally does like one honourable member said. The only challenge, as the member raised, is the very low survival rate for seedlings. And this is what we are working on. I need your support honourable members because I cannot do it alone since climate change hits everybody.

Right now, we have a drought and I have been here appealing to you. Therefore, when you come here to speak, please let us speak as a team. I appreciate whatever you have said and as a ministry, we shall work as a team to implement what you have said. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable minister, you are coming back here on Thursday to speak on sand mining and what you have done about it. Not today but on Thursday.

MS KITUTU: Okay, thank you. I will be able to bring the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, this is to inform you that the Parliamentary Commission has taken a decision to give all Members of Parliament seedlings. All of you will be agents for tree planting and you will do it by demonstration and actively doing it. (Applause) 

Therefore, at the right season, when NFA advises that it is the right time to plant, you will all receive seedlings from the Parliamentary Commission to go and do it yourselves and lead the people in the fight for tree planting. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO ALHAJI IBRAHIM KADDUNABI FOR BEING ELECTED PRESIDENT OF AFRICAN INSURANCE ORGANISATION
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I do not know who is the beneficiary of this motion; either the Government or a private member’s business. If it is the Government that is very happy with hon. Kaddunabi, they would raise it in their policy statement because insurance is under finance ministry. If it is a private member, then a private member would raise it with his own interest. 

However, if we start allowing motions like this, even the best dancers, agriculturalists and those who know how to fight will need a motion. If we do this, we are opening a floodgate of motions on this Floor.

The procedural issue I am raising is, is this a Private Member’s motion or a Government motion?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have raised motions here for private individuals; there was one of Suzan Muwonge on motor rally and several others. Once it is cleared by the Business Committee, it is okay. It is the Business Committee that should help guide in these processes so that we do not end up with what you are anticipating. However, right now it was cleared by the Business Committee so let us deal with it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am not disturbing. You should then guide us on where we should take the motion for people who have achieved because for this one, may be a member took it; how do we reach it? Recently there was the best farmer from Acholi and you saw the animals that he had. Now that is a person we would have paid tribute to here to demonstrate to the whole country. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please let us not extend this. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, in regard to the best farmer in Uganda, please bring that motion.

3.46
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Rubanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This motion is moved under rule 55 of our Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. The motion states:

“WHEREAS the African Insurance Organisation is an umbrella body for all insurance practitioners on the African Continent, with membership of 47 countries; 351 corporate entities and associate member entities from Europe, America, Asia and Latin America aimed at promoting inter Africa cooperation and development of health insurance operations in Africa;
 
AND WHEREAS Al-Hajji Kaddunabi Ibrahim Lubega is the Chief Executive Officer of the Insurance Regulatory Authority of Uganda, where he has performed a commendable job; evidenced by the transformation registered in the insurance industry; 

AWARE THAT Al-Hajji Kaddunabi Lubega is the Chairperson of the East African Insurance Supervisors Association and a Fellow of the Australian and New Zealand Institute of Insurance and Finance;

NOTING THAT Al-Hajji Kaddunabi having exhibited exceptional leadership as CEO of the Insurance Regulatory Authority; was installed as the President of African Insurance Organisation for the year 2017/2018 at the African Insurance Organisation’s 44th Conference and General Assembly held on 24th May 2017 at Serena Hotel Kampala, Uganda; 

RECOGNISING THAT Al-Hajji Kaddunabi as a former Member of Parliament representing Butambala County and as a former Chairperson of the Committee in National Economy exhibited good leadership skills during his tenure;

COGNISANT THAT the above achievement has been attained as a result of Al-Hajji Kaddunabi Ibrahim Lubega’s hard work and diligence and therefore, deserves the recognition of this Parliament; 

Now, therefore, be it resolved by this august House that:
(i) Parliament collectively congratulates Al-Hajji Kaddunabi Ibrahim Lubega for being elected as President of the African Insurance organisation.
(ii) It takes cognisance of the services rendered and contribution made to the insurance sector by Al-Hajji Kaddunabi Ibrahim Lubega.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the members of Kitgum Municipality, Kachumbala County, Kioga and Ssembabule District. It is properly seconded. Would you like to briefly speak to your motion?

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The African Insurance Organisation was established in 1972 in Mauritius to develop a health insurance and reinsurance industry on the African Continent as well as promote inter–African cooperation. 

The African Insurance Organisation has worked on various initiatives including:

Development, consolidation and strengthening of a number of insurance pools to grow African insurance and reinsurance capacity across the continent with an aim of increasing the volume of premiums retained within the continent;
Developing a micro insurance framework that aims at promoting the development of insurance products for the ordinary people;
Promoting Africa regulatory capacity building in which case regulators cooperate and coordinate more regularly; and 
Enhancing the capacity of African training institutes or colleges.

Mr Speaker, Al-Hajji Kaddunabi Lubega is a highly qualified insurance professional; he is one of the two fellows of the Australian and New Zealand Institute of Insurance and Finance.

As a fellow of the institute, Al-Hajji Kaddunabi has mentored many professionals and used his expertise to advance the insurance sector in Uganda and beyond, because of his desire to professionalise the sector. For example, the Insurance Institute of Uganda has been greatly supported in its mandate of training and certification of insurance professionals.

Today, the institute is offering both certificate and diploma level training fully recognised by the National Council for Higher Education. These developments are a build up to what Al-Hajji Kaddunabi initiated as a Certificate of Proficiency offered by the College of Insurance in Kenya during his tenure as the President of the Insurance Institute of Uganda in 2001.

It has also been made a requirement for all insurance players to undertake at least one insurance professional training with a view of improving knowledge and service to the insuring public.

Al-Hajji Kaddunabi Lubega as a Chief Executive Officer of the Insurance Regulatory Authority of Uganda has transformed the sector from the little known to an increasingly growing sector, raising from Shs297 billion in 2011 to over Shs 700 billion premium underwritten in 2017.

During his tenure, Al-Hajji Kaddunabi has put more emphasis on the core reason as to why people insure by stressing prompt claims payment. As such, gross claims paid increased from Shs59 billion in 2011 to over Shs 300 billion in 2017.

Mr Speaker, Al-Hajji Kaddunabi Lubega has spearheaded the revamping of the insurance regulatory environment by overhauling the Insurance Act to ensure full compliance with the International Association of Insurance Supervisors and the insurance core principles.

Currently there is the Insurance Act, 2017 which stresses corporate governance, anti-money laundering, risk based capital and risk based supervision among others. These changes are aimed at improving the insurance operations for the safety of the policy holders.

He has also provided stewardship to the sector and enhanced dispute settlement by spearheading alternative disputes resolutions through empowering the Complaints Bureau that is open to everybody with an insurance related dispute.
As the chairperson of the East African Insurance Supervisors Association, Al-Hajji Kaddunabi has spearheaded the process of integration whilst working with the other financial services subsectors.

The milestones registered include coming up with East African Insurance Bill, the East African Insurance Policy and the East African Cross Border Supervision Manual. These provide a firm framework for integration of insurance in the region.

Again, because of his exceptional leadership abilities evidenced by the milestones registered both locally and regionally, Al-Hajji Kaddunabi was installed as the President of the African Insurance Organisation for the year 2017/2018 at the 44th Conference and General Conference and General Assembly held on 24 May 2017 at Serena Hotel, Kampala, Uganda. The 44th conference has been ranked as the best organised and most attended conference in the last 45 years and Al-Hajji Kaddunabi was the chairman on the local organising committee. 

During his tenure as President, he has presided over a number of institutional changes aimed at enhancing the capacity of the organisation to better serve its members and the entire continent. 
Al-Hajji Kaddunabi has spearheaded constitutional reviews with the intention of brining all stakeholders on board and ensuring that the organisation is brought closer to the ordinary people. 

Additionally, Al-Hajji Kaddunabi carries the brand of Uganda as an investment and hospitality destination. Prior to his career in insurance industry, Al-Hajji Kaddunabi served as the Member of Parliament representing Butambala County during which he chaired the Committee on National Economy. As a chairperson, Al-Hajji Kaddunabi initiated the production of quarterly reports on the performance of various sectors of the economy. This gave an opportunity to the sectors, ministries and departments to give views and also hear from Members of Parliament. 

He extensively supported the health sector strategic plan which led to the provision of modern facilities at Butabika Hospital, Arua, Koboko, Kabale, Mubende and Masaka regional hospitals.

Al-Hajji Kaddunabi was also the first Chairman of the Parliamentary Pension Scheme where he worked tirelessly to ensure the welfare of the retiring Members of Parliament. Today, the scheme remains one of the major safety nets of this Parliament. (Applause)

Al-Hajji Kaddunabi was also the Vice Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development where he spearheaded the creation of the National Planning Authority and indeed, many other Bills were supported by him.

Al-Hajji Kaddunabi was the Chairman of the Muslims Parliamentary Caucus where he spearheaded, together with others, the creation of a SACCO and instituted various measures aimed at ensuring solidarity and members’ welfare. Indeed, by working together, several development projects in various constituencies were initiated.

Al-Hajji Kaddunabi also sits –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, that is a very long justification, please conclude. (Laughter) 

MR MUSASIZI: Al-Hajji Kaddunabi, also sits on the governing board to assess the Insurance Initiative, a global body which supports financial services deepening internationally. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.    

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? The seconder of the motion, hon. Anthony Okello, you will have to be brief. 

4.00
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion and I would like to congratulate Al-Hajji Kaddunabi upon his election and subsequent installation as President of the African Insurance Organisation for 2017/18. 

Mr Speaker, throughout the world now, the demand for first class insurance cannot be underestimated. The coming of Al-Hajji Kaddunabi at this point in time will not only improve strategic relevance of the African Insurance Organisation among member countries, but most importantly it will promote Uganda’s insurance strategic relevance to the rest of the world. 

It is my belief, Mr Speaker, that Uganda’s insurance regulatory capacity will be used to promote Africa’s insurance regulatory capacity and probably, vice-versa. If this is true, then the reputation of the African Insurance Organisation will gain a lot of credibility and success with high levels of transparency. 

As we speak now, Africa has got only about 1.4 per cent of the total world insurance premium. This means that there is still low level of penetration in Africa and this implies that there is enormous gross potential within the industry because as it is at the moment, the insurance industry is still widely untapped in Africa.

However, in Al-Hajji Kaddunabi, we see a highly dedicated leader with an entrepreneur’s spirit. He is also a person with high levels of energy in whom we see persistence and honesty. I have no doubt whatsoever that Al-Hajji Kaddunabi will make bold moves that will encourage new players to join the insurance market within the shortest time possible.

Managing risks is the most essential function of insurance and with new technologies and trends affecting how we live, the insurance industry must constantly evolve to address new types of risks.

As Chief Executive Officer of the Insurance Regulatory Authority of Uganda, Al-Hajji Kaddunabi has demonstrated that going forward, the ability to protect clients will become a key selling point for insurance – a qualification he takes to the African Insurance Organisation. 

I, therefore, would like to invite my honourable colleagues to support the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to Al-Hajji Kaddunabi Ibrahim for being elected President of the African Insurance Organisation. May it please you, Mr Speaker, that this motion passes. Thank you very much.         

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to Al-Hajji Kaddunabi Ibrahim Lubega for being elected President of the African Insurance Organisation and specifically, that this House resolves as follows: 

That it collectively, congratulates Al-Hajji Kaddunabi for being elected President of the African Insurance Organisation and that it takes cognisance of the services rendered and contribution made to the insurance sector by hon. Al-Hajji Kaddunabi Ibrahim Lubega. That is the motion, I propose for your debate and I am excited to propose this motion when the member is in the House. 

This time, the member in the gallery and not in the middle of the Chamber. You know the difference. The tribute motions that we have been doing in this House are a result of the member laying down here. But this particular motion is a unique one; the member is present and sitting in the VIP Gallery. (Applause)

This is the kind of motion that I would like to chair rather than the sad one where we only have problems. It is good to also recognise people when they are serving. Debate starts now with each Member taking two minutes – in your case, you will take one minute. (Laughter). Who said three minutes? I will start with hon. Kizige. Two minutes.   

4.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KARAMOJA (Mr Moses Kizige): Thank you, Mr Speaker and happy new year to all honourable colleagues. 

I stand to support the motion and I had the opportunity to serve with Al-Hajji Kaddunabi Ibrahim in the Seventh Parliament. I did not have the opportunity to serve with him in the Eighth Parliament, but Al-Hajji Kaddunabi continued to exhibit professionalism in and outside the House.

The reason I am supporting this motion is that Al-Hajji Kaddunabi has demonstrated to the world; first, that there is life outside this Parliament. (Applause) Many of us strive to stay in this House and on many occasions when you leave the House, you seem to be useless except for a few people.

However, if you continue exhibiting professionalism and you serve the country in the areas you have specialised in the way Al hajji Kaddunabi specialised in the insurance industry, then you become relevant to the nation and you continue serving.

His rising to that level is an encouragement to us all that when you are in this House, it is important to continue acquiring education in your various areas of specialisation but most importantly, to you continue serving dedicatedly. 

The NRM Government is good at identifying people who serve with dedication and professionalism and I am proud that the NRM Government has helped Al-hajji Kaddunabi rise to where he is. We congratulate him and we are proud of you. I support the motion.

4.05
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I was privileged to work with my brother, Al hajji Kaddunabi Ibrahim Lubega in the Eighth Parliament. He is so civil and humble - a gentleman he is. 

It is not surprising, Mr Speaker, that he has reached the level he has been recognised for. I congratulate you, hon. Lubega; you have lifted the flag of Uganda, not only within the country, or East Africa but the whole of Africa. Congratulations.

Mr Speaker, indeed hon. Lubega is an inspiration and evidence  that we, Members of Parliament, can still live outside Parliament. And this should be an inspiration for us to do what we can do and prepare so that we still become relevant in the community even if we leave this august House.

Mr Speaker, I would like to urge Government with the example of our own taking to insurance business. Many people do not understand insurance and Government squanders a lot of money which would be saved through insurance. For example, the vehicles, which are just lying idle when they just knock or even burst tyres are a total waste to Government.

If we took it - and I would like to urge Government to take this on insure all Government properties - we would not be spending money on all the vehicles coming from elsewhere to come to one particular garage.

This does not spare us, Mr Speaker. I think we need to learn the advantages of insurance. As Members of Parliament, we have got vehicles but many of us, including myself, have not taken on insurance. Probably, Parliament should take on this so that they partner with recommended companies to insure the vehicles they buy for Members of Parliament - which sometimes get accidents. This is possible if as country, we teach the benefits of insurance –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is two minutes.

4.11
MS JULIET KINYAMATAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to congratulate hon. Lubega for serving as an exemplary leader to all of us and other people because sometimes people think that one stops at being a politician. However, he has moved a step further in continuing with his career and also has a heart to serve not only Uganda but the whole of Africa. Therefore, I would like to congratulate you.

Secondly, this gives an encouragement to the youth that a house is not built in one day. You can imagine how old you are and then this is the time you become President of an African insurance organisation. This encourages the youths to work very hard, to study and also live an exemplary life like he has done. Thank you.
I would like to thank you for serving Uganda, the Pearl of Africa. This is because an insurance service is a concern to the whole world and most of us do not know even though we are Members of Parliament. Other professionals too do not engage in insuring for example Government buildings or assets. You imagine if fire breaks out and then Government has to put in a lot of money.

Therefore, since we have our own Ugandan, former Member of Parliament, I think we are going to massively sensitise the masses, Uganda, East Africa and Africa about the relevance of insurance in this world. Thank you. I am very much encouraged and I hope to follow your steps in my profession.

4.14
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. First, I would like to congratulate the hon. Ibrahim Kaddunabi Lubega on his election to the office of the President of African Insurance Organisation.

Mr Speaker, hon. Lubega, at the time when he was in Parliament, pioneered the process of us migrating from the Public Service pension to the Parliamentary Pension Scheme and worked so hard together with the then founding body of trustees to ensure that the Parliamentary Pension Scheme takes off. No wonder even when he went to the Insurance Regulatory Authority, he has continued to contribute significantly in the growth of this sector.

Mr Speaker, I would like to support this motion for two things. As hon. Lubega takes on this assignment as well as others in the insurance sector, the aspect of education and awareness of our business community on the importance of insurance in ensured.

Mr Speaker, like in the case of Soroti, we have business persons who are now at the level of probably being billionaires - fellows have big warehouses and merchandise but somebody has not picked up an insurance policy. And tomorrow if they catch fire, they will be calling you; “Honourable member, I lost my property in fire; can you help me contribute to rebuilding business.” And yet actually insurance could have been a better solution for them –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students from Soroti and Otatai Child Development Centre, represented by hon. Ariko Herbert and hon. Osegge Angelline. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

4.16
MR HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, this motion reminds me of a prominent Chinese proverb which says that “Every journey of 1,000 miles starts with the first step.” When we look behind, look into the future, and look at what hon. Kaddunabi has gone through, one of the places is this Parliament. The fact that today we are celebrating him for being elected as a president at the continental level to serve in the insurance industry is a big milestone.

I have been with hon. Kaddunabi. He has been our defender No.2 just like you, Mr Speaker, when you used to play for the parliamentary football team. I would like to congratulate him and wish him all the best. He is a clear testimony that when we leave Parliament, we can also serve outside in various capacities. You can be a Member of Parliament and tomorrow you are a Permanent Secretary, the other day you are a minister, etcetera, just like hon. Kaddunabi.

I just want to urge you, my dear brother, hon. Kaddunabi, to use the opportunity to promote the strategic interests of Uganda as you serve at a continental level because the issue of insurance is still quite new to the people of Uganda. It could be that we have not taken time to understand it in depth but you are now there at a continental level. Use that opportunity to promote our interests and also entrench the idea of insurance to the over 30 million people of Uganda such that we can properly understand it. I congratulate you. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.16
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Mr Speaker, I stand to support the motion because I know honourable – now president – Kaddunabi. I was his RDC in Mpigi and I supported his coming to Parliament because I already knew his capabilities.

Mr Speaker, we need to applaud every Ugandan achiever in order to encourage others. Like hon. Nandala-Mafabi mentioned, if there are any others, we should not stop anybody from bringing their names here with resolutions so that we can also recognise them and their performance.

Mr Speaker, hon. Kaddunabi started as a humble man – as an insurer, came to Parliament, became the CEO of the Insurance Regulatory Authority and is now the president of the African Insurance Organisation. I think we really need to applaud and congratulate him. I take this opportunity to congratulate my young brother on that great achievement.

Mr Speaker, we have an asset, in hon. Kaddunabi, as a country. Why don’t we use him? Maybe he can advise us on how we can insure Ugandans so that they are able to access the health services. What are we waiting for? We are now giving him a platform. We are getting him recognised by everybody who did not know him. Hon. Kaddunabi, please, we need your brains. We need your advice as a country so that we can help Ugandans to access health insurance.

4.21
MR PATRICK OPOLOT (NRM, Kachumbala County, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of this motion for raising this important issue on the recognition of Al hajji Ibrahim Kaddunabi. 

Mr Speaker, as the mover of the motion was reading the history of Al hajji Ibrahim Kaddunabi, he forgot one aspect which shaped his life. Being president of African Insurance Organisation, you should take note that the insurance industry is one of the areas in Uganda which are lagging behind. Now that we have been given the presidency of Africa, we thank God for that.

While at school, Al hajji Ibrahim Kaddunabi did not go to small halls; he went and stayed in the only hall – Nkrumah Hall –(Interjections)– and he was driven by the motto raised by Kwame Nkrumah who said Africa must unite. As such, Al hajji Ibrahim Kaddunabi is an activist and the motto of Nkrumah Hall puts it that, “Forward we move.” Al hajji Kaddunabi, you are still alive, can you move forward beyond that? We need more. You have become a president of Africa, can you now become the president of the world for insurance. (Applause)

I congratulate you for that achievement but do not stop there; forward we move. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know the issue of the only hall could have affected this motion very severely. (Laughter)

4.23
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank you very much for allowing such a motion about my brother, hon. Kaddunabi. I want to support the motion and congratulate him.

Mr Speaker, I was not in the Eighth Parliament but he is one of the Members of Parliament I used to follow very much whenever he was making submissions for the country. When you go to the Insurance Regulatory Authority, you meet a servant who serves with a smile, humility and loves his job. For many servants in this country, everybody is a king or a small god in their offices; but with Al hajji Kaddunabi, he is there to serve the people of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, we have interacted with Al hajji Kaddunabi about the issue of local content when we were making consultations and the insurance sector was one of the sectors that had many players, majority of whom, are non-Ugandans. During the interaction, I saw a man who loves this country and I saw a man who is ready to take the insurance sector to another level. Among the things we agreed with him was to encourage many Ugandans to join that sector and he said as long as he is still in that office, he would play a part in was to see that many Ugandan companies join the sector and make a contribution to the insurance sector.

Mr Speaker, I am one of the people that are not surprised that the African Insurance Organisation thought it wise to elect Al hajji Kaddunabi to that job. I am sure he is going to make Uganda proud and I believe he will represent us well, as a country. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.25
THE MINISTER FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Beti Kamya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion and congratulate hon. Kaddunabi Lubega. It is not surprising that hon. Kaddunabi excels in whatever he touches. After all, he is the son of his father, the late speaker of the Buganda Lukiiko, Kaddunabi Lubega – Inna Lillahi wa inna ilayhi raji’un 

His father was the speaker of the Buganda Lukiiko during the early days of Kabaka Mutebi’s reign, and he steered the Lukiiko with such excellence, mixed with firmness and charm that everybody that watched him in action was left in no doubt that he was a very well-groomed and excellent person. 

I served with hon. Kaddunabi Lubega in the Eighth Parliament, when he was chairman of the Committee on National Economy, in which I served. He often led delegations to travel inland and abroad and I remember how meticulous and organised he was in organising and managing our trips. 

He managed our presentations and our resolutions; he is the kind of leader that gets the best out of his team. I know that hon. Lubega was a team leader, a team builder; he was charming yet firm, self-motivated and a strategic thinker. 

Under his leadership, I have no doubt that the insurance industry in Uganda, in East Africa and in Africa is in very good hands and will reach very high levels.

Hon. Lubega, you have done your father proud. You have done the Parliament of Uganda proud. You have done Uganda, East Africa and Africa proud. I wish you a very productive and successful tenure of office. Thank you very much.

4.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jennifer Namuyangu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to our dear brother, Al hajji Kaddunabi Lubega. I had an opportunity to serve in the Seventh and Eighth Parliaments with Al hajji Kaddunabi. He is a person who is down to earth. He is very innovative, patriotic and with very high mobilisation skills. 

Mr Speaker, it was in the Seventh Parliament that Al hajji Kaddunabi mobilised us as Muslims to form a SACCO and this Sacco supported all of us. And I can assure you in the Eighth Parliament, we almost all returned because we were even supporting our constituencies. Al hajji Kaddunabi was also behind the creation of the Parliamentary Pension Scheme and I know it has benefited us as Members of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, I just want to ask for two things. One is that Al hajji Kaddunabi uses his mobilisation skills to mobilise the insurance companies to support the farmers by insuring agricultural enterprises, which is not very common, but also to mobilise especially Ugandans to take up insurances in health and for their properties. 

Lastly, I would like to appeal to him to sell the image of Uganda positively so that we can be able to attract, not only tourists, but also investors in our country as the Pearl of Africa. I wish him good luck and I congratulate him. Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Member for Mbale Municipality, your time is up. (Laughter)

4.31
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you. Mr Speaker, some of these gadgets make it very difficult for us to follow and operate within the time given. 

I also stand to support the motion and congratulate our colleague, hon. Kaddunabi. Uganda is a member of the international community. We live in a global village and if one of us is elected to such an important position, we feel very proud. 

People like Kaddunabi, who has been elected as President of the African Insurance Organisation, and people like Justices Bbosa and Ssebutinde, bring pride to this country and we should all support such people when they are elected to such important positions.

Mr Speaker, I want to ask our colleague, hon. Kaddunabi, who has been elected to educate the people and tell the difference between medical service providers and medical insurance. We have medical providers who have insured members here but it is quite different from medical insurance or health insurance. We want every Ugandan in this country to be insured, to get medical care so that people are able to access medical services. 

Therefore, you should teach people and teach all these insurance providers what they should do for Ugandans because insurance is quite important. 

My colleague from Soroti talked about the fires that have destroyed businesses. I just returned from Mbale yesterday. The fire destroyed the businesses of the people of Bugwere market. The people of Nkoma - all their businesses were burnt down. 

Mr Speaker, I ask that I bring a matter of national importance on this Floor to ask Government - because when there are fires in Kampala, the Government turns up and gives them some assistance. But when we get fires upcountry, Government pays a deaf ear. They don’t even try to follow up to help the people outside. 

Imagine if these people were insured, definitely they would get back their businesses. So Ugandans must know that insurance is very important but what makes it difficult is failure to have claims paid. 

Hon. Kaddunabi, I had an insurance of NIC one time and my vehicle was knocked by a bus. For me to claim repayment for my vehicle was a tug of war. To pay is quite easy to get insured, but when you get a problem, it becomes very difficult. So we should avoid all these things so that Ugandans are able to insure their properties, insure their vehicles that they get - (Member timed out.)

4.34
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Indeed, a lot has been spoken about hon. Lubega. I didn’t know him much, for sure, except for knowing that he was a former Member of Parliament and he is quite tall. (Laughter) 

However from the submissions of colleagues here, I really note that he deserves this appointment and indeed, he is a seasoned insurer who I think brings a lot of expertise and experience to this sector in Africa.

Mr Speaker, I have been having one issue about insurance that I have wanted to raise and it is good that I can now raise it to the chairman of African Insurance Organisation. We have a challenge in this country where most of our country derives livelihood from agriculture. However, most of our small scale agriculturalists and farmers just live by the mercy of God and on nature and if the rains are appropriate, then they benefit. If the rains are not good, they lose everything they have planted. 

We also have a challenge of pests and diseases but there is no deliberate policy to insure the agricultural farms for our farmers in this country. I would be very happy if this can be taken up at an African level so that maybe through local governments, we can get some support for our farmers to insure their gardens for some form of a risk transfer. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is how we are going to close; I will have the member for Bukuya, Dakabela, Bukooli, and Masindi District.

4.37
DR MICHAEL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion by hon. Musasizi. I wish to congratulate hon. Kaddunabi upon the great achievement of being elected President of the African Insurance Organisation. This is both a personal and national achievement. 

I know hon. Kaddunabi through his doctor brothers whom I stayed with; they come from a very wonderful family. From this day, it is clear that he deserved the election. It is a clear testimony of the capacity that Ugandans have in all spheres of life because we have excelled in different areas. Hon. Kaddunabi’s achievement comes at the right time when, as Ugandans, we are challenged and everyone is crying for the national health insurance.

It is now 12 years counting when the Ministry of Health and Ministry of Finance started working on the Bill. People from Rwanda, Kenya and Tanzania have implemented the national health insurance but we are still waiting and yet we have the human resource.

It is timely that he has achieved that and he has the knowledge that we need. For those who understand insurance, it is totally unacceptable for Ugandans to spend 60 per cent out of pocket on health, and yet if you go for insurance it would be much cheaper.

Mr Speaker, my other prayer is to urge the Minister of State for Finance, hon. Bahati and the Minister of State for Health, hon. Opendi to have an interaction with hon. Kaddunabi; to see how to bring forward this insurance to be implemented at this time when we are celebrating the achievement of our brother.

4.40
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity to support the motion. In 1999, while concluding my LLB research paper, I studied the need for reform of the insurance industry in this country. Amongst our findings were negative perceptions about insurance policies in this country that then required a paradigm shift among Ugandans. And there was also a weak legal regime coupled with lack of branding and visibility. 

Under the able leadership of our brother, Al hajji Kaddunabi Lubega, we have had a robust insurance law. We have also had a high level of awareness about insurance as an industry in this country. The current challenge that our brother should handle critically is on the establishment of sound capital markets that provide long-term financing, as opposed to short-term financing that is provided by our commercial banks.

That will enable the insurance industry to trickle down its activities to the grassroots, including to the people of Bukooli. On that note, therefore, and given the time frame, I wish to take this opportunity to recognise all his achievements in the insurance industry, and the country in general and I therefore support this motion.

4.42
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I wish everyone a happy new year. I would like to congratulate my brother, Al hajji Ibrahim Kaddunabi for taking the top most position in insurance in Africa.

Mr Speaker, I have known hon. Kaddunabi as a person with qualities of good leadership; you will bear witness with me that, since the attainment of the office as a chief executive officer of the Insurance Regulatory Authority, the insurance sector in Uganda has gained visibility. It has diversified most of the products.

Mr Speaker, it is during this time that the insurance sector has tried to move out to agriculture and I passionately speak about agriculture because our biggest population is in agriculture. 

As we were discussing this afternoon, the insurance sector needs to focus more on agriculture due to climate change. Mr Speaker, most of the population I represent in Masindi are farmers, particularly, sugar cane growers. And during the dry season, almost every year, we experience fire outbreaks.

I would like to urge the Insurance Regulatory Authority to interest the insurance companies to go and invest in these small farms; because they are rushing to invest in and insure companies which refine and process what the farmers grow and end up forgetting the small farmers. The insurance sector needs to focus on our farmers; that is when we shall be able to sustain the economy.

Mr Speaker I know the insurance companies in Uganda have been much more concerned about insuring industries; somebody has talked about giving out third party insurance. We tend to focus on a limited sector, leaving out the biggest population which if was insured would possibly benefit the country - (Member timed out.)

4.45
MR COSMAS ELOTU (NRM, Dakabela County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do stand to support this motion, and as a number of my colleagues have mentioned, I have, over time, followed the contribution of hon. Lubega, particularly in the area of insurance, with admiration.

It does not surprise us that he has been elected as the president of the African Insurance Organisation. Insurance in Uganda has developed over time. I remember way back in the mid-1990s, all that we knew about insurance was third party. However, as we speak now, quite a large number of people take various policies in support of their activities. Therefore, taking into consideration what Members have mentioned here, I think the hon. Alhaji Kaddunabi has played a very key role in ensuring that our people are aware of the insurance policy requirements and also in developing the insurance regulations in the country.

I, therefore, wish to add my voice in supporting the mover of this motion to recognise hon. Kaddunabi Lubega’s contribution in the insurance industry. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.   

4.47
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule):  Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I have three issues to raise: 

First, I recall, when we were at your party during the time of your election, you reminded us that it costs nothing to be humble. I recall that the honourable Alhaji Kaddunabi has been a very humble person for the time I have known him. His humility has taken him up to where he is now. I say so because at one time in our party he was vying for vice-chairman of West Buganda region and he was politely asked to step down; he did so and today this is where he is. That was a big lesson.

Secondly, Alhaji Kaddunabi has set an example - for example for my friend, hon. Jalia Bintu, hon. Cecilia Ogwal and others who have been serving in this Parliament for some time - that there is life after here. He has shown that you can be somewhere and survive and you come back and they pay tribute to you. It is not like what some people think that you can only have a career in Parliament. It is like what we have just passed – Article 102(b), seven years plus seven - and then we go and come here and you pay tribute to us. We can be somewhere and come back here and you still pay tribute to us and recognise us. Thank you so much, Alhaji Kaddunabi; you have set an example.

4.50
MS BETTY AOL OCAN (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I am here also to congratulate the honourable Alhaji Kaddunabi and Uganda in general because it is now continental and not just regional. Alhaji Kaddunabi is an exemplary figure and we have to learn a lot from him. He can now mentor many of us, not necessarily in the insurance sector but wherever we are. We are supposed to build up; start small and continue to build up.

I would like to say that Uganda is very proud of him. Uganda should always be proud of Ugandans. I remember one time, a Ugandan was supposed to secure a position in the United Nations (UN) and this was going to bring pride to Uganda. However, it was blocked by a fellow Ugandan. That was Ambassador Olara Otunnu, who was supposed to have secured that position. We should always support each other not only because we belong to one party but we should look at ourselves as Ugandans.

Therefore, the honourable Alhaji Kaddunabi, we would like to say that while you are there serving us at continental level, look back at Uganda because we are still down in that sector. A lot of our businesses are informal and not even registered. It is sometimes very difficult to insure businesses, which are not registered. Help us to be strong in that sector since you are a whole figurehead for the continent. Uganda should be proud and get the cream and bring it to Uganda. Thank you very much.

4.52
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the rest of the Members who have supported the motion.

Mr Speaker, I worked with the honourable Alhaji Kaddunabi in the Eighth Parliament. When I arrived in Parliament, he immediately mobilised and recruited me into the Muslim Parliamentary SACCO. He also introduced me to the Parliamentary SACCO at that time. Alhaji Kaddunabi is a very committed person. Once he wants to do something, he ensures he does it.

Alhaji Kaddunabi is not selfish with information. He is a mentor, very practical, patient and approachable at any time. I remember at that time when I had just joined Parliament, I was immediately appointed a minister but in many cases, I would approach him and he would guide me. Therefore, with all the skills he has, I know the honourable Alhaji Kaddunabi will not fail us. 

At the time when he wanted to join the insurance sector, he came to me and said, “honourable, pray with me and help me to ensure that I enter this insurance sector.” Immediately he joined the sector, the insurance sector changed positively. I know that he is going, but he has left a mark behind. Alhaji Kaddunabi, please do not go and forget whoever you have left in your place; keep mentoring them where it is required.

Another area I would like us to consider seriously is the issue concerning insuring the farmers. Last year, during the armyworm invasion, people lost things; they lost a lot of – (Member timed out)                  

4.55
MS SILVIA AKELLO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion. 

There is a slogan that we always use - Buy Uganda Build Uganda. However, when it comes to insurance industry, there are very few insurance companies that belong to Uganda. We even rush to join other insurance companies that are not Ugandan. How are we going to build Uganda and buy Uganda if we cannot empower the insurance companies that are from Uganda?

I would like to thank our brother and I pray that he uses that position to do serious civic education concerning the issues of insurance. Before I joined Parliament, I was working in an insurance company. Insurance companies do not tell people the exact benefits that they are supposed to get. When you pay for third party insurance, for example, and you get an accident, you are supposed to get Shs 1 million. However, I have never heard of any person whose vehicle might have knocked anybody get Shs 1 million from an insurance company where he got insurance. 

That is whey when you tell people to go for comprehensive insurance, they do not understand. Even when you tell them to go for health insurance, they still do not understand. They imagine that if they get insurance for one year, somebody must fall sick so that they benefit and if nobody falls sick then they say, “I threw my money”. Therefore, there must be civic education. Therefore we should not be negative and we shall get immediate benefits from the insurance that we have got. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to congratulate hon. Kaddunabi and to celebrate this achievement as a country.

I worked with hon. Kaddunabi when he was my chairman of the Committee on National Economy a few years ago. I have also been his supervisor at the Ministry of Finance for the last two years. I am glad that he has achieved this and we are happy that he has worked hard as an individual to achieve this.

Mr Speaker, all the leaders, post-independence, have been working hard to ensure the destiny of our continent, and the destiny of this continent comprises of economic prosperity, security and peace. The key ingredient in the economic prosperity of the continent is financial stability, and insurance is one single financial system that will actually guarantee the economic prosperity of the continent. Therefore, the job that hon. Kaddunabi will be doing in Cameroon as the president of this association is an important job in the economic prosperity of our continent. It is not an ordinary association but one that will determine the economic prosperity of our continent.

Hon. Kaddunabi, you therefore have our support. You have made us proud as a country and as Parliament, as a former Member of Parliament. You have shown that hard work is the only insurance that we have after this Parliament. Therefore, we want to congratulate you and to wish you the very best for the future. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the question that I now put for your decision is on this tribute motion to the honourable Alhaji Kaddunabi Ibrahim Lubega. I put the question to the motion that Parliament collectively congratulates Alhaji Kaddunabi Ibrahim Lubega for being elected as President of the African Insurance Organisation, and that Parliament takes cognizance of the services rendered and the contribution made to the insurance sector by Alhaji Kaddunabi Ibrahim Lubega. That is the motion for your decision. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, hon. Lubega, for this achievement. We look forward to improved services in this particular sector. With you there, we have no doubt that we will have improvement. The point that has been made repeatedly is the issue of agricultural insurance and also health insurance. Consider that and see how this can help. Thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA NATIONAL HEALTH LABORATORY SERVICES BILL, 2016

5.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Health Laboratory Services Bill, 2016” be read for the second time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Members for Bukonzo, Kibuku, Wakiso, Bukonzo West, Kumi Municipality, Gulu District and even Otuke. Would you like to justify your motion?  

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Laboratory services in this country were first introduced in 1926. However, there was nobody to actually coordinate them. The Central Public Health Laboratory Services that currently exist was established in 1983. 

As you will all note, Mr Speaker, laboratory services are at the centre of health service delivery in this country. Health laboratory services involve testing of specimen from humans, animals or the environment to inform medical decisions on prevention, diagnosis, treatment, monitoring and control of diseases in humans. 

Over 70 per cent of medical and public health decisions on disease management depend on the quality of health laboratory services. In addition, many diseases, including the communicable and non-communicable diseases, cannot be conclusively diagnosed without proper laboratory services in the country. Laboratory services, therefore, are critical for the rational use of medicine, especially antibiotics. 

Uganda, as you all know, has many players in the field of health laboratory services. Currently, we have close to 3,247 laboratories according to the health facility inventory of the year 2012, and by 2020 we estimate these laboratories to shoot up to about 5,000. However, there is no central coordinating body for the health laboratory services in the country. 

If we are to improve efficiency in the management of health laboratory services, we need a body to be able to supervise the existing laboratories. We also need a body to build capacity for the establishing of high technology lab services within the country, with international standards. We have challenges; sometimes patients are referred abroad because of the limited capacity of laboratory services within the country. 

Therefore, if this Bill is passed by this House, it will go a long way in addressing most of these challenges. With the law, we shall be able to have a standalone autonomous institution, the Uganda National Health Laboratory Services. It will have the capacity to even mobilize more resources besides Government financing, reduce dependence on laboratory services as is the case currently, and of course reduce on the forex that we do lose in referring some patients abroad. The country also stands to earn from foreign exchange, as we shall be able to even receive referrals from other countries within the region. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, that is the motion. I propose this motion for your debate. I propose the motion that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Health Laboratory Services Bill, 2016” be read the second time. That is the motion for second reading and for discussion of the principles of the Bill.

As you are aware, on 19 January 2017 this Bill came for the first reading and it was forwarded to the Committee on Health. To kick off the debate on the principles of the Bill, we will first listen to the committee’s report on the principles of the Bill. Chair, can we agree on the time you are going to take? Can you summarize the report?

5.07
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Michael Bukenya): I will take about five to eight minutes only. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

Mr Speaker, the minister’s justification has made my work much easier. Therefore, I will take much less time. However, before I present the report, allow me to lay on the Table the official report of the sectoral Committee on Health on the Uganda National Health Laboratory Services Bill, 2016 and a copy of the minutes of the meetings that were held by the committee. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the full report and the copy of the minutes of the committee.

MR BUKENYA: As you said, Mr Speaker, the Uganda National Health Laboratory Services Bill, 2016 was read for the first time on 19 January 2017 and subsequently referred to the Committee on Health for scrutiny and consideration in accordance with Article 91 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The committee now reports. 

The background has been dealt with by the minister, including the object of the Bill. Therefore, I will move on to page 4 of the report. The legal framework is well elaborated in the Constitution in objectives XIV and XX of our national objectives. Also, there is the Uganda National Health Laboratory Services Policy and the Uganda National Health Laboratory Services Strategic Plan, which justify the tabling of this Bill.

Methodology

After announcing this in the New Vision newspaper, we got different stakeholders who are listed below. Those who managed to come and interface with the committee are listed on page 6. We also had a benchmarking trip to India and another one to Namibia where we learnt about how they run their laboratory services. I will now go to the observations, which are on page 7 of the report

Observations
During the process of scrutinising the Bill, the committee observed that there were strong views in support of the Bill. However, there were also expressions of discontent with certain provisions by some stakeholders that required harmonisation and amendment. The following were the observations:

The Title of the Bill

Upon interacting with a number of stakeholders, people appreciated the title as a “one health” concept. The “one health” concept recognises that the health of people is connected to animals and the environment. The goal of “one health” is to encourage the collaborative efforts of multiple disciplines working locally, nationally and globally. 

Capturing the “one health” concept would require an interface between the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the National Health Research Organisation(NARO), the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Analytical Laboratories under the ministries of defence and internal affairs, forensics and other Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs). Encompassing all the above may not be practical under the prevailing structures in Uganda, where most of the mentioned departments and agencies are supervised by different ministries. It would therefore require large amounts of resources and time to carry out proper consultations to produce a comprehensive Bill.

Some stakeholders opposed the title of the Bill by arguing that the word “laboratory” connotes plant, animal, forensic and human laboratories. This would, therefore, imply that Uganda National Health Laboratory Services (UNHLS) would usurp the powers and mandate of other agencies handling other types of laboratories, especially those established by other Acts of Parliament such as the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Uganda National Health Research Organisation, Department of Government Analytical Laboratory and others.

The stakeholders, therefore, proposed, to the committee two ways of solving the problem. They said that we either amend the title to make it “The National Medical Laboratories Bill” or the minister withdraws the Bill. However, after various consultations, we went with the International Standard Organisation (ISO) definition of “laboratory”, which is outlined below, and the committee came up with the following recommendations:

The committee recommends that the title of the Bill remains as is in order to be consistent with other health sector laws and policies. 

To allay the fears of the stakeholders who expressed fear of losing their mandates to UNHLS, an exclusion clause is inserted in the Bill to exclude laboratories that are managed and monitored by those other MDAs.

In order to cater for the “one health” concept, a clause is inserted in the Bill to provide for collaboration with other regulatory and relevant institutions. 

In future, Government considers the possibility of reviewing the entire laboratory sector so as to establish an authority that will take care of all of laboratories in the country as outlined earlier.

2. 	There was also the issue of the existence of other regulatory agencies created by Acts of Parliament in the laboratory sector that may require collaboration with the Uganda National Health Laboratory Services. Those included the Allied Professionals Council, which was established by an Act in 1996 and given the mandate to register all laboratories as a prerequisite for set-up and to renew practising licences on an annual basis. It does a lot of other work in conjunction with the Uganda Dental and Medical Practitioners Council. 

There is also the National Drug Authority (NDA), which was established by an Act of Parliament to regulate laboratory supplies and equipment imported into the country or manufactured within, and in so doing contributes to laboratory services. 

The recommendation from the committee is that the Uganda National Health Laboratory Services Bill be enacted into law in order to act as a coordination body of health laboratories in Uganda. 

3. 	There are positive aspects, which were mentioned earlier, such as the policy and strategic plan which help with implementation. 

4. 	The general provisions in the Bill that require special scrutiny: The principles of legality require that all laws should be clear, ascertainable and non-retrospective so as to demonstrate and reflect effective rule of law. 

Clause 5(b) of the Bill is on forensic services. After looking through what I outlined earlier under the Government Analytical Laboratory Services, the committee recommended that the term “forensic services” should be excluded from the mandate of UNHLS.

Clause 7 (a) highlights one of the key functions of UNHLS, which is to coordinate the activities of other laboratories that are vested in UNHLS. It is not clear which laboratories were vested in UNHLS but as already mentioned, an exclusion clause was inserted to clarify on the laboratories under the coordination of UNHLS.

Clause 7(d) makes reference to “regulatory authority” without referring to which regulatory authority. It looks ambiguous. The recommendation from the committee is that the regulatory authority referred to in the clause 7 (d) should be spelt out within the clause.

Clause 5(b) provides for the establishment of modern and high technology reference laboratory services for forensic purposes as an object of the Bill. The recommendation is that the scope of the Bill should be limited to health laboratories in order to avoid duplicating functions. 

5. 	There was also the issue of alignment with the National Development Plan (NDP) and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). 

6. 	There was also an issue of affirmative action raised. The recommendation here is that the composition of the board under clause 9(7) should clearly state the numerical figure for the women on the board.

In conclusion, the committee noted that the health laboratory subsector is facing the following challenges: 

a) 	Absence of a law that provides for coordination of all laboratories in the country. 
b) 	Lack of autonomy, poor coordination, inferior quality services, among other issues, leading to limited ability to mobilise resources.

The committee, therefore, recommends expeditious consideration and approval of the Bill in order to establish the National Health Laboratory Services as an autonomous body which is quite essential for the monitoring, coordination setting standards and quality management of health laboratories.

Mr Speaker I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

5.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Sseninde): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to move a motion in accordance to our Rules of Procedure. Rule 201 (2) of the rules provides thus: “Debate on a report of a committee on a Bill shall take place at least three days after it has been laid on the Table by the Chairperson or the Deputy Chairperson or a Member nominated by the committee or by the Speaker.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion that these provisions be suspended so that we can go ahead with the debate. This is because the report that is going to be debated has no -(Interjection)- The justification is that this has been long overdue and secondly, the issue is not contentious. Therefore, I would like to request that we suspend this rule and we just sleep over the motion so that tomorrow, we can go ahead with the debate instead of waiting for the three days. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this particular rule 201 (2) came into very serious focus when we debated the Constitution (Amendment) Bill No.2. In the past, we have been operating as if there was no rule 201(2). A report would be presented and we would proceed with the debate.

There is a technical challenge with that provision itself. However, that is for review of the rules. At this time, we are not debating the report of the committee. We never debate the report of the committee. What we debate is the motion for second reading of the Bill, which debate is informed by the report of the committee and sometimes it contains minority reports. Therefore, we never actually debate reports of committees at this stage. The motion that we are debating now is the motion moved by the minister and not what has been presented by Dr Bukenya.

We might need to come back to these rules and look at them again. What is the significance of putting this catch? If we wanted to say that the motion for second reading of the Bill should be stayed upon being moved, or the debate on the motion for second reading of the Bill should be stayed for certain days, it would make sense. However, to say that the debate on the report of the committee on a Bill should take - we do not debate these reports. We debate the motion for second reading of the Bill and in the process of debating that motion, we analyse what the committee has recommended. 

Therefore, there is no debate on the report of the committee. In future, we might have to look at these things and clarify. However, this matter came up and those are our rules as they are. Rules are applied as they are, not as they ought to be. Therefore, as they are, you need three days under rule 201(2). If you are to take three days, not counting today, that would mean - But it does not say three sittings; it says three days. In which case, that would be Wednesday, Thursday and Friday. The next sitting of Parliament will be Tuesday and that will be the only time we will be able to come back under the rules as they are to come and debate these rules. We will have to come up.

What the honourable minister is trying to say is that given the nature of this Bill, will it be proper for us to suspend this rule, which requires this, and then we move with the general principles of the Bill and see how far we go with the debate, or even start the debate tomorrow if the time does not allow us to start today. This is what the motion is suggesting. I want a short debate on that motion. I will start from Bunyole. 

5.22
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. What we are going to discuss, which has been tabled, is about health and life. I would like to request -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First of all, was that motion seconded? It was seconded the Members for Kibuku, Rukungiri, Koboko, Kapchorwa, Kumi, Ntenjeru, Kabula and Bukonjo West. They have seconded this motion.

MR WALUSWAKA: Mr Speaker, I would like to request the minister and the House not to just hurry issues of health because we are talking about life. I remember one time you were in that Chair and it was reported that the ministry had invited Members to go to Butabika when they were going to launch the laboratory but Members were denied access. It is on record. I now request, Mr Speaker, that since we have just got the Bill and the report-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is not true. The Bill was brought in 2016, so we have not just got the Bill.

MR WALUSWAKA: Okay. I would like to request, Mr Speaker, that we do not rush. The minister –(Interjections)- I am still on the Floor, honourable members. The minister already has an issue of Nakaseke, which she has to handle. I would like to request that if the Parliament allows, we discuss this on Thursday when we have perused through the report. I do not see this as a matter of urgency. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Even if you are to discuss it one Thursday, rule 201 (2) as it is will not allow you to discuss it on Thursday. That is the point. It will not allow you to discuss tomorrow or Thursday. The earliest time would be Tuesday next week. Please, we are dealing with procedural issues now. How can you again raise on procedure?

5.25
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (Budadiri County West Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This Bill was brought to the House on -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: 19 January 2017.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, but it was published on 17 June 2016 and today is 9 January 2018. If there was urgency, madam minister, you should have done this in 2016. If it was urgent, you should have done it in 2017.  You cannot come now when they have just presented a report and say it is urgent. Please, treat Parliament as Parliament.

Mr Speaker, in this House we shall not be stampeded with people coming to say-(Interruption)

MS SSENINDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order. I would have hesitated to raise this point of order because I respect my brother. However, he has pointed out that this issue came to this Parliament a year ago. It was therefore not the mistake of Cabinet. It was before Parliament; it should have been Parliament to blame. However, we cannot blame ourselves because Parliament had to do an honourable job to make sure a good report is brought to be discussed. 

Now that the report is here with us and the Bill is ready to be discussed at the second reading, Mr Speaker, I do not see why now we should not think that this is a necessary issue to be debated on. Is my honourable colleague in order to insinuate that we have not done our work when it has been before Parliament where he belongs?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member did not refer to the date when the Bill was brought to Parliament, which was 19 January 2017. He referred to the date when the Bill was published in the Gazette, which was 17 June 2016. Do you still feel I should rule on your point of order? There was July, August, September, October, November and December of that same year, 2016, when the Bill was published. It only came to Parliament seven months after, and that is his point. It has nothing to do with when it came to Parliament last year in January.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you for the wise ruling. If you go through this Bill, it also mentions establishing a board and an executive director. Recently, Government said that they want to reduce on authorities but this one is establishing one. What are we talking about now?

Mr Speaker, that is why I am asking for time. First of all, we have confirmed that you have delayed with it. We have “died” for the number of years we have been around, so “dying” for another five days will be a continuous process, and we can go on. Even if we establish this authority, it cannot take effect immediately. We can continue with the current system as we analyse this. 

There are issues we would like to ask Government in these three days as we are reading the report. We want to ask how far they have gone with rationalising Government departments, how far they have gone with merging some of them. The Bill even raises the issue of duplication of works. If we discover that there is no need for this, we can take it to the forensic laboratory. Mr Speaker, since we have over delayed, let us delay further-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we will not be delaying; we will be following the rules. Honourable members, we might need to look at these rules also in a pragmatic way. This is because we have changed; instead of waiting for the matter to be laid on the Table, we now send it to Members in advance. The report of the committee was uploaded today. That is the argument I wanted to bring –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we can amend the rules to take care of the technology we have and say that as soon as the committee uploads the report, we shall say lay it on the iPads. (Laughter) The reason we need to understand this report is that we have to do some research-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Mafabi, your point is made. Honourable minister, can we deal with this Bill next week so that we do not draw negative energy to it.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the concerns raised by the Members. The Central Public Health Laboratory Services exists; we are simply more or less giving it more mandate. I am not debating the motion; I am accepting that we can have this debate maybe next week.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, so that we do not draw negative energy to a Bill that is so well intentioned. 

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, I would like to just inform Members that this Bill was saved from the Ninth Parliament. Due to backlog, the Health Committee in the Ninth Parliament did not consider it because they had various issues to consider. It is not a recent Bill, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was saved by this Parliament but it was reprinted on the 17 June 2016 in this Parliament. Therefore, the issue of the last Parliament does not arise anymore now. We are okay with this Bill.

Honourable members, let us defer debate and deal with it next week on Tuesday. It will be a substantial matter; please come ready to comment on the proposed amendments and also analyse the principles of the Bill. Is it a necessary Bill? If it is necessary, then we will not have to waste time debating its principles. We will pass the motion for second reading and then go on and deal with the specific proposed amendments in the provisions of the Bill. That will happen next week on Tuesday afternoon.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ANTI-COUNTERFEITING GOODS BILL, 2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that this particular Bill came for second reading last year - I do not remember the specific date - and the report of the committee was duly presented by the chair of the committee. The committee made recommendations and there were supposed to be consultations on the way to move with this Bill. Let us hear from the minister.

5.34
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the chairperson of the sectoral Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry and all the honourable members of the committee for their comments and guidance in the proposed Anti-Counterfeit Goods Bill, 2015.

Honourable colleagues, counterfeit goods still remain a serious challenge contributing to trade distortions in the country, and they are a major disincentive to innovation and to potential investors. Therefore, this needs to be holistically addressed.

Mr Speaker, the committee guided that there are already existing laws dealing with counterfeit and pirated corporate goods that could be reviewed to provide for more stringent penalties for infringement of intellectual property rights. My ministry has considered the committee’s recommendations and submitted a paper to Cabinet seeking guidance on how to strengthen the existing laws to provide adequate safeguards to the challenge of counterfeit goods. 

Mr Speaker, based on the committee’s recommendations and conclusion, I wish to withdraw the Anti-Counterfeit Goods Bill, 2015 for further consideration. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it is not as easy as that. You require the authority of the House. Therefore, you are going to request this House. Under rule 139, you have to seek leave of the House to withdraw that Bill.

MR WERIKHE: Thank you for your guidance, Mr Speaker. Following the recommendations, observations and guidance from the committee, I would like to request the House that we withdraw this Bill. I beg to request.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the honourable minister has sought your leave to withdraw this particular Bill and take it for further consultation and harmonisation before it comes back. That is the request. I am now going to put the question, unless there are debates.  

We cannot raise procedural issues now. The minister brought a Bill, it was discussed and analysed by the committee, which reported and recommended that the Bill should be withdrawn. The minister is now seeking leave of the House to withdraw the Bill in accordance with the recommendations from the committee on this subject. Do we need to debate it? 

HON. MEMBERS: No!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I put the question for approval of the withdrawal? I now put the question that leave be granted to the minister to withdraw his Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO INVESTIGATE THE MISMANAGEMENT OF PRE-SHIPMENT VERIFICATION OF CONFORMITY (PVOC) BY UGANDA NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS (UNBS)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, do we have sufficient time to deal with this motion? Can we receive the motion nevertheless? Let us receive the motion and you can go and look at it and come back to debate. Honourable member, please present your motion.

5.34
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to investigate the mismanagement of the Pre-Shipment Verification of Conformity (PVoC) Project by Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS). 

This motion is brought under rule 55 and not rule 47 of our new Rules of Procedure.

“WHEREAS the Uganda National Bureau of Standards is established under the Uganda National Bureau of Standards Act, Cap 327 of the Laws of Uganda, as a body corporate with perpetual succession and with powers to sue and be sued in its corporate name; 
  
“AND WHEREAS UNBS is responsible for matters of standardisation, quality assurance, metrology and testing with the aim of promoting trade, enhancing competitiveness of local industries and protecting the health and safety of consumers;  

AND WHEREAS in furtherance of its mandate, UNBS in the year 2008 initiated the Pre-Shipment Verification of Conformity (PVoC) Project with the purpose of improving the quality of imported goods by inspecting goods imported into the country, to ensure that they conform to the mandatory standards set by UNBS;

NOTING that in line with the PVoC programme, UNBS conducts pre-export roadworthiness inspection of used motor vehicles destined for use within the Republic of Uganda, with the view to ensure that they meet the UNBS requirements to minimise risks of unfit and substandard vehicles entering into the Ugandan market;

CONCERNED that UNBS is in process of appointing JEVIC as the sole inspector of used motor vehicles imported into Uganda from Japan, yet JEVIC is itself a dealer of used motor vehicles from Japan;

FURTHER concerned that the UNBS has been cleared by the office of the Solicitor-General to contract the same company, JEVIC, as the exclusive inspector to execute the PVoC from June 2018 despite previous contract performance not having been satisfactory;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this House that:

Parliament halts the exclusive award of the Pre-shipment Verification of Conformity Project to JEVIC Company as the implementer from June 2018.
Parliament assigns a relevant committee to investigate the circumstances of award of contract for pre-shipment verification of conformity to JEVIC Company.
Parliament inquiries into the stability of JEVIC Company in the execution of pre-shipment verification of conformity contract for UNBS.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by honourable members from Butaleja, Kole, Bufumbira East and Kibaale. Honourable member, are you are recommending that the in-House committee handles it?

MR LUBOGO: Mr Speaker, I am not seeking for a specific select committee. It could be handled by either the Committee on Trade and Industry or the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) because it can fall under either.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The appropriate committee, okay. Justify your motion.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. I have some documents to lay on the Table, but to start with, I would like to justify this motion. First, I am pleased that this afternoon we have had a small debate on the environment change conference that was held in Paris, and this comes just on the heels of that. 

Mr Speaker, Government perceived that it was necessary for Uganda, like many other economies, to qualify the imported goods from their origin before they come here. They must meet the standards from their point of origin and in case they fail to meet those standards, then they should not be imported into Uganda. For that reason, pre-shipment was conceived by Government in 2008.

However, Mr Speaker, right from there, suspicious dealings have been taking place between UNBS and the service providers. As the process took off, a number of companies applied to handle this. Uganda National Bureau of Standards qualified three companies to handle the pre-export verification of conformity in the countries where these goods come from. Specifically, in this case, it was used motor vehicles. These companies to handle pre-shipment inspection were Japan Vehicle Export Company (JEVIC), East African Company Limited and Jabal Kilimanjaro.

However, because of suspicious dealings between UNBS and JEVIC, a contract was signed by JEVIC that excluded the others. Also, because Japan is the major source of vehicles which are imported into Uganda, the only company which was allowed to inspect in Japan was JEVIC. This later led to a dispute and because it had been provided for in the contract that in case of a dispute, a tribunal shall be created, a tribunal was put into place to resolve this dispute. The tribunal handled the dispute and costs were awarded against UNBS for having breached the contract with JEVIC. A total of Shs 2.4 billion was awarded to JEVIC. 

Honourable colleagues, I would like to point out that UNBS first of all irregularly decided to give an exclusive contract to JEVIC. Secondly, they decided not to defend this matter when it came to the tribunal; when figures were submitted to the tribunal, UNBS left the tribunal to handle the matter without them. This cost the country a big loss of Shs 2.4 billion. 

Colleagues, I would like you to remember that last year, this very House was investigating the “handshake” issue of Uganda Revenue Authority (URA). The net amount of money URA staff and others took was about Shs 3 billion but this was after doing some good work for this country. Now, here is a case where the country suffers a Shs 2.4 billion loss just because of some people who have their underhand dealings with particular contractors. 

Mr Speaker, JEVIC has been banned from inspecting vehicles in many other countries including Kenya, which is a member of the East African Community. Kenya banned them because they canvassed for these contracts and secondly, they were found to have actually verified 117 vehicles that were highly contaminated by radioactive substances.

It is very expensive to bring a radioactive vehicle because it has the effect of causing cancer and you cannot destroy it anyway. The reason why these vehicles have to be inspected is because if they are found to be contaminated or substandard, they remain there. Therefore, this company was disqualified in Kenya and it still is up to today as I speak. I think Uganda should have been concerned about this because if a sister country within the same community has banned a company - I also get information that even in Rwanda it was banned - why should it be in Uganda, unless there are other reasons? (Mr Wamanga-Wamai rose_) I am about to end my justification. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the House that this particular company, which seems to have godfathers in UNBS, is itself a dealer in used motor vehicles. Therefore, you can imagine the conflict of interest where a company, which is a dealer of used motor vehicles, is inspecting its own vehicles for export to Uganda. Do you expect them to be doing quality work for the country? 

I think this should be a concern for this House. We should see that we look into this matter and find out what is really happening. In fact, colleagues have been talking about substandard goods this afternoon. Why do they continue to come? Why are these vehicles that produce emissions that we have been talking about and are below standard continue to come into this country?

Mr Speaker, the contract awarded to this company is expiring in June this year. Through the hand of UNBS, arrangements have been made and clearance has been given that it should be this same company, and the only one, to clear the vehicles that will be coming to Uganda. I have a document from the Solicitor-General, which I will lay on the Table. I also have a document from the Kenya Public Procurement Oversight Authority, which disqualified this company. I also have a document from the tribunal on the arbitral award against the Uganda National Bureau of Standards to the tune of Shs 2.4 billion. 

Mr Speaker, I think we have mishandled this country so much especially when it comes to businesses and contracts, whether it is roads or motor vehicle inspection which we have been talking about. Now, there is this motor vehicle inspection from outside Uganda; I think we have caused a lot of harm to our people and country. It is for that reason that I believe this Parliament cannot just watch and continue seeing things like it is business as usual. 

I seek the approval of this House that a committee of this House should be tasked to look into this matter and find out how this is happening. How is this whole thing of pre-export conformity being handled? Who is that particular person causing the country losses and subjecting Ugandans to health dangers. 

Against that background, Mr Speaker, I wish to ask the House to support the motion and allow that this investigation be carried out by this House. I thank you and I beg to move. 

However, I beg to lay these documents on the Table. I have this letter, which qualifies that company as the exclusive company to handle the inspection of vehicles coming into Uganda. It is dated December 9, 2016 from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. It is signed by C. Kashabaki. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR LUBOGO: I also beg to lay this document on the Table, which comes from the Kenya Public Procurement Oversight Authority. It is on the strength of this document that this particular contractor was disqualified from handling any contracts in Kenya. It is dated 2 April, 2015. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR LUBOGO: Mr Speaker, I also beg to lay this document from the tribunal pertaining to the arbitral award against Uganda National Bureau of Standards. This document is dated 28 August 2012. I beg to lay. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you, honourable member. I do not see the seconder of the motion here. 

MR LUBOGO: Mr Speaker, hon. Nsaba Buturo stood in for the seconder who had been put on record. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, would you like to second the motion?

5.53
DR BUTURO NSABA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): I do want to second the motion, Mr Speaker. 

One of the challenges this nation is faced with is the issue of corruption. The fact of the matter is that we are in danger as a nation of inviting forces of oppression, exploitation and domination that will eventually destroy all of us. Particularly, this matter of corruption, which is now a matter of concern to most of us, has got to be handled very seriously. I am suggesting that this House for once gets on top of this matter because it is getting out of hand.

I read in the motion, which my colleague has introduced, a number of issues that should cause concern to honourable members. The first one is incompetence. This taxpayers’ money is given away and who knows, there may be connivance between the parties involved. This has to be investigated. 

We read treachery. Treachery in that a nation’s resources must be given away to a company that simply has a record that is very suspicious. Our strategic neighbour, Kenya, has simply banned this company. It is worthy of us to note that our strategic ally, Kenya, has banned this company. What is the reason that can be given that explains why Uganda should look at this company in favourable terms when Kenya has certainly banned it?

My suggestion, to confirm my support of this motion, is that this House should really come out and speak loudly. Otherwise, corruption is getting out of hand. Our institutions are simply not functioning. Those that are mandated to really rein in this battle of corruption are not functioning. Many of us who are leaders in this nation are part of the story. We have got to do something about it. 

As my colleague has mentioned, this matter smacks of corruption, pure and simple. We need to send a message to other agencies of Government that this cannot go on. Therefore, I support the motion. 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. The motion that I propose for your debate is that Parliament investigates the mismanagement of pre-shipment verification of conformity by the Uganda National Bureau of Standards. That is the motion for your debate and debate will start tomorrow.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. In the Ninth Parliament, we did debate a motion like this in regard to Umeme and we came up with resolutions, which were not respected by the Executive. We did resolve that Umeme’s contract be terminated. Up to now, it has not been terminated. 

I would like to get assurance from you, Mr Speaker, on what would be the effect of us discussing this motion and at the end of the day we make resolutions which will not be respected by the Executive. I would like to be guided by you, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we all know the status of the resolutions that we pass in Parliament. There are two types of resolutions. There are those resolutions that are dictated by the Constitution that when we pass, they become mandatory and must be implemented. You know those resolutions. Parliament is required to do certain things by a resolution and once they do that, its implementation becomes mandatory.

The other set of resolutions that we pass are advisory. However, it is good courtesy that once Parliament passes a resolution and they have given timelines, for example, the Executive should come back to Parliament and say that this particular resolution one, two and three are incapable of implementation and we will not be able to implement them; for four, five and six, we have gone this far in implementing them. It is good practice in governance, so that both institutions recognise their participatory role in the governance of public affairs in these things. 

For the resolution that we passed on Umeme, for example, there should have been an action-taken report by the Executive telling Parliament that since you passed this resolution, this is what has happened. However, this will change, and change comes now. (Applause) Let us pass this resolution and let somebody go and play around with it. 

It is okay for you to say, “We will not implement”, that is fine, but you should come back and tell us, “For this one, we were not able to implement”. Give us the reasons why you cannot implement them. Give us the timelines of their implementation. Respect this institution. We cannot sit here and spend people’s time taking decisions which are simply ignored. (Applause). It is not right. It is not only bad politics but even bad manners. (Laughter). Let us start doing things properly. Let us start respecting each other.

Honourable members, we have deferred a Bill for debate of its principles and also consideration for amendment. What we do not want is a stampede at the committee stage of this Bill. Therefore, these are my directives: 

Proposals for amendment must be in writing and must be submitted to the Office of the Speaker by close of business - 5.00 p.m. - on Monday. If you have not proposed any amendment by 5.00 p.m. on Monday, do not stand up to propose any amendment on the Floor of Parliament. I will rule you out of order. That way, we will have an organised way of processing business of the House. 

Your amendments must not be oral. They must be written so that they can be shared. The reason I am saying they should be submitted by 5 o’clock on Monday is so that we can circulate them to honourable members to see what kind of amendments are being proposed. This is so that when we go to committee stage, there is not just showing up and saying, “an amendment”. I will not allow that one. (Applause) Even if the whole law will hinge on that amendment, we rather make mistakes without that amendment than with it.

That is my guidance on this issue. When processing amendments, a Member gets up and says, “amendment” and cannot even construct the amendment because it just came there and then. We then have to adjourn for them to go and polish the amendment. I will not permit that on this Bill or any other Bill that I will be processing. 

Honourable members, please, take this seriously. This is 2018 and it is a new year. (Laughter). Let us do things properly because when we have amendments, sometimes we make mistakes because we will have not had time to interrogate the amendments. Therefore, let us have this.  

I am even giving you a very good timeline of Monday. I should have said Friday evening. Let us do Monday for a start and that would apply for all the Bills that will come in future. There should be a deadline for submission of amendments. That is international practice and it should be the practice of this Parliament.

This House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 6.00 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 10 January 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 