

Wednesday, 23 January 2019

Parliament met at 2.36 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. First, I would like to remind the Government that there are over 20 questions, which have not been answered and were described as urgent. Therefore, I would like to call upon the Government side to come and answer them starting tomorrow.

Secondly, honourable members, yesterday, we indicated that there are committees which are oversubscribed. The Budget committee is oversubscribed by 10 Members. Therefore, the NRM, the Opposition and the Independents will have to remove some of the Members. 

The Committee on Equal Opportunities is oversubscribed by one Member, the Committee on National Economy is oversubscribed by five Members, the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) is oversubscribed by three Members and the Committee on Public Accounts (COSASE) is oversubscribed by four Members.

The following are undersubscribed; the Committee on HIV/AIDS requires two more Members, the Committee on Public Accounts (Government Assurances) requires two more Members, the Appointments Committee requires nine Members and the Committee on Human Rights requires six Members. Therefore, I would like to ask the whips to address this issue so that we can rationalise the representation. Thank you very much.

There are some matters of national concern.

2.39
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I raised a question for oral answer to the Prime Minister about the inquest in hon. Nebanda’s death and he committed to produce a written statement to this House.

We have been following up the issue but it has not come up. I seek the indulgence of the House that the Prime Minister should come with a response because they had committed to carry out an inquest into the death of hon. Nebanda but it is almost four years and the country has never been briefed about the same. He undertook to produce a statement but he has done so, to date. 

THE SPEAKER: The questions will be reflected on the Order Paper starting tomorrow until they are all answered.

2.40
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance regarding the inhuman evictions and torture that is happening to the people of Apaa in Amuru District. 

Of late, there have been rampant evictions going on although I am aware of an on-going mediation process being spearheaded by the Prime Minister. Unfortunately, we have a group of uniformed men and ununiformed men who come and cross the Nile with boats. They cause a lot of havoc, torture women and men, they cause arrests, loot people’s property, ferry them to the other side of the Nile and leave.

As I speak, the only health facility that is Apaa Health Centre III has been stopped from working and people no longer access medical care. My prayer goes to the Government and the Ministry of Health; now that people are no longer accessing the health facility, what are they going to do for them?

Secondly, I thought there was on-going mediation and dialogue and the simple principle of any dialogue and mediation is that there is always a cessation of hostilities. However, this has been the reverse. Therefore, can they explain what is happening and why they are doing what they are doing to the people of Apaa because they are also Ugandans?

THE SPEAKER: This issue has two areas; health and - is it the Uganda Wildlife Authority that has closed the facility? Can we ask the Minister Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to come and respond to that issue on Tuesday next week?

2.43 
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. There is a challenge on old Jinja Road. The traffic flow on this road is very wanting.

I am referring to the old Jinja Road that connects Jokas Hotel through Namanve Industrial Park up to Mukono. There is very high traffic of heavy trucks and buses that ply Kenya and eastern Uganda.

Secondly, the road is narrow. You can take between three to four hours from Namboole to the other side of Namanve. We recently had an instance in Kirinya where a lady was coming from duty and her husband called asking her whereabouts. She was in Kireka but it took her four hours to reach her home. When she reached home she was seriously battered because the husband could not believe her.

Fortunately three days later, the husband also faced the same problem. Therefore, there are instances of domestic violence arising out of this kind of congestion and traffic jam. Now - (Interjection)– I there was nothing like revenge.

Madam Speaker, it is very important and I pray that the concerned authorities or ministries take the initiative to widen this road. The beauty is that the railway reserve along which this road lies is enough for this road to be enlarged. It can act as a proper access road to ease traffic along this route.

For those of you who take that eastern route can –(Interjection)– so my prayer is that there should be proper regulation of the trucks and buses on this road and that the Minister of Works and Transport should widen this road in order for us to have access because we are wasting a lot of time and therefore, money is wasted in this regard. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we should ask the minister - I don’t know whether it is the Minister for Kampala Capital City or it is the Minister for Works and Transport. There have been plans to do flyovers and other things; maybe we need an update on what the plans are. I don’t know whether to ask the Minister for Kampala Capital City or the Minister for Works and Transport.

2.46
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): In that case, you should ask the Government or the Prime Minister to brief us. He will know which minister is responsible because these are Government programmes. From Kampala, the problem can spill over to Mukono because it is on Jinja Road.

I will, therefore, inform the Leader of Government Business to make sure that the matter is clarified.

THE SPEAKER: The Prime Minister should come and update the country on the plans to improve access. It is very stressful when you think about that road. The Prime Minister should come and address this issue on Tuesday next week.

2.47
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding social media communication that made rounds on WhatsApp to the effect that Thermos flasks contain tablet- looking materials that could be harmful to bodies. 

Some of you may have received this message. I received it and I broke two of my flasks. I indeed found three tablet-looking substances in each of the flasks. I did not know what role the tablets were meant to perform in the flasks. 

I thought that since it is a matter in the public and it concerns people’s health, I need to ask Parliament to either ask the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and possibly the responsible department of the Uganda National Bureau of Standards and the Ministry of Health to interest itself in this matter and see whether these substances are dangerous to human beings; or possibly get in touch with the manufacturers of these Thermos flasks to find out why these substances are inserted.

Madam Speaker, I would like to lay these substances that I got from my flasks on the Table – (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Winfred Kiiza for ceding ground for this information.

I think the problem of standards in this country is bigger than that. It goes beyond the House to the whole economy. If you have been following of late, the National Bureau of Standards together with the police have been attacking shops in Kampala confiscating property of Ugandans who go to banks to borrow money. What they say is, “We are enforcing standards.” One would ask, “Where are these people when these things are being imported into the country?”

Therefore, over and above health issues, there are more serious issues that relate to the economy and to the financial standing of our people that need to be addressed through the National Bureau of Standards.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I do not know how many times I have been on the Floor of this House to appeal to you to support the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. She does not have enough inspectors at the border; she needs staff that is why you should help her. She has no capacity to monitor these borders. I think she is short by 61 officers. To me, you could help the minister in that area.

2.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, in addition to what hon. Sseggona has said, Government is preparing a Consumer Protection Bill, which will be coming to this House. We discussed it as Cabinet and I think it will address a number of these things, which are being raised. Probably it will come in the month of February. We passed it as Cabinet.

THE SPEAKER: When are you going to address the shortage of inspectors?

MR BAHATI: We think this issue should be handled during the process of budgeting for the Financial Year 2019/2020.

THE SPEAKER: Some of them come from Lwakhakha; there is no inspection there. She is now laying the items.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I would like to lay the tablet- looking substances that I found inside the glass of the Thermos flasks for purposes of Parliament to possibly find out – (Interruption)

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Speaker, I do appreciate what she is trying to do because it is important. On top of that, there is also other information to the effect that some of the toilet papers we use have cancer-causing substances. 

Wouldn’t it have been procedurally correct if she had laid at the Table that kind of flask so that we all know, take pictures of this and we alert our people that in the meantime as the National Bureau of Standards tries to find out, beware of flasks of this make and type? Thank you.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, you advised that I look for the flasks and we could demonstrate and break them on the Floor of this House. I sent for them. Unfortunately, by the time we started they had not arrived. In the meantime, I would like you to allow me to present the tablet-looking materials. When the flasks come, I will lay them on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: I think it is better if the flasks came, we break them and then you lay the materials. We can differ the laying until the flasks arrive. 

MS WINFRED KIIZA: I have no objection to that, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Send for them, we are here.

THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Kiiza’s request regarding the tablet-like material she wants to lay is that they should be investigated. The trouble we are going to find ourselves in is to lay the flasks and condemn them before the investigations. There are people who have imported these flasks so you may cause them financial loss even before investigations are done.

I have seen these things; you must also be careful about trade wars. When I was in the media, we received a bottle of soda with a cockroach inside. Someone claimed that that company produces soda with cockroaches, only for us to learn later that they are the ones who opened that particular bottle, put there a cockroach and started doing a campaign.

This is a national Parliament so you must be very careful with every decision you make. Before you condemn the flasks, I am wondering whether it would not be procedurally right to first lay the tablets so that investigations are done and if the substances have a problem, then the flasks can be laid.

2.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (VETERAN AFFAIRS) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Ssemujju Nganda, for that approach. 

This can be a marketing strategy and we do not want to go into trade wars with traders. If hon. Kiiza has got these substances, we have Government chemists. Let the ministries concerned - the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Health are here; let them go and test these materials. If they are harmful, then we go for the flasks, open and find out whether these materials are harmful and we get moving. Otherwise, basing on hearsay could cause problems. 

Therefore, I support what hon. Ssemujju Nganda has proposed and I think we should adopt it.

2.53
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I agree with what hon. Ssemujju and hon. Rwamirama are talking about. However, I had another concern about the security and health of the people who are handling things they do not know without any protective measures. 

You do not know what you are handling; you have exposed yourself and you are bringing those things to Parliament to involve everybody. Suppose they are very dangerous? We must be careful about the materials we lay in this House. We have to think about other means of handling materials for purposes of our health. That is my concern, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let hon. Kiiza lay the items and the Clerk should send them to the Government chemist so that they write a report and come back to us.

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker for the ruling. They are already in our houses; we have already touched them as we were breaking the flasks. However, for purposes of possibly acting as the martyr, let me lay them on the Table for onward transmission to the Government chemist, for purposes of ascertaining the chemical content of the tablet-like substance that I found in the Thermos flask and possibly the health hazard that they are bound to cause to Ugandans and the population that use the flasks. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. The Clerk will transmit them to the Government chemist.

2.56
MS SARAH NAJJUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the road that connects Nakaseke District to Wakiso District through Kisega Parish, Kaloke Village. It was washed away three months ago and last week we lost a citizen who drowned there. I request the Ministry of Works and Transport to intervene as early as possible before the situation becomes worse. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: What is the name of the road?

MS NAJJUMA: The road that connects Nakaseke to Wakiso District through Kisega Parish, Kaloke Village.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Works and Transport, please address that issue and given us an update next week.

2.58
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katwakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. On 16 January 2019, the Karamajongs of Napak District attacked the Itesot community specifically of Oburatum Parish in the villages of Okameta and Amuturunyo. 

They injured people; Charles Amaitum’s hands were broken, Charles Otim’s legs were broken and his property stolen - goats, sheep, chicken, a bicycle and money and Stephen Elukut was badly beaten and his money stolen. He has wounds all over his body. 

The cause of this is that some time last year around November, we had a similar attack on those communities by the Karamajongs.  We even shared with the Ministry of Lands. The issue is about land between us and the Karamajongs.

We discussed with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to see how they could expedite resolving this issue since the survey had already been done, but nothing was done. However, last Wednesday, the police arrested one of the ringleaders of this team after he had been cited in the community. After his arrest, his clansmen decided to take revenge on the people and caused mayhem. He is called Luka.

As I speak, most of the people in those two villages have run away and are in hiding because the Karamajong have planned to come and kill them and they have sent a list of the people they want dead – 

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers?

MS AKURUT: As I make the prayers, there are nine people on the death list- Richard Ongorok, Stephen Elukut, Andrew Ocen, William Omeke, Opila Michael.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that the Ministry of Lands and Local Government - like I said, the survey was already done about the boarder issue between Katakwi and Napak - should be able to expedite that as soon as possible because the situation is going out of hand.

Secondly is on the deployment of the UPDF - when the district tried to deploy the LDUs, the Karamajong do not respect them. Therefore, we need urgent deployment of the UPDF at the border to calm the situation.

The third prayer is that the culprit - Luka Aguma, Simon Lochoroi, Paul Lote, Lopuka and the friends that caused the havoc should be brought to book and then the victims should be compensated. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister for Internal Affairs but the Minister of State for Defence is here, in respect to the deployment. I do not know whether you are able to speak about it or you will come back to us. In addition, hon. Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, on the issue of the border, there are so many boundary issues you have not yet brought to this House.

3.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (VETERAN AFFAIRS) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Madam Speaker, I will find out the facts and report on Tuesday next week.

3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable member for raising the matter. There is a dispute between the districts of Napak and Katakwi, with respect to the boundaries of these two districts and it is a long running conflict.

The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development opened the boundaries working together with the Ministry for Karamoja. In addition, the Government has been trying to reconcile the two communities to the extent that at one time, the Ministry for Karamoja Affairs took elders - because the major complaints mainly come from Napak side - and opinion leaders from Karamoja and flew them in a helicopter to look at the boundary across in a bid to resolve this conflict but somehow, they have not yet agreed.

The honourable member had raised this matter with us; the Minister for Karamoja Affairs is on the ground. I think tomorrow he is going to hold a meeting with the leaders from both sides. However, we are also going to hold another meeting here in Kampala next week on Tuesday, involving the Ministry of Lands Housing and Urban Development, the Ministry for Karamoja Affairs and the Ministry of Local Government together with the members of Parliament from the two districts –(Interruption)

MS NAMOE: Thank you for your submission, honourable minister. Madam Speaker, the issue of the boundary between Napak and Katakwi revolves around the issue of the 1963 maps. The people of Napak are saying we need the 1958 map to determine the boundary and if that boundary is to be properly defined, we need to use Karamoja District versus Teso District. At that time, Napak was not there when those boundaries were created.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think we can conclude that issue. Honourable minister, tell us the solution quickly.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, the beauty of this, just like the Woman Member of Parliament has said, is that we have the old districts of Karamoja and Teso and these are captured in the independence Constitution. Those are the boundaries, which our surveyors use to streamline that. When our surveyors went on the ground, they used that very information, which is captured in the independence Constitution, where Karamoja is separated from Teso because that is what marks the boundary between Napak and Katakwi. 

What we are remaining with is a consultative meeting, which we are going to hold here in Kampala next week. It will involve the Ministries of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Local Government, Karamoja Affairs and the members of Parliament from the two districts. Thereafter, we shall agree to go on the ground and meet with the opinion leaders there and sensitise them so that we can generate consensus on that. 

Otherwise, our ministry has already opened the boundaries. What remains is to reconcile the two communities so that they can agree. We shall, therefore, bring a report probably in two weeks’ time after we have met here and also on the ground –(Interruption) 

MS NAMOE: There is no boundary that has been demarcated yet. The stones that are there have been rejected because the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development used the 1963 map to determine where to put the stones. The British at that time had put a clear acid line but the ministry is paying a deaf ear to that. The acid line runs all the way from Kween up to Otuke. Are you in order, honourable minister, to misguide this House? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister and members, please go and attend the meeting and come and give us an update. Thereafter, we shall know whether the boundaries are there or not. Give us a report after a fortnight. 

3.08
MR COSMAS ELOTU (NRM, Dakabela County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. On 9 March 2016, an ambulance serving Atirir Health Centre IV in Soroti District and Dakabela County was involved in an accident. Seven people died in that accident; four members of one family and then the hospital staff - the nurse and the driver. 

Madam Speaker, Atirir Health Centre IV is very important. It is currently categorised as a health centre IV ideally because of its location. It was created when Soroti District then included Amuria and Kaberamaido; so, it is centrally located among those three districts and it serves a lot of people. 

As we speak, since that happened, that health centre IV does not have an ambulance. It is such a critical situation that three weeks ago, a pregnant woman who was being evacuated from the same health centre to Soroti Regional Hospital was crushed by a truck, as she was on a boda boda. 

I have raised this issue a number of times with the ministry. I have written to the permanent secretary and I have had a chat with the Minister of Health. The same issue was raised to you when you visited us in Dakabela launching the women’s hospital about a year ago. Madam Speaker, nothing has been done up to now. 

My prayer is on compassionate grounds. Let this ambulance be replaced. We are not asking for anything extraordinary but simply saying we lost an ambulance in a very difficult situation; seven people died and we are in dire situation as we speak. Therefore, we need a new ambulance as such. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: We shall ask the Minister of Health to advise us on arrangements to replace the ambulance to Atirir Health Centre IV. Please give us an update next week on Tuesday. 

3.11
MS PROSSY MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Fund. I do not know what is happening in other districts but in my district, the money that is being given to the women is very little. For example, the indicative figure for Rubanda District is Shs 162 million. The files that were submitted are worth Shs 700 million.
 
Madam Speaker, this is money that we are trying to make noise for so that it can help our women and bring them out of poverty. When you look at the indicative figure for the youth, it is quite higher than that for the women yet when our women get this money, they pay on time and bring it back in a much clearer way than the youth. 

I do not know what we are going to do because when I went to the ministry and put my concern to them, they told me that the money that is given to them is little and that money in the women’s bag is little. 

Women are trying to work hard so that they can come out of poverty. They have their faith in us and are trying to call out to us. Last week, I had a meeting in my district with all the leaders and the cry was one, “This money is little and it is not helping our women.” 

My prayer is to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because when you go to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, they tell you to talk to the people of the ministry of finance. Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I ask you to add my voice to the Ministry of Finance –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are in the budget process. I think you should take opportunity to seek an upgrade of those funds during the Budget Framework Paper. We direct the committees on Gender and Budget to follow that up. Minister of finance, do you have some good news? 

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker and colleagues, that matter has been brought to our attention. We are still working around to see how we can be able to increase the funding for the women, especially in view of the fact that women seem to be more committed in terms of paying back what they have borrowed. 

I think in the next Budget Framework Paper, we shall have some reallocations, particularly going to our women. Therefore, I just want to allay the fears of our colleague that, that matter has been brought to our attention and we have taken note of it. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you. 

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED, “THE ANTI-SLAVERY BILL, 2018”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will adjust the Order Paper after item four to bring up item 13. 

3.14
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to move a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Anti-Slavery Bill, 2019.” 

WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda; 

AND WHEREAS Parliament enacted its Rules of Procedure pursuant to Article 94 (1) of the Constitution and clause 4(b) of Article 94 and rule 120 bestowing upon a Member of Parliament the right to move a Private Members’ Bill; 

AWARE that the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda under Objective X of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy sets out the State’s duty to take all necessary steps to involve people in the formulation, implementation of development plans and programmes which affect them; 

FURTHER AWARE that Article 25 of the Constitution imposes prohibition on slavery, servitude and forced labour; 

RECOGNISING that Uganda is a signatory to a number of international legal instruments, such as the Convention to Suppress Slave Trade and Slavery, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organised Crime and Convention on the rights of the Child, 1989, which prohibit slavery in all its forms;

FURTHER RECOGNISING that currently in Uganda, in the legislation dealing with slavery, including the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, the Penal code Act cap 120 and the Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Act, 2009 all consider the traditional forms of slavery, being the buying and selling of human beings but do not deal with the modern forms of slavery that are prevalent today;

CONCERNED that the world has seen an upsurge in the occurrence of the modern forms of slavery including the sale of children, child prostitution, child pornography, the exploitation of child labour, the sexual mutilation of female children, the use of children in armed conflicts, debt bondage, the trafficking in persons and in the sale of human beings and organs, the exploitation of prostitution and certain practices under the apartheid and colonial regimes;

FURTHER CONCERNED that the 2017 trafficking in persons report declared Uganda as a source, transit and destination country for men, women and children subjected to forced labour and sex trafficking and ranked Uganda in “Tier 2", being a country whose Government does not fully comply with the minimum standards of eliminating trafficking in persons and other modern forms of slavery;

NOTING that the 2017 trafficking in persons report found that Ugandan migrant workers are subjected to forced labour and sex trafficking in the United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia, Oman, Qatar, Kuwait, Iraq, Iran, Egypt, Turkey, Jordan and Algeria among others and despite the Government's complete ban in 2016 on Ugandans' travel abroad for domestic work, some licensed and unlicensed agencies circumvented this ban and are sending Ugandans through Kenya and Tanzania;

FURTHER NOTING that unless stringent measures are introduced to specifically ban the modern forms of slavery, Ugandan citizens will continue to be subject to the modern forms of slavery;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:

    1. This House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill, for an Act of Parliament titled, “The Anti-Slavery Bill, 2018” a draft of which is hereto attached and do order for the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded by several members. The justification.

MR ARIKO: Thank you, honourable colleagues. Madam Speaker, a great Italian poet by the names of Dante Alighier in his work, “The Devine Comedy” stated once that the hottest part in hell shall be reserved for those who at the time of moral crisis will take neutral positions. 

As members of Parliament, we are aware that we are faced with a moral crisis where, as Parliament, we need to exercise our mandate and role in providing for a law that will not only secure our people today but many more with posterity to come.

I would like to inform the House that we have been awash with a number of incidents where our people are taken in batches and loads and we only get feedback when they have been victims of torture, inhumane treatment as well as servitude. Two weeks ago, the media was awash with columns of close to 100 plus Ugandans lining up at Entebbe International Airport and that they were leaving the country to proceed to the Middle East to work mostly as domestic workers.

Madam Speaker, last year, you sent me together with a number of colleagues for a conference in the United States of America. At Dubai, we met close to 60 young Ugandan women who did not know and could not even trace which gate in Dubai would connect them to Jordan. Somehow, by the Grace of God, they came to us as members of Parliament asking us if we could guide them. 

I was in the company of hon. David Guma and our first question was, “Where you headed to and what are you going to do?” They said that they were going to work.” We asked them who was going to receive them and they replied that they did not know. “Who sent you?” They said, “The organisation that is exporting us.” We asked where they were going and they said to Jordan.

We asked them where they will you live and they did not know. We were surprised at how you can have 60 Ugandans whom even if these organisations were licensed, are going to a country that they do not know and no one is there to guide them through the gates and no one even cares to know what will happen to them.

Madam Speaker, all too often, young people are being trafficked whether through force, threats or deception into traveling overseas to be exploited in construction jobs or as domestic workers. According to the Global Survey Index, there are an estimated 304,000 Ugandans who are victims of trafficking, forced labour and modern slavery. This is a problem that demands for action and it is the reason we implore the House to grant us leave to introduce this law.

Madam Speaker, some colleagues might ask, why then do we not rely on the Anti-Trafficking in Persons Act, 2009? Madam Speaker, regarding the Anti-Trafficking in Persons Act focuses on the aspect of moving somebody from one place to the other for purposes of exploitation. We would like to a Bill or an Act that goes beyond the aspect of moving somebody for purposes of slavery. 

I could be a slave but without having been moved from Soroti to wherever I am being taken. You could be a slave from within your domicile. There are people that have become slaves within the confines of families, servitude and debt bondage. There are people that have become salves not necessarily because they have been moved from one area to the other. We would like a broader law that will bring together all forms of slavery into one common law. 

Madam Speaker, my colleagues and I, therefore, without delving too much into why it is necessary for us to introduce this Bill, would like to implore honourable colleagues that you see it in yourselves that a number of times on this Floor, Members of Parliament have raised concerns, have raised complaints, have raised desire to address problems of modern day slavery and other forms of exploitation.

We, therefore, request you honourable members, to find it within your wisdom to grant my honourable colleagues; hon. Agnes Kunihira and hon. Henry Kibalya to bring to this House a Bill titled, “The Anti-Slavery Bill, 2018” that will deal with all forms of modern and traditional slavery. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.26
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion presented by hon. Herbert Ariko, to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Anti-Slavery Bill, 2018”. 

When we carry out research, we find that there is lot of data moving everywhere concerning issues related to slavery in Uganda in whichever form. The United States Department of State, which is concerned with State diplomacy quoted Uganda as a source, transit and destination for men, women and children subject to torture, forced labour and sex trafficking. 

Madam Speaker, in Uganda, licensed and unlicensed companies based in Kampala employ agencies which continue to recruit Ugandans to work as security guards, labourers and drivers in many countries, including the Middle East. Some of these people are migrants from Uganda who are taken as workers. They are taken with the aim of working in countries such the United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia, Qatar and others. They are recruited under the guise of offering decent labour but at the end of the day, what Ugandans find themselves doing that side, is what you do not need to know.

Despite a ban on recruiting Ugandans to work as domestic workers oversees, licensed and unlicensed agencies circumnavigate this ban and they continue recruiting cleaners and other people with the intent of employing them into decent employment but at the end of the day, these people find themselves in indecent employment.

Madam Speaker, the Government of Ugandan has on several occasions wished to handle this but it does not fully meet the minimum standards for the estimation of the number of people that are trafficked outside this country. It is this cause, therefore, that brings us here to bring a law that can help the Government to have Ugandans that are controlled, Ugandans that are given a future and Ugandans that have a line to follow.

Trafficking of children is a problem and is hidden –(Interruption)

MR AGABA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter. At this point our colleagues are seeking leave of the House to go and draft a Bill, which they will they table before the House and give their rationale for the Bill. Is it procedurally right that the seconder of the Bill – even if he is the mover – gives the rationale of the Bill now or is it for them to simply seek the authority of the House to go and research, put their words together and come? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, for now it is just a question of seeking our leave so that you can come back. You do not have to go into the merits of the Bill.

MR KAIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In that respect, I stand here to second the motion to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Anti-Slavery Bill, 2018”.

3.31
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers Representative): Madam Speaker, I stand to second the motion moved by hon. Herbert Ariko under the provisions of Article 94(4)(b) of the Constitution. We have debated this issue on a number of occasions and we have also witnessed how our people are suffering. I, therefore, add my voice to seek your support that you give us leave to move a Private Member’s Bill. 

Madam Speaker, I beg that Parliament grants us leave to present a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Anti-Slavery Bill, 2018”. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do grant authority to hon. Ariko to bring a Bill for first reading.

(Question put and agreed to.)

3.32
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, with the motion passed, my situation is a bit tricky. Whereas I sympathise with the sentiments of the movers of this motion and I appreciate their intention to bring a Private Member’s Bill, I wanted to point out that although the concerns of the Members are legitimate, we do not need another law. We have in place a sufficient legal framework to address what we have been told are the intentions of the new law.

When you look at our Constitution, the Penal Code Act –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are now going into the merits of the Bill. Are you anticipating the content of the Bill? Are you debating the content of the Bill?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I had a second point to make. Ordinarily, in a motion of this nature, we should have been availed copies of the intended Bill so that we look at it and see whether it is proper before this House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Attorney-General, they are simply seeking leave and if you look at your iPad, the Bill is uploaded there. Check your iPad and at this stage, you cannot enter into the merits of the Bill.

Therefore, authority is granted for publication of the Bill and bring it for first reading.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO A QUESTION RAISED BY HON. CENTENARY FRANCO ROBERT, MP KASESE MUNICIPALITY, ON THE NON-PAYMENT OF STIPEND TO SIX UGANDAN MEDICAL STUDENTS PURSUING STUDIES IN CUBA ON BILATERAL ARRANGEMENTS

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMALRY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to present a statement on the Government’s non-payment of monthly stipends to Ugandan medical students pursuing studies in Cuba that was raised by hon. Robert Centenary, the MP Kasese Municipality.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Education and Sports supports students on Government-to-Government scholarships abroad, with a modest stipend amounting to $100 per month. While it is possible for students in other countries to open accounts in their respective countries of study, it was not possible for those in Cuba because of the following reasons:
Cuba is under economic sanctions from the United States of America and no intermediary banks operate within the country. 

Secondly, as a result of this, the Cuban Embassy in Uganda advised the students to open VISA accounts in banks at home. At the time, Standard Chartered Bank and Stanbic Bank were the operational banks. The students would then use their Visa Cards to withdraw their allowances in Cuba. This system has been functional over the years and it was only recently in Financial Year 2018/2019 when the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development queried payment of allowances to local Banks when the students are abroad.

In our letter to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development dated 7 January 2019, we formally relayed this information to the ministry and we are now working with them to ensure remittances are made without any further delays. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to inform the House.

THE SPEAKER: Can the minister come to update us? Hon. Bahati, you should come and update us on whether the system is now working after your meeting with the Minister of Education and Sports. (Mr Wamanga-Wamai rose_) Okay, give the information, hon. Wamai.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Our mission in Canada takes care of Cuba. Allowances for students can be sent through our Mission in Canada because there is an officer who is attached to Canada and takes care of the interests of students in Cuba. Therefore, if the money is sent to our mission, the officer in charge of student affairs there will travel to Cuba and hand over the money to the students in Cuba instead of putting the money in the banks here. That is what has been going on for many years.

THE SPEAKER: Can the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development come and update us on this matter after you have met with the Ministry of Education and Sports so that we can advise the young people how they are going to get their money? Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY GLOWING TRIBUTE TO MS QUIIN ABENAKYO FOR HER OUTSTANDING PERFORMANCE AT THE 68TH EDITION OF THE  MISS WORLD PAGEANT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you recall yesterday, we indicated that we would have a formal motion to pay tribute to Miss World Africa. She is here again with her sponsors, Brenda Nanyonjo and Kevin Zziwa as well as the family - Mr Charles Sembera and Mrs Alice Sembera who are her father and mother respectively; the grandmother Mrs Joyce Kipwitu; her aunt, Grace Abenakyo and Margaret Dwaya, her sister. You are welcome. 

3.39
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I rise to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay glowing tribute to Ms Quiin Abenakyo for her outstanding performance at the 68th edition of the Miss World Pageant 2018.
It is moved under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS the 68th edition of the Miss World pageant was held on 8 December 2018 at the Sanya City Arena in Sanya, China where over 118 contestants from all over the world competed for the title of Miss World;

AND WHEREAS Miss Uganda 2018, Ms Quiin Abenakyo, represented Uganda at the Miss World Pageant;

AWARE that Ms Quiin Abenakyo's exceptional performance came as a result of her participation in the Miss Uganda pageant, an annual event organised by the Miss Uganda Foundation, a Non-Government Organisation founded by Ms Brenda Nanyonjo wherein Ms Quiin Abenakyo emerged winner of the Miss Uganda crown, which led to her qualification as the representative of Uganda at the Miss World Beauty Pageant;

RECOGNISING that Ms Quiin Abenakyo showcased exceptional brilliance while defending her beauty with a purpose project entitled, "Fighting teenage pregnancies” during the competition for the title of Miss World; emerging winner of several crowns, including being crowned Miss World Africa;

NOTING that Ms Quiin Abenakyo's victory is the first of its kind for a Ugandan participant and the first Miss Uganda to make it to the top five finalists of such an international beauty pageant;

RECOGNISING that the remarkable performance of Ms Quiin Abenakyo has enhanced Uganda’s standing in the world and has made Uganda a business, tourist and investment destination;

APPRECIATING that this victory presents a unique opportunity for national unity, patriotism, promotion of girl-child education, development of talent and potential, especially amongst the youth and women in Uganda;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that:

    1. Parliament collectively congratulates and pays deserved glowing tribute to Ms Quiin Abenakyo for the tremendous feat of emerging winner of Miss World Africa Crown and making it to the top five finalists at the 68th edition of the Miss World pageant.

    2. Parliament applauds and takes cognisance of the contribution of the Miss Uganda Foundation in organising the annual Miss Uganda Beauty Pageant. 

    3. Parliament urges the ministries responsible for tourism, foreign affairs and gender to support the Miss Uganda Foundation in the organisation of the annual Miss Uganda Beauty pageants in an effort to promote Uganda as a tourism destination. 

    4. Government continues to support programmes aimed at promoting girl-child education in order to maximise the potential of all the girl children.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by several Members. Justify the motion. (Applause)

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, before I justify the motion, having spoken to the Miss Uganda Foundation manager today, I would like to, in a special way, ask all of you to applaud the Rt Hon. Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga Alitwala, for her personal support to the Miss Uganda pageant. 

In a special way, I would also like to recognise the following members of Parliament seated in this House who have, at a personal level, supported the Miss Uganda Foundation, including the former Miss Uganda, Atat Cecilia Ogwal. (Applause)

I would also like to take note of the following men seated in this House who have walked the journey with the Miss Uganda Foundation including;

    1. Hon. Alex Ruhunda, MP Fort Portal Municipality
    2. Hon. Muhammad Nsereko, MP Kampala Central
    3. Hon. Paulson Luttamaguzi, MP Nakaseke South
    4. Hon. Thomas Tayebwa, MP Ruhinda North and all the other Members. 

The ones I mentioned played a great role in supporting the Miss Uganda Foundation during the organisation of the Miss Uganda competition.

Honourable members, as you realise, Ms Abenakyo is a young brilliant lady who just graduated three days ago from Makerere University. She graduated with a Bachelor of Business Computing. It means being Miss Uganda is no longer about beauty alone but also about brains. I would like to, therefore, say that the queen we have before us today has beauty with a brain and a purpose.

Madam Speaker, Ms Abenakyo’s “Beauty with a Purpose” project is targeting keeping girls in school and preventing teenage pregnancies. I am sure all of us in this House love that theme which won her the Miss World Africa crown. There were 108 participants but Miss Uganda came fourth amongst them all. Honourable members, you need to applaud Ms Abenakyo. Her coming fourth was not necessarily based on beauty alone. Whereas she is naturally beautiful, she is also gifted with a brain and favour.

The mother of the girl we are celebrating today gave her the name Quiin, which means she wishes her daughter well wherever she goes. To make matters interesting, Abenakyo, in my understanding, means “have it all”. Therefore, honourable members, when we are naming our children, it is important to give them wonderful names. If you give a child – (Interjections) – Madam Speaker, I need to be protected.

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

MS AMONGIN: I personally think naming of children is relevant to the growth of a child; for example, I am called Amongin and my name means “big bull”. Ms Abenakyo was also given all those wonderful names. So, when you are naming your children, it is important for you to give them names that portray a great future, so that they excel in whatever they do.

Back to our issue of celebrating the achievement of Ms Abenakyo, her agenda is to keep the girl-child in school and end early pregnancies, early marriages and improve menstrual hygiene. I interacted with Ms Abenakyo for two minutes today and I asked her what her dream is. She said her dream is not necessarily this fame she got. However, she wants to transform the lives of young hopeless girls out there who are forced into early marriage. She wants to reach out to those girls in northern Uganda. She specifically said she wants to reach out to the girls in Karamoja and the Batwa community in Bundibugyo. 

I believe this girl has a vision. She is not just holding the position for the sake of beauty, but she has a vision to transform the lives of other young girls in the country. She is a role model for the young children because through her, those children see they can also make it to the top. 

Whereas the Miss Uganda Pageant is annual, I would like to call upon Members of Parliament to take a step to allocate money to this particular event. It has implications, not necessarily for beauty but also for promoting our agenda as a country. It promotes tourism, culture and the girl-child, since Miss Uganda Foundation can carry out a variety of activities if empowered.

Ms Abenakyo is a torch bearer for all the 54 countries in Africa. This is the first time Uganda is at the top, carrying the Africa flag. Therefore, I would like to call upon Parliament to give this young lady support. As Members of the Pan-African Parliament, we celebrated Miss Africa at the Pan-African Parliament. Now that Ms Abenakyo is the Miss World Africa, why wouldn’t we celebrate her in Midrand, South Africa, so that the whole continent knows that Uganda is endowed not only with beauty but also nature? 

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I would like, in one way or another, to say that when I interacted with Ms Abenakyo, she told me there are debts of Shs 138 million that were incurred in organising her participation at the Miss World Pageant, for air tickets and other things. She said they did this on their own because there was no support at all. For that matter, I would like to thank a Nigerian, Renzioni, who tried to design our Miss Uganda. He is a Nigerian and we should applaud him. 

I would like to call upon this Parliament to allocate money to support this project on an annual basis, it could be through the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. Let us do this in support of activities like Ms Abenakyo’s “Beauty with a Purpose” project. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Kawooya, you have three minutes. Honourable members, I have two sets of motions and two sets of movers. 

3.54
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to express gratitude to Miss World Africa, Ms Abenakyo. Being the fourth most beautiful and intelligent woman in the world, she did not only make us proud as a country but she made the African continent and the world proud. On behalf of the Pan-African Parliament women and on behalf of all African women, I would like to add my voice to congratulate and applaud her for being our torch. 

Ms Abenakyo did not only hold the Ugandan flag high, but on behalf of the African continent and on behalf of the beauties in this House, namely my old beauty, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, the former Miss World and myself of course, Miss West Nile. (Laughter) I became Miss West Nile, competed up to Miss Uganda and I became the third and I am very proud of that – (Interjection) - Those in West Nile can testify.

Ms Abenakyo became a unifying factor, not only for Ugandans but for the African continent and globally. She mesmerised so many. This was expressed by the voting and rallying, which was of course spearheaded by you, the Speaker, by the President of this country, His Excellency Kaguta Museveni, and each and everybody. Millions of Africans rallied behind our Miss Africa and she made us proud.

Finally, Ms Abenakyo’s victory was a demonstration of the resilience and determination of the African woman; once an African woman comes out with all the values, she goes in for the highest. We are proud of that because she has been an inspiration to the many young generations to come. She has demonstrated that indeed African women are women of substance and that we can always reach the global stage without fear and make it at any time –(Member timed out.)

3.58
MS PAMELA KAMUGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion moved by hon. Jacquiline Amongin, the Woman Representative for Ngora District. As the Chairperson, Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA), I congratulate Ms Abenakyo on this very great achievement -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Abala, please -

MS KAMUGO: Madam Speaker, these are my justifications: I had an interview with Ms Abenakyo’s five minutes before we entered the House and her passion is about the girl-child. She is focusing on ending early child marriages and teenage pregnancies. As UWOPA, we are very proud of her. She clearly indicated that she is very passionate about the girl-child and highlighted how early child marriages and teenage pregnancies are compromising the health of young girls in schools.

She also mentioned that these early teenage pregnancies pose a lot of complications to the girls. They have led to high dropout rates from schools, fistula, etcetera, and she looks forward to curbing some of these complications amongst the women.

Madam Speaker, she is one of the few young female activists who has emulated you as our role model. (Applause) She has advocated for the young persons in Uganda and also at the global level. Ms  Abenakyo, we are very proud of you and we look forward to supporting you. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

4.01
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole):  Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I stand as a very happy man because Uganda has produced the best in Africa. She is supposed to have been the best in the world but the African judges were few on the panel. She should have been the best in the world.

I was lucky that during the Christmas period, I hosted this beautiful lady at my home in Fort Portal. The people of Toro who managed to give a wife to the Basoga produced a very good product for Africa. (Laughter) I think other men can now learn from that.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you in person. Last year, when we had the Miss Uganda contest, she was left on her own. We had to move around looking for money and if you had not stood with us, we would have failed. You never know if that had failed, we would not have Abenakyo this year. That foundation was laid and I would like to thank you wholeheartedly, Madam Speaker.

I would like to raise key strategic issues, especially when it comes to our priorities. I have been engaging with the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities and Uganda Tourism Board. I have been asking them why they do not prioritise, because we give them a lot of money to advertise this country. I know they set up a duplicate Miss Tourism but that is more for within Uganda; the brand name of Miss Uganda/Miss World is a big thing. We cannot just neglect it and inject money in our smaller confines; that is not strategic.

I urge that we resolve that money comes from the Uganda Tourism Board and goes to the Miss Uganda budget. Unfortunately, the Government Chief Whip removed me from the Budget Committee; I used to play a good role.

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to say that this lady is a gift to this nation and to the colour we have. As a Pan Africanist, I know that many people have been indoctrinated by not appreciating this beautiful black colour. However, you can see the beauty of Africa shining in this colour. Let us be proud of our colour and make young generations proud of being African. Thank you very much.

4.03
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me an opportunity to contribute to this motion. 

As usual, I take time to correct the people of Uganda that I was never really Miss Uganda as such but I participated in Miss Brooke Bond at that time and it was a marketing competition, in 1969. What I needed to let you know is that I did not even emerge the winner because being a marketing competition, it had three components including the academic component, to tell Ugandans and the people at large what the value of tea is. One thing you got from me is that slogan, which has remained up to now - “Any time is tea time”. That was the slogan we coined at that time.

The other component was how to serve tea. That is what defeated me. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, this is very important because it defines beauty. When you are serving tea, as a lady you must serve with some gentility, a bit of a smile and talk to the person you are serving the tea to. You must explain to them that tea is good - when you feel hot, take tea; when you feel cold, take tea. I went as a proper Mulango and I just took that tea and –(Laughter). I missed it but as my colleague from Toro has just said, the beauty from Toro took the Miss Brooke Bond and I was runner-up. The media and everybody thought that I was the one who got it, up to now, and I have continued to celebrate that. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I am not going to dwell on what has already been highlighted by the movers of this motion. Allow me to dwell on two things. One of them is that Churchill defined what Uganda is - Uganda is the Pearl of Africa. I would like you to look at the lady seated up there; she is a pearl. Stand up, please. (Applause) I think she defines the beauty that you can find in any part of Uganda for which we need to be proud.

Secondly, I would like to emphasise the lack of interest that we, as Parliament and Government in particular, pay towards the initiative by the Miss Uganda Foundation. Every time, the foundation is doing this programme on its own. I would like to appreciate you, Madam Speaker, because you have done your best; you have contributed a lot. I remember in 2015/2016, you contributed towards the air ticket.

I would like Parliament to know that on the day our queen was flying for this competition, she met me at the airport. She came straight to me - I had never met her before - and all she asked for, with a lot of humility, was prayers and blessings from a mother. That is what I did on your behalf; I blessed her for this competition and I am very proud that God heard our prayer.

Finally, I would like to say that Africa must define its own beauty. I like the fact that it is our members of the Pan African Parliament that have moved this motion. I would like hon. Jacquiline Amongin to take this to the Pan African Parliament and have this motion moved there as well. This is because for the first time, we have defined the beauty of Africa, which has never been the case. This is a miracle for us and for Africa. People must turn their attention to Africa for what Africa has. People should not only look at wretched naked looking people and define them as Africans. We are –(Member timed out.) 

4.10
MS JULIE MUKODA (Independent, Woman Representative, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion. As the Woman Member of Parliament for Mayuge District, I would like to congratulate my daughter. I am so proud of you. You made us proud.

I would like to say thank you to every Ugandan. I have never seen Ugandans so united as we were when we were voting for Miss Uganda. By the time she was voted, I was bed-ridden but I used my phone to vote and I would send my fellow Members, friends, family and people in Mayuge messages to vote for our girl. 

I am so proud of Ms Abenakyo. Thank you for being an inspiration to the young girl-child of Uganda. You have made us proud and you have inspired so many girls in this country. Yesterday, I was in Mayuge when a girl came to me - she is going to senior four – and she said, “Honourable, I would like to be like Quiin. If you can, introduce me to her so that she can teach me what I can do because I am the next queen.” 

We are proud of you. I pledge to be a joint partner in your project and help our teenage girls to avoid early pregnancy. Thank you.

4.12
MS ANNA ADEKE (Independent, Female Youth Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and also to congratulate our beauty queen who is not only beautiful but also very brilliant. 

Some time back, beauty pageants were looked at as something shameful. Many women were not willing to participate in beauty pageants because so much was attached to them - having to adorn a bikini and do the catwalk. So many people had a stereotype about beauty queens. I am so proud that our Parliament is moving out of the closet to celebrate women, feminism and to appreciate that it is okay for women to be comfortable in their skin and to identify themselves as beautiful and share their ideas with the world. 

I listened to Ms Abenakyo’s submission about her project. She was asked about it, alongside the beauty queen from Argentina, and she did so well. She made me so proud. The video made rounds on WhatsApp and not even Over the Top (OTT) tax would stop us from voting for her. We voted for her overwhelmingly because she made us proud to be Ugandan, proud to be young women, and she is setting the pace for many young girls who feel like they are not confident about themselves.

We, therefore, need to look at beauty pageants as something that can contribute not only to us as women but also to the country’s tourism. Many people in the world are looking out for Uganda because she was not only Miss Africa but she was the second runner-up in the world. She beat other continents to come third in the entire competition. 

She has done so well and in future, we would like to see our institutions like the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities supporting these pageants because they market our country. You can imagine how many people cannot wait to see how beautiful Uganda is. If the creatures that come from here look so fair and beautiful like she does, what about everything else that is in our country?

I would like to also thank her parents for supporting her. It is not easy to find parents who support such a calling. (Applause) Many of them want to box you into the classroom to read hard, become an accountant or an engineer. Look at how many lives Ms Abenakyo is changing because she expressed her beauty. Thank you very much for supporting us as young women. We love you so much, Quin and we shall support you. Bravo!

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we speak, let us make concrete proposals. Where is the home of Miss Uganda? Where is the funding? We must deal with that. 

4.15
MR ANDREW KALUYA (Independent, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion moved by hon. Amongin congratulating Ms Abenakyo for her wonderful contribution towards Uganda’s popularity and fame.

Ms Abenakyo has done Uganda and Africa proud, bearing in mind that Africa and Uganda in particular have been known for negative reasons largely. Now we have a reason to celebrate Uganda as the Pearl of Africa for such a wonderful achievement that Ms Abenakyo has given to us, and it is no doubt that this achievement has come from a very young Musoga girl, beautiful as she looks. What I know is that with the support of Government, more such talents will come up. 

I would like to thank the Miss Uganda Foundation that has helped us identify this girl and for giving its all to ensure that we attain such success. Ms Abenakyo is not only beautiful but also very brilliant. She has very strong values, especially when it comes to the girl-child. It is through her that we can achieve milestones when it comes to helping the girl-child. We need to support her, support the Miss Uganda Foundation itself and ensure that even the young girls that have not discovered their potential can come up.

Madam Speaker, on behalf of most of the male members of this House, who have very under privileged - Some male Members here have suggested that they need to get familiar with her projects so that they can help the girl-child in their constituencies. They have requested that maybe Ms Abenakyo can give us her number so that we can help the girl-child in the different constituencies. (Laughter) (Member timed out.)

4.18
MS VERONICA BABIRYE (Independent, Woman Representative, Buyende): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. On behalf of the people of Buyende, Busoga and Uganda at large, I would like to congratulate our daughter upon that big award of Miss Africa.

Madam Speaker, I was a model before and I know the challenges that models go through to reach that level of Miss Uganda or Miss World. During our years, when we were trying our level best to reach there but it was not easy. I had one advantage; I was picked because of my height but the other things were not there. (Laughter) The resources to dress me up and keep up the standard were not there. I stopped at the level of a model. 

Most of us persevered in those modelling companies thinking that maybe we shall get business. However, we realised that actually, our clients were bar people because Ugandans were not taking that industry seriously. Therefore, most parents discouraged their children to participate in modelling. There was also the challenge of age limit in modelling. You can only be a model up to the age of 30 years. Beyond that, no one wants to look at a model older than 30 years. 

Madam Speaker, the challenges we had at that time are the same challenges which Abenakyo had. She wanted to carry on with her career but if it were not for you and other good Samaritans, she would not have gone that far. If her parents were not civilized and were teachers like mine, she would have stopped at that level.

Madam Speaker, Abenakyo –(Member timed out.)

4.22
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion. Congratulations to Ms Abenakyo, your parents, relatives and friends, Uganda, Africa and Members of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, Abenakyo is a Miss World Africa and we are paying tribute to her for three outstanding issues. One of them is promotion of tourism. Secondly, she is a fighter against teenage pregnancies. Thirdly, she is a promoter of girl-child education.

Allow me to talk about two of these issues: girl-child education and being a fighter against teenage pregnancies. To all of us who are here as leaders, can we go all out and support Ms Abenakyo in promoting girl-child education and avoiding teenage pregnancies by doing the following as leaders and educationists:

First, can we go to our schools and promote good sanitary conditions and hygiene, so that our girls can stay in school. Fighting, teasing and bullying the girl-child in schools should be the second issue we should fight as we help Ms Abenakyo in trying to fight for the girl-child.

Thirdly, affirmative action should be improved on for the girl-child. As parents and leaders, let us go out and tell parents to provide uniforms, scholastic materials and enough pocket money for the girl-child so that she can stay in school and not go around looking for money.

Equal treatment for all our children, as parents and as leaders - Discrimination, segregation, oppression and exploitation of the girl-child should cease forthwith. Ms Abenakyo, please go ahead.

Cruelty and harsh conditions at home - A girl comes back from school and her mother makes her look after the children, sweep and wash plates. All these should cease. Can we lessen domestic chores for our girl-child. Above all, let us try to promote girl-child education.

Lastly, how can we raise money to support Ms Abenakyo? Honourable Minister for Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, we have very many tourist sites in this country, in western Uganda, eastern Uganda, central Uganda as well as West Nile. We can develop some of these tourist sites so that we can raise enough money and have both domestic and foreign tourists. In Moyo District, for instance, you can go to Dufile sub-county, Panjala. Emin Pasha was able to settle there and he even died there. It was also a very big market for slave traders. 

These sites can be developed so that they attract tourists to come and raise money and we develop the tourism industry in this country. In this way, we shall be helping our beautiful daughter, Ms Abenakyo. I thank you very much for listening to me. God bless you. 

4.26
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I need to add my voice to those of my colleagues and thank whoever participated and played a great role to see the success that we are celebrating today. Ms Abenakyo, we are proud of you and we thank you for the courage that you exhibited and the determination that brought Uganda on the map.

Madam Speaker, hon. Jacquiline Amongin was thanking very many people. I equally need to add my voice and say that you have really exhibited a symbol of leadership and support. In most of these successes that we register, your name will be number one - you will be leading. It takes us somewhere and it is something that I need to talk about. 

In addition, hon. Mariam Naigaga really mobilised us. Some of us are not good at WhatsApp but she mobilised us day and night to vote for Ms Abenakyo. Hence, she did her part. Hon. Sseggona has also offered free legal services to all the programmes that Ms Abenakyo will be running and we are happy. 

Madam Speaker, I have two issues to raise. The Minister for Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities is here. Ms Abenakyo’s parents were interviewed and what they said in that interview left a lot to be desired. We are always good at celebrating success at the last hour. If you were not there, Madam Speaker, we would not be celebrating today. However, we have departments and sectors that are responsible. We wonder what happened to them. Ms Abenakyo was already queen of Uganda and Africa. She was going for the Miss World competition but the departments concerned were not there to come in and give a hand. We need to revise our steps and know where to put the required support. 

We are here promising this and the other. The minister will also come on the Floor and promise us heaven on earth. However, history has it that after such moments of promising and celebrating, things die out. In the next two years, we shall be here and you will be tracing the success of Ms Abenakyo’s projects, the support that Government promised, and you will see everybody – (Member timed out.) 

4.29
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have mentioned before that the lives of African children are full of possibilities. Many times, because we come from poor backgrounds, many African children may give up along the way. It is right for us to celebrate the success of Ms Abenakyo, as evidence that there is hope at the end of the tunnel, that our children should believe in possibilities. If you carry out a survey in Parliament here, I am very sure, without doubt, there will be many of us that will give testimonies of how they went to primary school either without shoes, in torn shirts or in the most wretched or weird ways, but now they are here as Members of Parliament. 

My own mother, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, has told us how she performed in a beauty pageant. I thought that she was almost Miss Uganda some time, until today when she corrected my impression. I was also informed that hon. Anifa Kawooya was one of the most beautiful air hostesses of her time. Today, she is here with us in Parliament. This is testimony that the lives of African children are full of possibilities. Therefore, from the success of Ms Abenakyo, our young people should have hope that the future is very bright and they will do better. 

I would like to make a 180 degree turn and say that every success in Africa is a dream come true but – (Member timed out.) 

4.31
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I would like to join all the Members to congratulate Ms Abenakyo, who did wonders at the Miss World contest. Our dear Quiin, congratulations. Today, I really had to talk because I want to be counted as one of the young men who were around at the time when Ms Abenakyo raised the Ugandan flag this high.

Madam Speaker, I loved Ms Abenakyo’s project so much. When you talk about teenage pregnancy and early marriage, it tickles us as a nation. As the health sector, what have we done to tackle girl-child education and teenage pregnancies? What have we done to encourage young girls and ladies to fulfil their potential so that we produce ladies like Abenakyo - a lady with meticulous character and a very assertive attitude that can enable someone to make such a monumental achievement? 

Madam Speaker, you are one of those who have done that in this country; you have moved and progressed. You are where you are today because of this and you have been a model to many. Ms Abenakyo, being young, has moved and done wonders. I congratulate her and her family, and I urge us as a Parliament to unite when it comes to the budget for girl-child education and health. Let us support these girls and children to get immunised so that they can remain beautiful, grow and then we get more like Ms Abenakyo. 

Since Busoga is now the industry that is producing “Quiins” we are also going to work harder. I encourage the Basoga to produce more children, especially girl-children, so that we can have more beauty queens. Let us produce more children and have more beauty queens from Busoga so that we can continue to embrace this and grow. I congratulate you, Quiin. Long live Uganda. I thank you. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Members, I would like to hear some serious proposals for funding.  

4.34
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join in congratulating Ms Abenakyo, her parents and the foundation. In a special way, I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for fighting for the girl-child because wherever you have gone, you really talk about this. 

I would also like to thank the Members of Parliament because many of them voted for her. I remember in this area, hon. Okori-Moe told us to vote and people were busy with their phones voting. We were in the House but Members were voting. You know I am not on WhatsApp so when I asked what everyone was voting for, they told me to install it and vote. I called my personal assistant and asked him to vote from office since everyone was voting. I think Ugandans and Members of Parliament took this up as one of their areas.

Madam Speaker, it has already been said that sometimes we enjoy the successes but when somebody is going through the struggle, we are not there to see this person through. I would like to propose in this Parliament that the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities names a road in one of the parks after Ms Abenakyo in order for us to remember her. We do not want to forget about her after this year. Can we have it on record that we have somebody who has done that? 

I would also like to propose a budget for recreation so that under the sports department and the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, we have a recreation budget, which can help the foundation to promote pageant activities.

Madam Speaker, there is a year when we had a deaf girl become first runner up in the Miss Uganda contest. As an organisation, we had to look for a sign language interpreter. She was very beautiful and she did it, but Government was really adamant. I think Government should learn a lesson; we should not always run to pick these people from Entebbe but when we come here, we should take advantage. 

I think we need to start learning the lesson of progressing, to see to it that talent is built. This young girl, being a student and again running for Miss World competition - I think that was her determination. She has broken the inferiority complex of going to compete with people who we thought will always win. She has broken their determination and will be a role model for Ugandan girls.

Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to this House, as the budget comes, to look at bringing the recreation budget on board. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.36
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate hon. Jacquiline Amongin for the motion that she has moved this afternoon. I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate Ms Abenakyo on behalf of the people of Bulamogi County, Kaliro District, and to further congratulate her parents and family for the good upbringing of Ms Abenakyo.

As a Christian, I used to think that before God we are all seen to be equal, beautiful and handsome. However, I realised that it is not so. The word of God in Job 42 says that God blessed Job with three daughters and they were the most beautiful girls in the land. That confirms to us that God decides to make some people more beautiful than others, but we are all good before God.

What I would like to say to Ms Abenakyo is that the beauty that God has blessed you with - both of body and mind - should be used for the glory of God. We have a problem with the virus of “celebrity”. When somebody becomes a celebrity, if not well tamed or handled properly, their status may not be used properly and what should have been used for the glory of God turns out to be used for evil purposes. We pray that you will be a blessing and you will glorify the Lord with your achievement.

I appreciated Ms Abenakyo when I watched her speak and tell the world what she stood for and when she was appealing for people to vote. Her expression, composure and precision in communication really made me love her so much and I even tried to appeal to people to continue voting for her. Ms Abenakyo is Miss World Africa. Accordingly, we expect that your impact is going to go beyond the bounds of Uganda. It is going to go across the African continent and we pray that you reach out to Africa and make Africa shine.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I have noted that from the Africans who have been united with titles of “Sir” – (Member timed out.)

4.39
MS BRENDA ASINDE (NRM, Women Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to stand with other Members to congratulate Ms Abenakyo. On behalf of the people of Iganga District, we are really proud as the Basoga people. Thank you for making us proud.

I like your principles and what you want to achieve in life. There are so many people who are going to be inspired by what you want in life. Regarding your dream of fighting teenage pregnancies, as a girl who has grown up in Busoga, I know that you identified the right thing for all the girls in Busoga because that is one of the challenges we have in Busoga. You will find a child of 10, 11 or 12 years pregnant and married to a boy of 14 years. Therefore, I think you brought out the right idea at the right time. May God bless you for that.

Madam Speaker, I thank you for your generosity and for what you did for this young girl. Sometimes there comes a time when you are competing and you look around and you have nowhere to get funds and you have nowhere to get what you need to finish the race. I thank you very much and may God bless you.

When we start budgeting, I suggest that even though we are thinking about tourism and the foundation, let us also think about Abenakyo as a person. There are so many people who have gained from their achievements, like the athletes who win races in the world. Therefore, I think Abenakyo should also get something and be rewarded for the achievement that she got. That is my submission. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I wonder whether she is going to be recognised on Saturday at the NRM celebrations because she has marketed Uganda. Minister for the Presidency, she deserves to be recognised.

4.42
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to, first of all, thank the mover of the motion for raising this matter and also thank Members for their words of encouragement and appreciation. 

To you, Madam Speaker, from the word go we thank you for rallying this House to support our own Ms Abenakyo. Indeed, from this platform of Parliament, the whole country was able to listen to your voice and vote. That is why we now boast of our Ms Abenakyo, Miss World Africa.

I would like to start by congratulating Ms Abenakyo for this mega achievement. As the Chairperson of Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children where we say, “Children first”, I am very delighted that all her projects are focusing on children. Therefore, as Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children, our doors are open to partner with her to see that we reach to all our children, especially the girl-child.

Madam Speaker, for us to be able to get a girl-child of Ms Abenakyo’s quality, we have to ensure that first and foremost, there is no domestic violence. We must ensure that we have families in which children can grow with dignity, families where children will be given education and where children’s health will be guaranteed. 

We need a Government that is going to invest in its children. The tales, which Ms Abenakyo went through before Government finally realised that it had an asset in this lady, are very disappointing. We learnt that even getting an air ticket for her to go for the Miss World finals was a problem. Where was the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities? My friend, hon. Godfrey Kiwanda, you are here and we have seen you moving around with people just because of beauty but now we have a qualified beauty at world stage; can you empty the coffers so that – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Children (UPFC), we are going to sit and consult with the members and see what we can do. However, as the chairperson, I would like to lead by example. Next month, I will be contributing Shs 1 million. As a forum, we will see what we can do to support the projects. I thank you.

4.45
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion as moved by hon. Jacquiline Amongin in regard to Ms Abenakyo’s victory and the victory of Uganda.

The victory that Ms Abenakyo secured for our country and the continent is not a mean achievement for African women. We would like to congratulate you Quiin, your managers, parents and the children of Africa. Congratulations to the women of Africa and the women of Uganda.

Quiin, in your victory, the Pearl of Africa rose again. As a country, we have been known for bad things for a long time. I am glad that our name was washed clean, that we are not a country that can be known for corruption or bad things but we also have beauties with a purpose. Ms Abenakyo is one such beauty with a purpose. We would like to thank you. Congratulations to the parents of Ms Abenakyo for moulding her into a beauty that has attracted many people and has won souls. As a country, the Pearl is shining again through Ms Abenakyo.

Madam Speaker, I would like to propose that we specifically celebrate Ms Abenakyo on the International Women’s Day. On the 8th of March, we should celebrate Ms Abenakyo as a person and we celebrate her victory and possibly, we request that as it has been done to others, Ms Abenakyo, as a person, can equally receive her kitu kidogo and possibly a “presidential handshake”. (Applause) I would like to request the President of Uganda that like he has done for other people who come out with distinguished achievements, Ms Abenakyo should equally be recognised.

Madam Speaker, when the news of Ms Abenakyo came out, I remembered the Biblical verse where people were saying – (Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Kiiza for allowing information. Ms Abenakyo saved Uganda a lot of foreign currency - millions of dollars that we normally spend in advertising on CNN. I would like to request the Government that since she has saved us millions of dollars that we would have spent, at least $ 1 million be attached to her projects. It is not only CNN but all televisions and international media were showing Uganda because of her. That is the information I wanted to give.

MS KIIZA: As I wind up, I was saying that I remembered what is in the Bible; when Jesus emerged, people were saying, “Can anything good come from Nazareth?” When I heard Ms Abenakyo was from Busoga, I said, “Oh my God! You mean Busoga - (Laughter) - the one we have known for that “thing” can raise a world queen? 

Quiin, thank you for raising the image of the Basoga people. (Laughter) This message is all the way from the great people of Rwenzori, congratulating our counterparts of Busoga upon the milestone you have achieved in the victory of Ms Abenakyo.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to suggest something to the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. Minister of Tourism, hon. Suubi, we get a lot of tourists coming from abroad; can we tag a small fund, even though it is Shs 1,000, to support the Miss Uganda Foundation, and possibly a percentage goes to Abenakyo’s activities? They will pay it. Look for a way of packaging it so that possibly, at every gate of any national park, there is a box that is collecting money for Ms Abenakyo and the Miss Uganda Foundation. It can be a way through which we can collect money that will help future participants of such contests, where we find ourselves in a sorry state to facilitate our own children.

Madam Speaker, as I wind up, I would like to thank you from the bottom of my heart for the heart you have had for talented Ugandans. Every time we run into a crisis requiring support, you have always been readily available. Every time there is a team going out there on behalf of Uganda, you have always been handy. It is not surprising that even in the situation that Ms Abenakyo faced, you were there. I know it is not because she is from Busoga because you have done it for other people from all regions. You have done it for other Ugandans. We thank you and pray that God continues to bless you with such a big heart. May you be rewarded abundantly. I thank you.

4.52
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also rise to join the rest of the team in congratulating Ms Abenakyo for making Uganda very proud. I would like to thank her parents. It is not easy to bring up such a beautiful girl but you looked after her and made sure there were no boys running around. She is a girl of substance, not just beauty. Congratulations to the parents and congratulations to Ms Abenakyo.

Madam Speaker, what happens in this country is that individuals try their best on their own. When they go out there and win, like Ms Abenakyo has done, we start celebrating. However, before one comes up and wins such a prestigious award, the Government does nothing. 

Now, the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities has somebody who is going to market this country. We have got tourism expos in Tokyo, Berlin, Milan and Spain and now we have got a person to go and market this country. At times, you are not even able to fund those tourism promotions that take place around the country but now you have got somebody, not because of beauty alone but she has got substance. She is a graduate who is going to increase the number of tourists coming into this country.

Madam Speaker, I know there are people waiting outside there and I hope Ms Abenakyo will not sign any contract with some of these guys waiting outside. They are now going to ride on your beauty. They want money. They will come and say, “We did this and that for you.” Ugandans are like that and many will be running around you now that they did this and that –(Member timed out.)

4.55
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to say a word. I stand here as Mr Uganda as well. (Laughter) I am Mr Uganda, together with the father of Abenakyo. He really supported his daughter and I would like to thank him for supporting her this far.

Ladies are extremely beautiful, starting with you, Madam Speaker and every lady you see in this House. (Applause) They have standard lips, standard chests and whatever God has made on you but it is because you are made out of our ribs; the men as the giants that stand here. I want to thank the men with big shoulders and broad chests who are contributing to this motion.

We are going to speak in vain if the beauty competition that this lady won is not coupled with action. We have contributed in this House for Cancer and sportsmen. We would like to set a record. We have 435 members of Parliament. If we just contributed Shs 1 million shillings each over time, that would be Shs 435 million for that young lady. If that is too much, we can contribute Shs 500,000 and therefore, Shs 435 million divided by two. It is a one-off life achievement that she has made but which will promote Uganda for the rest of our lives. Therefore, I would like to propose, on a serious note, that we make that deduction for her. 

Success is a time for us to rethink certain things. The Bible says, in Genesis, that the blessing of Esau was taken by Jacob because Esau took for granted his birth right as the first born. He was not working hard. Jacob worked very hard and received the blessing that God gave to Abraham and Isaac, which was supposed to be given to him.

We have taken for granted our wonderful blessing of the internet. Now, we have imposed a tax called Over The Top (OTT) that limited some of us from voting. The 4,380 people who voted were very few. If you saw the Nepalese beauty winner, she received over 36,000 votes through the internet. Now, here we are frustrating internet. Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, please, rethink OTT. Ms Abenakyo would have actually been the winner; the Miss World – (Member timed out.)

4.58
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also join with the people of Gulu Municipality to thank our Queen, Abenakyo for selling and marketing this country at the highest level possible.

Beauty in the African context is both internal and external. Ms Ms Abenakyo is among those in Africa who exuded what we call beauty with a purpose. She fulfilled it the way Africans look at beauty. She carried the flag of the African norms into that contest, she carried the flag of values, morals and purpose, good behaviour, skills, knowledge and she was well dressed. I think she represented us and deserves what she got from that contest.

Madam Speaker, you talked about proposals. I would like to propose that Ms Abenakyo be supported to open the Miss Quiin Abenakyo Foundation that should be the framework of ensuring that she gets financial support and other contributions to leapfrog this foundation to better heights so that through that foundation, we have scholarships for girl-children that can be promoted in this country. They should go through that foundation.

As a footnote to hon. Kiiza’s proposal, I would like to suggest that the President declares her a national hero on Women’s Day. We have seen many being declared heroes with a lot of doubt but this is very clear in the whole of Africa. She must be declared a hero on Women’s Day. I thank you.

5.00
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I see the honourable Minister of State for Tourism and I say, “thank you.” This is specifically your docket. I have known you as a person who is very passionate about tourism.

Let me start by congratulating the parents of Miss World Africa. Thank you very much for supporting your daughter. Many of us parents do not see value in supporting children along this line. Therefore, I would like to thank you very much. People have already said that it is not only about beauty but more about creativity. 

I remember I attended a beauty competition for the northern part of Uganda. I sat from 8.00 p.m. up to 3 a.m. and these people held their competition under difficult circumstances. It was so difficult that I offered my support but later on, I heard that part of the support that I gave was taken by an individual, which was very unfortunate.

I would like to thank all those who have supported our Miss World Africa to succeed. You have chosen the best project; to support education because you will get the good and the truth in education. However, we have a big problem with our girl-child education. Over 3000 of our pupils are girls and they may not continue with their education because their results did not come out. With girls, after such a frustration, what happens next? They drop out completely. What should we do to save these teenage girls who may drop out of school and become pregnant? We need to support our girls.

You are Miss World Africa but charity begins at home; so, start from Uganda, which is the Pearl of Africa. I love the fact that you have taken on girl-child education and prevention of teenage pregnancies. Please, let us work on this area together. 

My proposal is, why should we be completely adamant and say these girls should remain home for a complete year and wait for another year of exams instead of giving them maybe one month to sit – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, give us your proposal.

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you. I would like to make a proposal to the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. I have seen the budget and it is very small, only at 0.1 per cent yet it is tourism, which brings in a lot of foreign exchange. Why do we mistreat it like that?

Please, try very hard and let this Miss World Africa be your ambassador. She should be an ambassador under the tourism sector so that we do not struggle to support her individually. She should be supported in a system so that it is the system that gives her a job, which will earn a lot of credibility for Uganda. 

I feel there is a lot to say on the area she has taken but in the interest of time, let me end here. Thank you. God bless you in your work. 

5.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Godfrey Kiwanda): Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank you for the support and passion you have for the tourism industry. You are the person not only for the cause of Ms Abenakyo but also all the support you have given us as a ministry. 

I also would like to thank the Members of Parliament for the support they have given us. This is not the only competition that we have had. We have been carrying out Miss Tourism competitions in your constituencies and regions. I have been with you in these drives and seen your contributions. Therefore, I would like to thank you for the passion you have for the tourism sector. We are really moved by your support wherever we have our top management meeting.

Madam Speaker, whereas it is true that at first, the ministry did not participate fully in supporting the Miss Uganda Foundation, I would like to inform you that the foundation, which is headed by Miss Brenda Nanyonjo, won a franchise to organise Miss Uganda for ten years and she has done this for the last eight years. Of course, Miss Uganda Foundation has gone through hardships for the last eight years. This time, we are recognising them because they have taken it to another level. Otherwise, this is not their first participation.
 
Ms Brenda Nanyonjo, together with her team, carried out the competition this time and Ms Abenakyo came first as Miss Uganda and that became her constituency. However, Ms Brenda Nanyonjo won this franchise from Miss World because Miss World had been organising the competition. Some time back, Uganda was banned for about three consecutive years because we had some issues with the former organisers.

When Brenda Nanyonjo’s team came on board, they were much more organised. So, I would like to thank Miss Uganda Foundation. They are the first people to put us back on the map to organise Miss Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, there were 108 ladies who participated in the Miss World contest. Ms Abenakyo made it in the first 33, which success was very attractive. When we heard about this, we could not believe it because we did not think we could even make it to the first 50. 
It was at this point that I called my people and told them we had to participate in what was taking place in China. Better late than never, we began from there. We had to mobilise Ugandans and I would like to appreciate all Ugandans who participated in the voting. 

Personally, I called our Embassy in China to make sure they take full charge from that point. We also made sure we footed all the bills. Of course, we thought we would only end at the top 33. However, being the Pearl of Africa, when Ms Abenakyo competed amongst the 33, she made it to the top five. 

Out of the five contestants, Ms Abenakyo came number four and she was crowned Miss World Africa. So, we would like to congratulate our daughter for this - (Interjections) - she was number four out of the five contestants and so she was crowned Miss World Africa.

From there, as I mentioned that success is very attractive, we organised a heroine’s welcome for Miss World Africa. She was received by ministers at the Airport. We had a dinner with His Excellency, the President, first of all, at the Entebbe State House before a special dinner was also organised on 29 December 2018 by His Excellency, the President and the First Lady in Rwakitura. 

I would like to thank the President for according us time to organise two dinners within the same week for Ms Abenakyo. It is very unusual and we appreciate this.

Of course, we also briefed the President that the organisers had gone through a lot of hardships not only this year but also in other years, to organise this event. The President then promised to help not only Ms Abenakyo but also the organisers, Miss Uganda Foundation. As I mentioned, we organised the dinner and Ms Abenakyo had a meeting with the President. What took place between the President and Ms Abenakyo and her parents, they will tell us.

During the dinner, I briefed the President that we have different organisations. People normally only hear about Miss Uganda but we also have different competitions in the country like Miss Tourism Uganda, Miss Earth, Miss Universe and Miss Curvy. There are different people who won these franchises, which are also competed for globally.

Therefore, Government needs to work out mechanisms of supporting these kinds of competitions. As a ministry, we promise that in the next financial year, we will have a budget particularly for such competitions in the country. We have put a budget line for all these competitions.

Particularly for Ms Abenakyo, there are four drives we are running as a ministry. We have the domestic drive where we would like to equip Ugandans with knowledge about their country. So, we appointed Ms Abenakyo officially as a Goodwill Tourism Ambassador. She is also going to be a flagship on the domestic tourism Twende Uganda Campaign, which we are beginning specifically for the East African Region. We must tell everyone our story, especially the East African Community that Uganda is a country to visit. Therefore, Ms Abenakyo is leading the Twende Uganda Campaign.
 
We have another campaign called Destination Uganda and the Pearl of Africa Campaign. We are incorporating Ms Abenakyo to almost all our international shows in London, Germany and different destinations as we market Uganda.

Ms Abenakyo - the good thing –(interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, honourable minister for allowing the clarification. Madam Speaker, the clarification I am seeking from the minister is: one of the colleagues gave unemployment as one of the challenges that could be facing the youth today. He suggested that if Ms Abenakyo got employed somewhere, the youth outside there would see that there are several avenues through which somebody can gain success.

The minister has said Ms Abenakyo has been appointed a tourism ambassador and has been given other responsibilities. I would like to seek clarification from the minister whether she has now been put on the payroll and that she is going to be getting salary or it is just something seasonal and at the end of the day, it is not sustainable.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am also seeking clarification. From the list, which the minister has given us, which Ms Abenakyo is expected to do under the ministry, to me as a parent and a leader in this country, it sounds exploitative. Let us be clear about this.

If you are going to employ Ms Abenakyo in the ministry, she is going to be there as a consultant, to package and market. That means you are not going to pay her just this civil service salary. She has to be on contract and has to know –(Applause)– and thank God I am a patron in that foundation. I am going to make sure you do not exploit her.

She must market this country at a cost because already, you are spending a lot of money in financing those diaspora conferences and so on. This is our own local initiative and so, we are not going to allow Ms Abenakyo to be exploited. I pray that you take that message seriously.

MR KIWANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I do not believe in exploitation of Ms Abenakyo. She is holding this throne for 365 days. We will ensure that within the 365 days we work with her and – (Interjections) – Yes. First of all, you know the procedures of Government. Issues concerning -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if the will was there, it can be done in one day. Procedures on Miss World?

MR KIWANDA: Madam Speaker, I had - like now, we are beginning our first drive with her, beginning with Busoga on Sunday, 27 January and we shall be going up to Karamoja. However, during all this time, what we have done at the ministry - (Interjections) - let me first explain - (interruption)

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker, I did not want to interrupt the minister who has recently been awarded for his performance but I am perturbed. The hon. Cecilia Ogwal raised a very pertinent issue about the employment of Ms Abenakyo.

In your right, Madam Speaker, you interjected. The minister holding the Floor, as he praises our African Queen, has neglected, refused, ignored and pretended not to have heard what the majority of this House have said through hon. Cecilia Ogwal.

Therefore, is it in order for the honourable minister to continue diverting us from the contractual issue of the employment of our Miss World Africa; the origin of Busoga Kingdom? Is it in order for the honourable minister, who is known for awarding others - ambassador of this animal, ambassador of that fish and so on – to categorically dodge the question? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Ms Abenakyo is a unique product and asset to this country. She cannot be treated like anybody else. We would like to hear of the practical reality of how she is going to live. You are taking her to Kidepo, how much will you pay her for going there? Yes, we want a contract.

MR KIWANDA: Madam Speaker, what I can confirm on the Floor of this House is that as a ministry, we are going to work with Ms Abenakyo and we shall be facilitating her fully. However, at another level and for the contract, I was consulting the Attorney-General because I had to sit with Uganda Tourism Board - on my side - because even this morning before I came here, I was asking them if we can have her on a salary payroll but they had to take me through the procedures of employment.

However, on the side of promotion - because the point of the House is that we are spending money on the public relations firms and we can have this –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I rise with pain to ask my friend, hon. Kiwanda and former Chairman, to receive this as a point of order, and of course, you have heard that I have assumed a duty of protecting Ms Abenakyo and the Foundation from exploitation. 

All ministries in Uganda are supposed to have policies. The minister is talking about consulting his departments without making reference to his policy on this particular one because they are exploiting our children. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have policies in your ministry?

MR KIWANDA: Madam Speaker, Ms Abenakyo, much as today she is working with us, she is still under contractual obligations with Miss World. As a ministry, we do not own her 100 per cent. They have programmes for her as Miss Uganda and Miss World Africa. They have special programmes for her even if we are to work with her.

Therefore, I have sat with the organisation - even the time that we are going to have her, we cannot have her 100 per cent because she is under contractual arrangement with Miss World.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think you have not understood what we have achieved. It is not just one year. She will always be known and continue selling Uganda. Do not talk about this one year. Please, get serious.

MR SSEGGONA: The minister having ceded ground to receive this point of clarification, may I seek clarification? One, what is there in those contracts that is restrictive and therefore, not allowing you to deal with her? 

Two, what is in your policy that stops you because the question from me, and which was emphasised by the Speaker is: do you have a policy or is there a problem with it? Today, it is Ms Abenakyo, yesterday, it was another and tomorrow, it will be another. What is your policy?

MR ARIKO: Madam Speaker, I was once an employee of the ministry and also the Parliamentary Commission. What the hon. Cecilia Ogwal seeks to find out from the minister is detached from the contractual obligations that Ms Abenakyo has with the Miss World.

Uganda is a sovereign state that has mandate to offer employment opportunities to its citizens. The mission of the Public Service is to attract, retain and develop a competent workforce. And under the Uganda Public Service Regulations, it is provided that under circumstances where Government wants to address a peculiar challenge, it may source through head-hunting, those kinds of competencies, skills and abilities that cannot ordinarily be got through ordinary advertising. We all know that what she offers is unique, not easily available and cannot be got through ordinary advertising. (Applause)

Therefore, what we require of the minister is a commitment that through the use of Public Service Form III, the ministry can make a submission for a special contract to be offered to Ms Abenakyo so that Government of Uganda defines her pay. Thank you. (Applause)

5.26
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the members for their zeal and excitement as we honour our heroine, Ms Abenakyo. I join you to congratulate her and to wish her a bright future. 

The matter on the Floor on how Government is going to facilitate her is an important one. Those of you who saw her at State House and listened to His Excellency, the President would bear me witness that he has already undertaken that Government is going to facilitate her. The question is: how do we engage in facilitating her? 

It is important to own up as a country that whereas we have the sports policy and so many other policies, as of today, I do not know any policy regarding beauty pageants. We have now seen it is important to have in place a policy to deal with these things and I know we shall definitely work on that.

When the minister says that they are going to employ or give her a contract, maybe it is for lack of a better way of putting it. Honourable members know that for any money to be drawn from the Consolidated Fund to support any activity, there must be a definite programme. The process must be undertaken holistically from the start to the end. 

If we are to support Ms Abenakyo, as indeed, we are going to, we must put in place a mechanism of how we formulate a budget line and how we engage in prioritising that activity, which we must do and how we put it in the budget. 

Now that we have agreed that we shall do it, allow Government to engage in the process of: one quickly putting in place a policy and two, seeing how we prioritise the activity and bringing it into the Budget Framework Paper for members of Parliament to express themselves. Otherwise, I do not see –(Interruption) 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, it is uncomfortable of me to put the Attorney-General to Order. You know that in this country, including Parliament, we hire consultants. Some are international and others local but to do specific jobs for Parliament or any institution. Why is the minister being divergent on this issue?

When he talks about policy, to come up with a policy, this Government will take five years. You know it and the Deputy Attorney-General knows it too. He is just telling us, “Go to sleep; the Government has nothing to do with it.”

Is he in order to talk as if we do not know how the Government is run and to behave as if he does not know that this Government is spending a lot of money on both international and local consultancy?

THE SPEAKER: He is out of order. Maybe, the Minister of Public service; is he here? We may want to engage the services of the Minister of Public Service to resolve this issue.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Listening to the Deputy Attorney-General, I got perturbed. We wanted to get clarification from the Minister of Tourism who had hyped the whole matter, painting a picture that Ms Abenakyo will be catered for under the programme. However, when the Deputy Attorney-General started to speak, I felt completely out of balance that he even erased the little hope that the minister was trying to paint and even shattered the will of Government to help Ms Abenakyo.

In his submission, the Deputy Attorney-General emphasised the procedures in Government for recruiting people, indicating that they will even have to first sit and talking about the commitment of the President yet, the minister was clearly indicating it. 
There are very many people who are saying they want to fulfil that presidential pledge but in doing so, you are taking it away from reality. We only wanted your legal advice on how fast this can be done. The contract can be made – Ms Abenakyo has skipped the level of being a local contractor. She is now an international contractor. The money you have been using to hire CNN - can you see how to help Ms Abenakyo. Can you use the policy you have been using to hire public relations consultants to ensure that Ms Abenakyo is also catered for? Stop exploiting your own people when you are spending money on people who will not even pay taxes in turn. You are giving money to strangers but you are not empowering your own. 

It takes millions of money for a parent to raise up a child like that. It takes a lot of energy for someone to offer themselves and bring out what they have to offer. She has marketed Uganda for heaven’s sake. She needs to be recognised in a special way without going behind corners. 

You have been sponsoring other people - see how you put her on –(interjections)– even in ways that one cannot understand. We would be glad to see how Government commits herself on which contract they want to put Ms Abenakyo on. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from a mother of one of the tourism queens.

5.33
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand as a mother to a former Miss Tourism Queen. If the Minister for Tourism is not going to give us on this Floor, the clarification in black and white on what Ms Abenakyo is going to be entitled to - I experienced it myself. My daughter was Miss Tourism of Uganda. 

She came to your office and she was brought to the House but nothing was given to her. I had to struggle as a mother to motivate my own daughter in all the travels when she went to Kuala Lumpur, London marketing Uganda. She was not marketing my family.

I know the Minister is failing right now to tell us what the girl is going to be entitled to and once he fails, that issue will be left to, “To Whom It May Concern.” It will go back to the parents of this young girl to start struggling with her. I have the experience - the minister is here - I called him several times until he stopped receiving my calls. This girl has to be given something to market Uganda and she has to –(Member timed out.)

5.35
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is consensus in the House that we put Ms Abenakyo at the international level though she is born in this country. She has raised the bar, there is no doubt. However, I am very sure the minister was caught off balance. He did not expect what the contribution in this House has brought out. I want to request that we put my brother on notice so that he goes and consults other agencies and ministries and reports back to the House in the shortest time possible on the modalities for catering for Ms Abenakyo and I think there is no alternative because there is nobody who is going to market this country better than her. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think you are aware now that Ms Abenakyo is a national asset. She is not just anybody. Can we direct the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Tourism to sit together make a proposal and bring it here on Tuesday? - Yes, Tuesday.

MR KIWANDA: Madam Speaker, can I request for two weeks because we had made some programme.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from Public Service.

5.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for moving this motion. However, I think the issue at hand is not for Public Service. It seems to be governed by the PPDA Act because you are talking of taking on her services, which is not the same as being recruited. I feel is -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, why don’t you assist us to find a solution? Work with the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities and give us a solution.

MR KARUBANGA: Much obliged.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, our instructions are to the Minister of Tourism and the Minister of Public Service to create a proposal and bring it here so that we can – Tuesday may be - I think they have some activities – can you come back the other Tuesday? No, let us give him time to do a good job and we shall put him on the Order Paper to report. Honourable members, I now put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House do pay tribute to Ms Abenakyo for promoting Uganda as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)


THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Clerk is directed to extract the Tribute, send one to Ms Abenakyo, another to Miss Uganda Foundation and to the family including the District Council of Mayuge as well as the Office of Kyabazinga of Busoga. Let us go to next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LAW REVISION (PENALTIES IN CRIMINAL MATTERS) MISCELLANEOUS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last time, the report was presented and we were told that the mover and the Minister were discussing something but now, you are free to debate the Law Revision (Penalties in Criminal Matters) Miscellaneous (Amendment) Bill, 2015.

5.40
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence. It is unfortunate I do not see the mover of the Bill. However, we had a discussion and agreed that there are some aspects of this Bill that we have to harmonise and maybe, that explains why he is not here. (Mr Sseggona enters the chamber) I am glad he has appeared. (Laughter) Anyhow, we had gone over the matter and we had agreed that we have to first sit and harmonise our positions and agree on how to bring the Bill back to the House for your consideration, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is that the position, hon. Sseggona?

5.42
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, usually, when we are adjourning cases, we give our justifications. It is true we had a discussion with the Attorney-General. He said the matter had been brought to his attention today and that he needed to make a study of it and see if he can request his side to agree with us. As the mover and other movers from our side, I have no problem. He can do his consultations. My thinking is that it is not a very complicated thing. It can be handled within three days.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter is adjourned until Tuesday next week and this is the last one because you have had three or four adjournments.
 
BILLS
SECOND READING

THE SECURITY INTEREST IN MOVABLE PROPERTY BILL, 2018

THE SPEAKER: The report was presented and I think it is for debate. Does the minister wish -

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: No, Madam Speaker. I wanted to clarify what you have clarified. It is now for debate.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, while we are going to discuss matters of security according to the Bill, the ministers of Security and Internal Affairs are not here. Shall we be proceeding well? I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not think it has to do with security. It is about interest in movable property and has nothing to do with security. Honourable members, please, debate. 

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inquire whether the chairperson of the committee is around so that he guides us as we process this Bill.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do recall that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs distributed their work and each Bill has a sponsor. -  Isn’t it? Anyway, let us know; where is the chairperson and the vice chairperson of the committee?

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, it is true that this matter was being handled by the Vice Chairperson, hon. Sam Bitangaro. I sit in the same committee with my colleague, hon. Akamba. We do not seem to have kept track of where the matter ended. As we were trying to look for him, just before this, the House began and we did not succeed. 

THE SPEAKER: So, you are not ready?

MR SSEGGONA: We are not ready.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it is deferred to next week. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

5.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 9 January 2019, when this report came up for discussion, hon. Sseggona informed the House that the Leader of the Opposition had tasked him to ask for some time from the House in order to harmonise their position with that of the movers of the Bill.

We had a meeting yesterday, which ended very late at around 6.30 p.m. and the issues, which were raised had a lot of bearing on the Constitution of this country. Our ministry had a meeting this morning with the Attorney-General to get his opinion on those issues. Unfortunately, he did not get enough time to offer his opinion. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we are requesting that you accord us some more time, preferably two weeks to help us reconcile our position before coming back to the House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know we agreed that the third meeting is to do with the Budget but now, we are pushing Bills and interfering with the Budget meeting, yet, this is an old Bill.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, as you will appreciate, the issues of governance of Kampala Capital City have serious implications and have implications on the Constitution. That is why we struggled to have that meeting. Again, because of the budgeting process, the meeting could only take place yesterday afternoon. 

We raised issues of constitutional nature and we stand very firmly by those issues. Again, for the good and integrity of our process, we do not have any objection to the proposal by the Minister. It may not necessarily be two weeks; it could even be more so that it gives way to the budgeting process, which we do not want to interfere with. 

As you rightly observed, this Bill has been around and now it came up at a time when we were dealing with another important process. My view is that the minister should concede to have the Bill discussed after the budgeting process because we do not want to create constitutional catastrophe in the governance of our country. The Bill affects the Constitution fundamentally. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not agree with the proposal that it should be shelved. Let us defer it to next week. The Attorney-General should speedily come. This is an old Bill of 2015. It is deferred to next week.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW $210 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (IDB) TO FINANCE THE UPGRADING OF THE RWEKUNYE-APAC-LIRA-ACHOLIBUR ROAD PROJECT UNDER THE NEW ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK FINANCING TERMS

5.49
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to present the report of the Committee on National Economy on the motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow $210 million from the Islamic Development Bank to finance the upgrading of the Rwekunye-Apac-Lira-Acholibur Road Project under the new Islamic Development Bank financing terms.

Madam Speaker, before I proceed with the loan request report, I would like to thank my colleagues, who participated in the evaluation of these loans. Some of them have left the committee but others have stayed. Nevertheless, I thank all of them for a job well done. 

I would like to lay at the Table a copy of the brief from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the loan request, a copy of the report, which I am submitting, the appraisal document for the road, the agreement between IDB and Government of Uganda and the amended terms of the project. I beg to lay, Madam Speaker. 

This loan was first submitted in 2017 and it was approved. However, before it could be implemented, IDB changed management and the mode of financing changed. Therefore, we had to enter into new terms. According to our Rules of Procedure, we have to come back here for approval.

In September 2018, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented a request to Parliament to authorise this loan and it was passed on to the committee. The committee re-examined the loan using the usual methodology of document review, making reference to the Constitution and field visits. 

According to our findings, this loan was still viable and was still desirable, hence we went ahead to examine it further.
The key expected benefit from the project is improved regional and national connectivity. This project will cost $313 million and we are borrowing $210 million and the rest will be provided by the Government of Uganda.

The project cost, by components, is provided under Table 1 in the report, which is uploaded on our iPads. 

When we were examining the loan, we looked at the old and new terms. The old terms are provided under Table 2. The new terms are provided under Table 3 in the report.

Madam Speaker, the loan terms indicate that the loan is based on market interest rates. Therefore, it is not a concessional loan. It is a market rate loan. The repayment will attract a 10-year Mid Swap rate at the reference rate during the gestation period of 1.23 per cent plus 60 points. 

As I have already stated, it is not a concessional loan but more or less a commercial loan. This loan being an infrastructure loan requires counterpart funds for compensation and other local activities, which will be provided by Government.

In last year’s Budget, Government provided Shs 14 billion as counterpart funding. In the current year, Government provided Shs 9.2 billion for the local counterpart funding.

When we look at the economic return of the project - the project is economically viable with 18.4 per cent Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR). Under sensitivity test, even if we increase the project cost by 20 per cent, it will still be economically viable. 

Committee observations

On the budgetary implications, the committee noted that the current mode of budgetary financing, which is annual-based, is not suitable for multi-year development projects, which are crucial for economic development. Specifically, the zero budgeting procedure at every end of financial year wipes out any unspent balances and yet, work is carried over the next fiscal year. This requires that projects, which are developed over a long period of time should not have annual budgets but they should have budgets matching their period of constructions.

The committee, therefore, recommends that in order to improve project execution and budget efficiency, Government should explore the establishment of an infrastructure fund to avail resources whenever costs are incurred in order to address the above challenges. This will also save us from accumulating costs where we are required to pay interest and damages due to delayed payments.

Project implementation delays

It was observed that this project was delayed because of the restructuring of the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) and that is why they were caught up by the changes at the IDB. The procurement process for the project also caused delay by the requirement to advertise in International Press Media in fulfilment of the IDB procurement requirements. Under the IDB rule, they have to advertise in all the member countries so that they can apply.

The committee recommends that for the close monitoring of the procurement process by the Ministry of Works and Transport and UNRA, to ensure the recruitment of suitably experienced civil works contractors and supervising consulting firms, the close supervision and more pro-active role by UNRA during project implementation should reduce the risks of implementation delays of this project. Implementation delays do not only affect changes in the funding modalities but also the cost because once a loan becomes effective and it is not utilised, there is a cost attached.

Therefore, the implementing agencies must bear that in mind and minimise it as much as possible. That is why we have come up with stringent requirements to have the procurement plan and the feasibility studies before new loans are presented to this House.

Economic and financial viability of the project 

The committee, therefore, recommends as follows: 

    1. Government should ensure timely execution of the project.
    2. Government should always ensure sourcing for funds whose costs are commensurate to the project returns
    3.  Government should desist from negotiating non-concessional loans at market rates for projects that will not generate direct revenue to Government within the medium term.  A project like a road does not generate revenue directly but it generates it indirectly. Therefore, projects like this should be financed with concessional funds.

Road safety

The committee noted that road safety in Uganda is a growing concern, due to the human, social and economic misery that results from the daily carnage on our roads. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government’s future developments in the road sub-sector should have to include comprehensive road safety measures with the ultimate objective of reducing road carnage and fatalities through instituting proper road safety management measures in all new road construction projects and a well-coordinated accident response mechanism.

Madam Speaker, this loan is going to finance a very important project in the northern part of this country, which is connecting to our neighbouring countries.
This loan is going to facilitate a very important road in the northern part of Uganda, which connects us to our neighbours.

Therefore, the committee further recommends that the motion for a Resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow $210 million from the Islamic Development Bank to finance the upgrading of the Rwenkunye-Apac-Lira-Acholibur Road Project, based on the new financing modalities be approved, subject to the above recommendations.

I would like to request that I present the next loan because the terms are almost the same like this one. Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW $110 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (IDB) TO FINANCE THE UPGRADING OF THE MUYEMBE-NAKAPIRIPIRIT ROAD PROJECT UNDER THE NEW ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK FINANCING MODALITY

5.52
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba):
Madam Speaker, the background to this is the same. The documents I am going to lay at the Table are more or less the same like those I have laid for the proceeding loan. Anyhow, for record purposes, I will itemise them as I did in the other loan. I am laying at the Table, a brief to Parliament by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to borrow $210 million from IDB for financing the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road.

I lay at the Table a copy of the report, which is fully signed. I also lay at the Table a copy of the report for the previous loan. I also lay at the Table a copy of the agreement for upgrading the road and the appraisal document. 

Madam Speaker, both these loans were resubmitted to Parliament at the same time in August last year. This loan – like the preceding one – had been approved earlier in 2015 and 2017 respectively but was caught up by the changes. 

Madam Speaker, we re-examined the loan request and again used the same methodology. Our findings were that the development objective of this project is to facilitate socio-economic development by upgrading the existing road from earthen/gravel to improve its capacity, serviceability and safety in order to meet the present and future transportation needs and enhance the overall efficiency of the road transport system. The area which is going to be upgraded is 92 kilometres. This is going to accelerate economic activities by improving access of people to social amenities, market places, business and employment.

Madam Speaker, the expected benefits is the improved regional and national connectivity here indicated. The project cost is $120 million to be financed through a combination of a loan from the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) and Government of Uganda. 

The project cost by component, is provided under Table 1 and the initial terms of the loan, which was approved in 2015, are covered under Table 2. The new loan terms are provided under Table 3.

Madam Speaker, the above terms indicate that the loan is also based on market interest rates; it is not concessional but a commercial loan. Table 4 shows the conditions required for financing this loan. Although the loan is non-concessional, the project is viable.

On the budget implications, there is a requirement for counterpart funding like in the previous project. I would like to report that there was a provision in the last budget and there is a provision in this budget only that these provisions will not be adequate to provide the required counterpart funding. This requires Government to provide further money as the project moves ahead because it is not going to be done in one year. The economic rate of return is 13.8 per cent, which is reasonable.

Observations and recommendations

The committee noted that during financial year 2017/2018, the Government provided Shs 2.1 billion as counterpart funding and this financial year, Government has made a provision of Shs 5.1 billion. Similarly, external financing of the project has reduced from Shs 87.32 billion to Shs 79.19 billion. 

However, the budget for compensation has not been provided, compared to Shs 1 billion that was provide in last year’s budget and this will certainly cause problems. Therefore, we call upon Government to provide adequate counterpart funding because this is the reason why many of the loans are non-performing yet this is usually the money for paying compensations.

The committee recommends that in order to improve project execution and budget efficiency, the Government should explore the establishment of an infrastructure fund, which is a recommendation I have already made in the other loan. In addition, budgetary provisions for land acquisition for the project should be undertaken during the current budget to meet the creditor conditionalities of having more than 50 per cent of the land available for project implementation before they start construction.

Madam Speaker, on project implementation delays, restructuring and change of terms have been the main cause of delays in these two loans. The committee recommends for the close monitoring of procurement processes by the Ministry of Works and Transport and Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) to ensure recruitment of qualified people so that we do not delay the process because we do not have adequate competent staff.

On the economic and financial viability of the project, the committee recommends that, Government should ensure timely execution of the projects to enable the infrastructure/asset start generating economic benefits to the country to ease the debt repayment burden. There should not be a mismatch between the benefits and construction bill.

Secondly, Government should always ensure sourcing for funds or financial products whose costs are commensurate to the project returns. This means Government should try as much as possible to look for concessional fund wherever it is available.

Project management unit
The committee noted that the project management unit established for the implementation of the upgrading of Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi and Pallisa-Kamonkoli road projects will also double as the project management unit for this project. However, Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi road project is on-going and the effectiveness of managing the project in different localities will constrain the timely implementation of this project. The committee, therefore, recommends for a dedicated and separate project management unit to be established under UNRA for the implementation of the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit road project.

On the prioritisation of development projects in Karamoja, the committee noted the high concentration of development projects mainly in the southern part of Karamoja, for example, the Moroto-Nakapiripirit road project and Dry Lands Integrated Development Projected, leaving the northern part of Karamoja with very limited development interventions, especially in the areas of infrastructure development.

The committee recommends that Government should show serious commitment to the people of Karamoja by ensuring that the Lira-Abim-Kotido-Kaabong and the Moroto-Kotido-Kaabong roads are given urgent attention.

On the provision for sanitary facilities, we still have a problem that most of our highways do not have sanitary provisions. What people do is to stop anywhere and ease themselves in the bushes. 

The committee noted that under the road works component, there is no explicit provision for the construction of sanitary facilities as recommended by Parliament. The committee recommends that this provision be catered for and that Government devises lasting means of setting up and maintaining these facilities along the new highways.

With those observations, Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that the Motion for a Resolution of Parliament to Authorise Government to Borrow $110 million from the Islamic Development Bank to finance the upgrading of the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit road project based on the new financing modalities be approved, subject to above provisions.
I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. Of course, there are two reports but they are two roads: Rwekunye-Apac-Lira-Acholibur and Muyembe-Nakapiripirit. However, the minister should first tell us why he has failed to implement our decision on the sanitary facilities on the roads. We took that decision in the Ninth Parliament. Minister of Works and Transport, please, give us a report on the sanitary facilities on the roads.

When you are travelling to Nairobi, people stop somewhere and lift their gomesis. They urinate on the roadside – (Laughter)– We made a resolution in the Ninth Parliament that any new road must have those facilities. 

6.14 
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRASPORT (Ms Monica Azuba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the Roads Bill which is still under Parliament in the committee, there are provisions for what you are calling “sanitary facilities” but we call them “rest areas” for every 80 kilometres. Going forward, all the roads that we are constructing are going to have those facilities. The land will be availed and we are proposing that the private sector comes in to construct those rest areas.

THE SPEAKER: The road belongs to the Government.

MS BBUMBA: I wanted to find out whether what is being proposed in the Bill is going to be at a fee because she said it is the private sector. Whenever the private sector does something, they have to be paid. We know that quite a number of our travellers on the roads may not have money to pay for these facilities.

MS AZUBA: Madam Speaker, as I said, this is still under Parliament and it will come up on the Floor for debate; so I would like to suggest that we address it then. However, when we have rest areas, the private sector will have hotels, inns and of course the facilities for the toilets will be there. 

Nevertheless, since I did not come prepared for this and it is under Parliament, I request that we discuss it when it comes on the Floor.

THE SPEAKER: Our worry is that we took this decision about five years ago and said that every loan must include this component. However, the loans are now coming but hon. Bahati has forgotten. 

6.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, at this moment, I want to make a commitment that in the next round of projects that we are going to carry out, the issue of sanitary facilities will be part and parcel of this. I will request the Minister of Works and Transport to see whether we can find something to work out those facilities along the way under the contingency facility. I think it can be possible within the same.

THE SPEAKER: You are contributing to spreading of diseases. 

COL MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, I have information. I wish the Minister of Water and Environment was here. I know that the Ministry of Water and Environment has undertaken a survey on all roads and is carrying out that project; they have actually started. They are working on the old ones. I wish the minister was here. I know what I am talking about.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the two ministers. The Minister of Works and Transport says these will be fully fledged rest facilities, with shops and all that, where people can make stopovers and have a drink. Hon. Bahati, the finance minister, says these are standby facilities.

Initially when we debated this, it was the need to provide clean toilet facilities. We do not mind if they are “rest areas” and all that. However, the fact that they are going to be too many and are fully fledged rest areas; we do not want these to hamper the initial idea of having simple but clean toilet facilities for people who are travelling along the roads.

So, what do we have? Is it the fully fledged ones or the standby facilities? I beg to know.

6.19
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to request Members to join hands and approve this loan. You are aware that according to the poverty indicators, northern and eastern regions are the worst affected. These regions had been marginalised; so I would like to request Members that now that the chance has come, let us support this.

However, honourable minister, on the issue that you will give the contract to construct rest facilities to private people – let us construct them. For management, we can give that to the private people if possible but let construction be within the contract.

As an engineer, constructing restrooms – that she is talking about – will not be expensive unless the engineers try to create a loophole to steal money. As a representative of the people of Bunyole West, I would like to propose and request that we pass these loans. 

However, as the Speaker stated, we need restrooms. I think Parliament should now direct that starting from these ones, if they mess up, it goes. I would like to thank you and request Members to support this loan.

THE SPEAKER: I think the support is there. What we want is to ensure that what we resolved is being done.

6.21
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I remember that resolution was passed about three years ago and the issue was to provide social amenities along the roads. These social amenities would provide markets for the women – you know there are these people who sell merchandise along the road – public toilets, and provide for tree planting in the road reserves. We specified these issues and can retrieve the Hansard regarding the same.

My worry is that all the road projects we have been passing have not fulfilled this kind of provision. My appeal to Government is that it should help us because it will provide for the greening, organised markets along the road and ease the journey for tourists and all passengers. It is high time we revoked what we passed sometime back and made sure the new contractors implement it. Thank you.

6.22
MR TONY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the chairperson and committee for their report and for supporting that Parliament approves this loan.

First of all, on the sanitary facilities on the way, if you travel from Kampala to Gulu, we are only saved by one or two businesspeople in Migyera and somewhere where all the buses flock. Sometimes, you see the real crisis when you get to that place. I think the minister is aware of this. 

I think if we get to the trading centres where there is water, we should buy land and put these facilities in places that are convenient and we move on. Let us start with this.

However, on the loan, the bank has remained the same – Islamic Development Bank. The loan amount and the interest rate – except the terms for the loan – have remained the same. Since this was already approved by this House in 2017 – and when it came out in September 2018, Parliament was only required to approve the new changes – I would, therefore, ask Parliament to continue and endorse what it had already agreed on.

My concern, however, is on the speed of implementation of this project. I would like to put it to the minister that this project has delayed. The minister, when Parliament approves this loan, should move faster. It is because you are aware of the report of the Committee on Equal Opportunities that has put the north at 13 per cent tarmac-road coverage. Each time you delay, new things will come up and the project gets changed. This is how the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit and Rwekunye-Apac-Lira-Acholibur road projects have delayed. 

In the report, the minister is saying in the financial year 2017/2018, there was Shs 14 billion and then in this financial year, Shs 9.2 billion has been approved. Yet, Government is supposed to provide counterpart funding of about Shs 102 billion. So, I would like to know from her how this project is going to take off with only Shs 9 billion in the budget for compensation. That is our responsibility. Are you planning to put in additional money for counterpart funding? 

I am also aware you are already in the process of advertising procurement of contractors. In the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit project, the process of procuring a contractor is in advanced stage whereas, in the Rwekunye-Apac-Lira-Acholibur project, you are in the process of procuring a contractor.

When you procure contractors before we have the money for counterpart funding, how are we going to proceed? I would like to get clarification from you on this. 

Otherwise, I would like to thank the committee and Parliament. I pray we bless this so that the Ministry of Works and Transport takes action in implementing the project. Thank you.

6.25
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to speak on two points. The first one is the roadside infrastructure programme. We keep changing policies yet we agreed we should have those facilities along the roads. However, remember that a few years ago, we found that Government cannot run such facilities. Therefore, my view is that, especially at land acquisition, the Ministry of Works and Transport should acquire enough land at the 80 kilometre-mark. That land should be planned jointly with the local governments and all the other agencies of Government so that we can have special facilities at roadsides.

On Masaka Road, there is now a good private initiative at petrol stations at Lukaya where Government is building a market. When it is multipurpose like that, those who want to buy other things will use the facility. Those who specifically go to use the restrooms will also be catered for so that the whole project is combined.

Therefore, my recommendation is that the Ministry of Works and Transport, first and foremost, acquires enough land along those points. Also, the implementation should be a joint effort between Government agencies and the private sector. 

On the infrastructure fund, it is a good idea that an infrastructure fund be established. The advantages of the fund are that we would avoid a lot of Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) contracts in terms of prior acquisition of certain services like designs and land acquisition. It is because we are spending a lot of money on EPC contracts and we are not encouraging our own people. We are not building our local capacity because all the roads are isolated. 

Secondly, it helps us to put the tools off road for a certain specified period. It is in this angle that I would like to ask the Minister of Works and Transport and maybe, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development about the roads which were promised for upgrade during the last presidential campaigns. The next elections are coming and we do not have a priority list and we do not know what is happening.

If you had such a fund, at least, we would do some activities like design identification so that we can know that there is a consequential methodology of upgrading the roads. However, it looks haphazard because we do not have that fund.

The other point about the fund is that we would own it locally. Currently, we do not have a fund and therefore, the local content is dying in all the constructions. All the money is going back to foreigners – Chinese and Indians – and Ugandans are not participating in such funds. When a fund is a loan, we look at it as if it is foreign but if it is our own fund – like the Energy Fund that we put up in the Eighth Parliament – when we do something with it, we own the programme. We know what is happening and we have a better say on it. We can ensure that Ugandans participate in the infrastructure project.

Otherwise, with those recommendations, I thank you. I think we need to have the work plan of all the roads promised by the President including two roads in Rwampara so that we all know what we are doing in the next 10 to 20 years and we plan appropriately for them. Thank you.

6.29
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me chance. Taking into consideration the sanitary facilities on our roads, it is a very significant matter for all roads that usually come up later. 

When I visited Namibia 10 years ago, I was surprised to find that after every 100 kilometres, there is a resting place where people can relax and not necessarily use the restroom. So, this is something we should also emulate in our country.

About our loans, as a country, I am glad to report to our Parliament that when I checked the indebtedness of the African countries – I was trying to find out where we are – I was so happy to find out that comparatively, we are doing well.  However, that does not mean we should relax. We should know how much we have borrowed. 

Onetime, I spoke about this. Madam Speaker, you also onetime said you would like the current total loan amount to be updated. I do not know when we shall get this so that we know when we are getting new loans how much has been added or subtracted. It helps us to also track our debts. The two loans of $200 million and $110 million total up to $310 million. So, we must be able to know the total amount of loans because it helps us in accountability. Thank you. 

6.31
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the committee report and thank the committee for the good report. We are not going to waste time debating this loan because it is long overdue. These two roads needed to be tarmacked yesterday. Now that we have the opportunity, let us support it even if it means carrying the burden of paying the debt in future so that we all benefit. It is because we cannot pay debt for other roads when some roads are not tarmacked.

When it comes to the issue of how fast this road will be implemented, the cause of delay is always compensation. At times, Government can have the will to make the road as big as possible but, as shown in the report, the counterpart funding is very small. It may not be enough to compensate all the people including the counterpart requirement. Can the minister tell us how much more money she needs so that, as we are still budgeting, we do everything possible to get the counterpart funding now? This is so that when the road construction starts, it is not stagnated because of lack of money. 

Madam Speaker, my next point is on the issue of safety. The committee has emphasised the issue of safety; we would make the road wide enough to make sure that there are no accidents. The road has already been surveyed and assessed.

I would like to know how wide the road is going to be. The only way of avoiding road accidents, like head-on collisions, is having very large roads where the vehicles can overtake without endangering other oncoming vehicles; where the road has a section for pedestrians to walk easily for even blind people like me to walk for miles without any support.

What is there in your plan? I would like to know what you have included. Can you tell me how wide these roads today are going to be so that we are sure that the safety will be certain? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.34
MS OKETAYOT C.D. LOWILA (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the good report and I stand to support the motion and the recommendations of the committee.

I appreciate the concerns that have been raised by Members on the issue of sanitary facilities along the roads. It has come out clearly that these are some of the issues we have been demanding Government to make some commitments on and we are not seeing anything coming up.

However, it is my prayer that these good concerns should not be preconditions for approving this loan. I would like to thank my sister, hon. Baba Diri, very much, for her submission. I was already getting worried when I heard my brother, hon. Dulu, seated next to me here whispering that the issue of sanitary facilities should be a condition for approving this loan.

Madam Speaker, the road we are talking about is a road we have been complaining about for a long time. If we talk of Rwekunye-Apac-Lira-Acholibur Road, we are talking about a colonial period road. If we look around the country, you will find some roads that have been opened some few years ago already tarmacked and upgraded. However, we are talking about a colonial period road.

Therefore, whatever good concerns we have about these sanitary facilities – yes we would like to see Government making commitment. However, it is my prayer that honourable colleagues, let us approve this loan without raising many arguments. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought you wanted a modern road with modern facilities.

6.36
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity and I thank the committee for the good report. On sanitary facilities, I pray that Government, through the works ministry, ensures that these facilities are provided not only for the new roads but also all the main roads we have.

As people travel, we have categories of people; we have the elderly – and age goes with other things that we know. Others have diabetes and they cannot be kept in the buses for a very long distance. In a situation that we have, people even line up to access the few toilets as they travel and keeping them clean is a problem. Therefore, I pray that Government considers this.

Madam Speaker, the issue of the compensation is very crucial. I have got this experience on the road from Atyak to Adjumani. The process has been delayed because of compensation. The way Government budgets is such that it phases it out and when it is phased out, it affects the next stage of construction.

In this we need to know how much is needed per road so that we can assess the impact of what is budgeted for. We have been informed that for the first one we have Shs 14 billion in the running budget. However, how much do we need to compensate all the affected persons?

When we delay to construct these roads, it turns to be a question to be answered by the leaders from those areas. This is 2019, people are becoming more inquisitive and we are supposed to account to our people. At the end, it is the Members of Parliament who get sacrificed when it comes to election time. Therefore, can the Government help us so that we all become accountable? Therefore can we know how much money is needed per road for compensation?

I support the proposal for the – (Member timed out.)

6.40
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report. However, I would like to note that the committee has observed that there is a major policy shift on restructuring, which is causing delays in project implementation.

Maybe we shall have to ask the minister to assure us whether what the committee observed is not going to affect the implementation of these projects; merging UNRA with the works ministry. We need that assurance; I have no problem with the loan and working on the road.

I would like to remind Members; at one time if I have not forgotten, you made a directive when you were guiding on the highways and the sanitation thereto. You directed that for the new contracts that are coming, it is a requirement that all these projects must have sanitation facilities. We need to recall – and maybe given a status on the newly constructed roads – whether this requirement has been taken into account.

It is so important, as we travel, that it embarrasses us. One time we were in a parliamentary bus and nature called; we had to stop on the road for Members of Parliament to get out of the bus and go to the bush. It is such an embarrassment.

Last week we travelled with the Leader of the Opposition on accountability and we observed that some contracts are given before the road designs are given. This happened in Mitooma, Rubirizi and other areas. I don’t know how these technical officers can give companies to construct roads without designs –(Interruption)– I will take your information.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, honourable member. We were in Mitooma together. The designs were made in accordance with the surveys that had been done. The fact that the engineer did not have them at that material moment does not mean that they were not available –

MS NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, it is funny because we received complaints from the community of Mitooma. I am wondering how a Member of Parliament representing Mitooma can support the mistakes that were observed even in your presence. It is absurd.

What I am reporting is what we observed with the Leader of the Opposition. The contracts for these roads were given without designs. Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) came and apologised. In fact when we reached the meeting in Rubirizi they were testifying and telling us the reason. I am wondering how – anyway. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity but whatever decisions we take on this Floor should be followed to ensure that Parliament is not taken for a ride. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue raised by hon. Namayanja has been on the Floor of this House. There have been roads that have been constructed without designs and Government has admitted to that. It is not something new. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, at least not the Mitooma one.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us ensure that all the roads in Uganda are designed and done.

6.45
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the chairperson for the report and I stand to support the approval of this loan. 

As earlier reported, the Ninth Parliament passed a resolution that all these facilities must be on all these major roads. I would like the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning), Mr David Bahati to explain. He has not given us a justified reason why this has not taken place yet it was a resolution that Parliament passed.

The other issue of great concern is that if we take, for example, Karamoja with very low toilet coverage and we want to construct these amenities in these areas, I would like to appeal to Government that the facilities must be managed by Government because there is need for water and power. Then these facilities are provided for areas, especially for these new roads, which we are going to construct so that people can benefit from them. It will help us to promote the hygiene and avoid outbreaks of unnecessary diseases.

The other thing is – I do not know how we can put this across to the minister – When are we going to see our oil flowing? My major concern is that the cost of road construction would go low if we got the crude oil – the by-products. I would see a country with all tarmacked roads if we had this oil flowing. However, there is no current status and nobody is providing the information. I do not know if the honourable minister could come and provide some light on that.

The other issue is about compensation. Honourable Minister of Works and Transport, this is an area where we are seeing a lot of money and time being wasted. These loans take long to be implemented. Why do you go ahead to issue contracts when you have not – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the business of toilets is lucrative. I went to Queen Elizabeth National Park and the toilets were being run by the ordinary people. They were charging Shs 1,000 per visit and there was a queue. They have their water, soap and they give you a piece of toilet paper. It is good business. (Laughter)

6.48
MS LUCY ACHIRO (Independent, Aruu North County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the Committee on National Economy for the wonderful report. 

I fully support the borrowing of this money to construct the road up to Acholibur. This will ease transportation of goods from central to the other side of the northern part of Uganda. There is a lot of business that goes on between people from central Uganda to northern Uganda and South Sudan. We appreciate that the process of this loan maturing takes place faster than we would imagine.

I remember that we used to travel from Kitgum to Kampala in two days but when they constructed that road that goes through Acholibur to Kitgum, we spend like an hour to Gulu and we are in Kampala in four hours. You can imagine how we will be benefiting from this.

Secondly, there is the issue of compensation. I pray that they do not undervalue people’s property as they do the compensation. I saw it when they were compensating people for the road that comes from Musingo to Acholibur. You can have a house but they end up giving you like Shs 4 million or Shs 8 million. So I pray that you put that into consideration.

Lastly, on the roads safety, most times we forget about – as we hand over these roads like we did with the one in Acholibur, it was a wonderful road and our communities were so excited. There is a way the boda boda motorcyclists celebrate when they are riding and most of them were knocked down. We pray that once it gets completed, we sensitise our community that the fact that this road is clean does not mean that they cannot get accidents because we lost many boda boda riders – (Member timed out.)

6.50
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to the Members who have appreciated the report of the Committee on National Economy. 

I rise to support this report seeking to get the loan approved for this monumental road for us. I am very excited because after that, I believe there will be a way of also tarmacking Moroto Road that goes through Kilak all the way to Agago. In Agago we do not have a tarmac road and any delay is a delay for our tarmac road. 

With respect to the road safety issue, it is extremely difficult. We are swallowing dust – like the one described in the Bible that for the sin of Adam and Eve they will forever continue swallowing dust. We are swallowing dust on murram roads to the extent that – I do not know how to describe it. 

Other than that, that road is very narrow. Just about a week back, there was an accident on the road which triggered clan clashes. What they are doing now is a one-lane road. In most cases, if another car is coming you have to park on the roadside; if a boda boda rider tries to dodge a car, it gets – a lot of accidents as my sister said.

Therefore, I think when they are doing that, they should at least make it a two-lane road. We have a problem from Corner Kilak to Abim that needs to be corrected. I had wanted to speak quietly to UNRA but since this matter has already been mentioned here, I think let me also say something about it.

In respect to sanitation, that is the way to go. In September, I was in Kamloops in British Columbia; you find recreation parks with small toilets that are sustainable – that is really where we need to go. The question is the cost implication; do we want it as a pilot project moving forward? At the end of the day this is a very poor country; I would want to know the cost implication of all this.

However, that is where we need to go. I know that we could do it now or probably look at it, adjust the competing interests and then decide to move in that direction but otherwise, there is no doubt –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know, it is very primitive to urinate on the road. Do not talk about costs. It is very primitive indeed.

6.54
MS JANE NABULINDO (Independent, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good work. However, my concern is about sanitary facilities on the highways. I request the Minister of Works and the one for tourism at least to help us with a toilet around Busitema junction because that place has a tourist stopover. They always stop to admire our baboons but there is no toilet at all. At least it has been fair for men because for them when they ease themselves they face the other way but it is very difficult for women to squat because even a baboon can undress you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do you know why the President drives with a toilet? It is not a small issue.

6.55
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the committee – I beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker. An omission has been made here. Can you allow me, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: No. Give it to somebody. Give it to hon. Mbwatekamwa.

6.55
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of sanitation facilities on the roadside should not be something that we are negotiating about – it should be given. I saw the vice chairperson of the committee here. In addition, hon. Bahati gave an assurance when he was asking the minister to look for money – this is a budgeting season. I think the committee must take it seriously to have this money included.

The issue of management of this should not be a big problem. By the way, Madam Speaker, you have just told us that it is also a source of non-tax revenue, why can’t the Government invest in this? At least we should be able to start in the next financial year to provide on the main highways and this could help us.

Madam Speaker, look at the issue of Mabira where they sell chicken, I do not know why the Government has not provided such facilities in such areas. It is a very lucrative area for the people who move around it, they help the local people get employment but we are now debating about it instead of the Minister of Finance providing resources to help.

There is another directive the President gave regarding the town councils where these main road projects cross. The President directed that the contractors must provide five kilometres to the town councils and centres but you find this ignored. I hope this has been looked at by the committee to ensure that this is provided for.

Madam Speaker, I support this loan for this road. Yesterday we asked the Minister of Works to give us the distribution of the tarmac roads in this country. Some of us were being accused that we are being tribalistic because we are saying that there are no tarmacked roads in the east and the north.

If you were to look at Teso, had it not been for the Greater North Road, we would not be having a road. They brought us a map here which was an embarrassment to them. Look at this map and see the distribution of tarmac roads in this country. This is from Government.

Madam Speaker, that is why I am saying we are going to support this loan and we need more loans to provide roads. Look at Karamoja and this region; look at the eastern side, this one in red is where the tarmac is. This map speaks for itself.

Therefore, I ask Government to provide more money for the roads in the east and the north. No wonder we are leading – 

Madam Speaker, the Member from Rwampara raised the issue about pledges. There are a number of pledges which the President made about the roads – a majority of which are in the east – but they have not worked on them.

You can look at the Kumi-Ngora-Serere-Kasilo Road, since 2006, it has not been provided for. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I think we need to move and ensure that wherever the loans are provided here, they must provide for regional balance in this country.

6.59
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the report of the Committee on National Economy. The road of Rwekunye through Lira to Acholibur is long overdue. I just want to thank the committee for approving this and I just urge the House to support this loan.

As hon. Okupa has just said, we are there to blame. Each time you find loans coming to this House – but it is like we are marginalised and if you consider the percentage of the tarmacked roads in the north, most especially in the Lango sub-region, it is less than 10 per cent, which is not acceptable.

Madam Speaker, I have read from there and I have got from the report that Government of Uganda funds will be used as part of this, especially acquiring the land. This is where delays in most cases occur. I just wanted to know from the Minister of Works whether now that we are considering the Budget Framework Paper – is there already a provision for such money that will help us as Government of Uganda for acquiring the land? Is it catered for or we are going to approve this loan and then it will remain because Government has not provided any funds for it?

In addition, some percentage of this money would be used for consultancy and road design review. We were just talking about road design and here they will do a review. I feel at an appropriate time if they are going to do a road design review, then the issue of sanitary facilities would not be a problem.

Madam Speaker, getting from Masindi up to Kitgum without easing yourself is not okay and it is very embarrassing. Can we be an example so that the rest of these other countries also emulate us this time? Let us have the sanitary facilities along the roads to help our people.

Lastly, we blacklisted some companies but time will come and you find that these roads are allocated to those same companies that were blacklisted. Madam Speaker, the road from Lira to Kamdini is very embarrassing. It was given to a company that was blacklisted. I do not know what Ministry of Works and Transport does – if it is part of their projects, I do not know. However, we are saying if a company has been blacklisted, there is no need – (Member timed out.) 

7.02 
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me first speak for Amudat because you have given me an opportunity. 

The committee recommendations on page 14 read: “The committee recommends that Government should show serious commitment to the people of Karamoja by ensuring that the Lira-Abim-Kotido- Kaabong Road and the Moroto-Kotido-Kaabong Road are given urgent attention.” 

Amudat is also part of Karamoja and you will find that they have rich minerals; we are getting marble from Amudat. It borders with Kenya and has a game reserve. At least, there is a reason to why these people should also share the national cake. When it comes to voting for the National Resistance Movement, Amudat votes very well. Therefore, my question to the minister is; why is it that Amudat has been left out? Is it intentional? 

Let me speak on the issue of sanitation, which is very important. Remember one of our late colleagues was embarrassed when he was found urinating by the road side. They even made a terminology and named his name as one of “urinating.” I cannot mention that. May he rest in peace. 

Madam Speaker, we are going to continue being ashamed. One time, I travelled with the Committee on Education but there is one senior colleague who kept on saying that he needed to “change tyres” after every 10 to 20 kilometres and indeed he would go to the bush. I think he suffers from diabetes. Therefore, it is very important. 

Lastly, hon. Ayoo talked about compensation. It is very important because we have seen that projects are not taking off.  For example, last year, they were supposed to construct an oil road, which is Rusharira-Konge Road. However, today I went to Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) to inquire about it and I was told that they cannot kick off that project because they do not have money to compensate the residents. Above all, when it comes to compensation, they intimidate them by telling them that they either take the money or else go to court, where they will probably not get anything. Therefore, honourable minister, I pray that this should not happen to these people that are going to be affected. Thank you.

7.05
MR ASHRAF OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to join my colleagues in thanking this committee for bringing up this loan, which is meant for infrastructural development in this country. When you construct a road, you are building the economy. So I support this loan.

I have an issue that I intend to bring to the attention of this Parliament; about an unknown zone. It is probably not known at all by the Minister of Works and Transport or UNRA. It is the Koboko-Yumbe-Adjumani Road and then the Arua-Terego-Yumbe-Adjumani Road. All the refugees that we are talking about in this country live in this zone.
 
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) travels and takes a lot of property and goods to this area. As I speak now, someone takes almost two hours and a half to reach Yumbe from Arua, which is 90 kilometres. The road is impassable and heavy trucks use that road but nothing is being said about it. 

Are we being punished for accepting these refugees? That is what we are wondering. How come a whole minister does not know about that area? The roads are impassable and we need some intervention by the Government. 

My prayer is – (Interruption) 

MR ALERO: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, for your information, Moyo District is a 1962 District comparable to Masaka, Kabale, Mbarara, Mbale, Lira, Soroti and Gulu. However, Moyo does not have any single tarmac road. As he alluded to, our development there is being retarded by the presence of River Nile at Laropi. 

We have a ferry which delays us. We cannot move as smoothly as is expected. Therefore, this has arrested our economic development in that sub-region. Thank you very much. 

MR OLEGA: Madam Speaker, if I invited you to Yumbe now, you would find that the people are brown and the dark ones are darker because of the dust. All the properties in the shops are completely destroyed. The people there told me they do not ask why they are going to vote because they do not see any need and nobody is thinking about them. Although the President promised that their road will be tarmacked, nothing has happened. 

My prayer is, let us consider Yumbe in terms of tarmacking this road from Koboko-Yumbe-Moyo-Adjumani and from Arua-Terego-Yumbe; that will cover the whole region. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have been discussing with the United Nations support for infrastructure for districts like Yumbe, where the damage has been caused for refugees. I think we need to follow it up and find out where the money is because there is some money being provided to support infrastructure there. 

7.08
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion for the fund and the committee report. 

The Members have all unanimously supported the committee report and the loan. They have raised similar issues from all the regions. As I listened to them, I realised that these similar issues are pertinent in that they all relate to the poor road infrastructure development and at the same time, they talk about the issue of compensation and presidential pledges. 

Madam Speaker, it hurts some of us when we sit in this House because year in, year out, you are talking about the same road. For example, the road from Villa Maria-Ssembabule; the time frame for it to have been completed is over. The issue of monitoring by the ministry and those concerned is very poor. 

The issue I am talking about is how the Ministry of Works and Transport works together with UNRA. The roads that are being constructed by UNRA throughout – because I move around in most cases – as you observed rightly, there are no proper designs being put forward and no monitoring. A case in issue is the road from Kyabakuza to Matete and Ssembabule. On that road, you find black soil being used in form of first class murram and a passable road now being impassable. Therefore, you ask yourself why do they come in to make a road that we are struggling to pass through and now it is impassable? 

If there is any form of development of any country, Uganda inclusive, that benefits the rural people who are the majority, without discrimination, it is development of the infrastructure; in this case, the road infrastructure. 

Madam Speaker, a proper road network only stimulates the creation of wealth. We cannot talk about wealth creation when our road –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know we have two loans but I would like to make a proposal in relation to the sanitation facilities; that we apply part of the contingency fund – it is 10 per cent, isn’t it? Honourable chairperson, what is the contingency fund in these loans?

MS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, it is five per cent.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I would like to propose that we apply 50 per cent of the contingency fund to address the issue of sanitation? (Applause)

Honourable members, I would like to put the question that the report on Rwekunye-Apac-Lira-Acholibur Road be amended to utilise 50 per cent of the contingency fund to the sanitation facilities. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I also put the question that the loan for Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road be amended to apply 50 per cent of the contingency fund to the construction of sanitary facilities on those roads. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the loan for Rwekunye-Apac-Lira-Acholibur Road be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the loan for Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Minister, would you like to say something?

7.13
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Azuba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted to respond to a few of the questions that have been put across. I have the good news that the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road, 90 per cent of compensation is already done. (Applause)

Now, we applied for a supplementary budget of Shs 260 billion for compensation for all the roads. We have reached an agreement with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that we put compensation funds in one pool. Therefore, whichever road is ready we shall go along with compensation for that road.

Therefore, Rwekunye-Apac Road is one of those roads that are prioritised. Once we get the approval of the Shs 260 billion which we have applied for under supplementary, we will have the funds for that road for compensation. Somebody asked about the width of the roads. I think we have provided for the good width – which is 3.5 metres on each side. This means seven metres across and shoulders are 1.5 metres. Within the towns, the shoulders are three and that includes also for the cyclists.

For the sanitary facilities, we have already passed that but it is part of the design of all these roads; Rwekunye-Apac-Lira-Acholibur is part of the design. The sanitary facilities are designed within the road.

THE SPEAKER: The chairperson of the Committee on National Economy reported that the designs are not there.

MS AZUBA: I said the design because as I had said earlier, the design would be there but now, they were going to be run by a private company and you have already passed that. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for that.

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and honourable minister.  I remember last year when a statement was presented to this House about the World Toilet Day, the House adopted that all loans and construction of roads should have highway facilities. It should be one of the prerequisites taken into consideration when a particular road is taken on. 

Therefore, I would like to get guidance from the minister, besides this loan project that we have passed, is this implemented also in other areas because sanitation and hygiene should be a priority in those highways? That is the clarification I would like to seek.

THE SPEAKER: Let the minister answer.

MS AZUBA: Madam Speaker, for all roads that are going to be designed from now onwards, those facilities will be provided for.

On the issue of contracts being given out before the designs are made, I must say that I have not seen this since I came in. It could have happened because I read some reports but it is not happening and I have not heard any area where a contract has been given out when there is no design.

Please, allow me to respond to hon. Elijah Okupa. Hon. Okupa showed us a map and that map must be old. As I talk now, the area of the east and northeast we are doing Muyembe-Nakapiripirit, we have Kapchorwa-Suam, we have Akisim-Moroto, Rwekunye-Apac, Kamuli roads, Mbale-Lwakhakha, Soroti-Amuria-Katakwi and all those roads were not on the map that he showed. 

Therefore, I believe we were being misled –(Applause)

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for passing these loans because they are going to change the status of those areas – that is Rwekunye-Apac and Muyembe-Nakapiripirit. As of now, I do not have the funding for Amudat-Kaabong but it is in the pipeline. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much for the work done. 

(The House rose at 7.19 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 24 January 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 
