
Friday, 31 January 2020

Parliament met at 10.19 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE deputy SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Please, receive my due apology for starting a bit late today. We had a long day yesterday so a combination of the rain and fatigue of yesterday did not make this morning very easy. However, we are here and I truly apologise. Let us go to business.

10.24
Mr micheal mawanda (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Early last week, I raised a matter of national importance in respect to the new curriculum being rolled out by Government. They have started training teachers in Government schools yet the curriculum is supposed to be implemented by all schools; both Government and private. Private schools have not been brought on board. 

The textbooks have not been availed to schools and yet schools are opening on Monday. I wanted the ministry to come and tell us what we are supposed to do as private institutions and how we are going to implement the new curriculum.

I would like to know whether we are proceeding well since the Government has not come up to give us a direction in something that is going to have a serious impact in the education of our children.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you. First of all, you did not proceed well. That is a policy matter and it should have been dealt with by a formal parliamentary question rather than as a matter of national importance.

I keep saying that matters of national importance are for very urgent matters. A formal question would have received written answers by now from the ministers and we would have dealt with it.

That notwithstanding, I think a response is required in this matter because it is important and it is affecting the whole country. They need to know what is going on. 

Please find a way of passing on a message to the ministers in charge of education to brief the House. In the process, the whole country is briefed.

Honourable members, remember that today’s focus is on finishing this Bill. Let us deal with it. There is designation but the members are not here. I do not see the Dean of the Independents so we will come to that later. Let go to item four.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose that we will come back to all the new insertions. Let us deal with what is in the Bill and it might be easier for us to process those later when we have finished the other parts of the Bill; unless they have implications on the other provisions of the Bill. Mr Chairperson, do they have implications on the other provisions of the Bill?

10.26
The chairperson, committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Chairperson, I concur with you that we first deal with issues, which are clear then come back to sort out these areas where we need to harmonise. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That means that we go to clause 38.

Clause 38

Mr musasizi: Mr Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 38 by substituting it with the following:

“91G. Registrar of Tribunal
(1) 	The Tribunal shall have a Registrar who shall be a person qualified to be a Registrar of the High Court and shall be appointed by the Tribunal;
(2) 	The Registrar shall be appointed on contract for a period of four years renewable for only one further term, on terms and conditions of service to be specified in the instruments of appointment.”

The justifications are:

(l) 	To provide for the appointing authority of the Registrar of the Appeals Tribunal.
(2) 	To provide for the tenure of the Registrar of the Tribunal.

 I beg to submit.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, in the original Bill, Clause 38 had a provision for the tribunal to appoint other officers and employees as may be necessary for the effective discharge of the functions of the tribunal. The chairperson of the committee has said that we substitute that but we are losing that last part of the tribunal to appoint.

Therefore, I would like to suggest that maybe we can maintain it in (3) to read: “The Tribunal may appoint other officers and employees as may be necessary for the effective discharge of the functions of the Tribunal.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairperson, you propose to replace what is in the Bill but the minister says it does not fit in very well.

Mr musasizi: Mr Chairperson, the minister’s concern is alright as long as we add the proposal to appoint a Registrar of the Tribunal. The spirit is to have the Registrar established by the Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: By saying we will appoint other officers, is the other officer just the Registrar?

Mr musasizi: No, it is the Registrar and other officers. The provision in the Bill states, “The Registrar shall be appointed by the Tribunal in consultation with Judicial Service Commission and a Tribunal may appoint other officers and employees as may be necessary for the effective discharge of functions of the Tribunal.” I think this is fine.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is what I thought.

Mr musasizi: Let us drop the committee proposal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I thought it was fine too. Honourable members, the proposed amendment in clause 38 is withdrawn. I now put the question that clause 38 stands part of this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 46 by-
(i) 	renumbering the existing clause as (1); and  
(ii) 	inserting, immediately after sub-section (3) the following: “Regulations made under this section shall be laid before Parliament and shall take effect upon the expiry of twenty one working days.” 

Justification: To bring the regulations to the attention of Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, I do not know the importance of waiting for 21 days. If the regulations have been made by the minister and have been laid on Table, waiting for 21 days does not make much meaning, because they are not going to be approved by Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If the committee is agreeable to remove the phrase, “and approval of Parliament”, then, the rest of what remains is laying for information. If it is laying for information, then, you do not need to talk about the number of days because days are normally important if Parliament had to do something about it; either give a negative or positive vote. 

You can say that it will never come into force until it is approved by Parliament or it will come into force until it is annulled by Parliament. In this one, there is no such requirement. You are just saying it will be laid before Parliament. Once it is published, it will be laid before Parliament. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Chairperson, just to be helped by both the minister and the chairperson – we have made proposals in other laws. Parliament needs to be consistent. What have we said when considering similar proposals? 

MR BAHATI: Leader of the Opposition, what we have been saying in other laws, apart from the oil laws, is that we have been requiring them to be laid before Parliament for information. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What the Act says is that this is about regulations: Section 96(2) reads, “Without prejudice to the general effect of sub-section (1), the minister shall, on the recommendation of the Authority and approval of Parliament, issue regulations for procurement and disposal by procuring and disposing entities outside Uganda.” 

Therefore, the Bill now seeks to take out – it reads, “Without prejudice to the general effect of sub-section (1), the minister shall, on the recommendation of the Authority and approval of Parliament, issue regulations.” In other words, the issuance of the regulations will have prior parliamentary approval. That is highly regular. 
Usually, the regulation comes in if we need to look at it. We look at them when they have already been prepared but now they are saying that before these regulations are prepared, Parliament should also approve them. 

The amendment now is that we take out “and approval of Parliament.” They can do the recommendation of the Authority, which is still an internal procedure of preparing the text of the regulation but the types of regulation should not involve Parliament. I think this was an after-wisdom-thought, which, all of sudden occurred to the minister – that it should not have been there; they are now seeking to take it out. However, the committee is saying something else. 

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, in 2012, we went through a rigorous process of approving the regulation and I must admit it was disturbing. That is why we are agreeing with the proposal not to have regulations approved by Parliament. 

In this regard, Mr Chairperson, I would like to amend my proposal to read as follows: “Regulations made under this section shall be laid before Parliament.” We will delete “and shall take effect upon expiry of twenty one days.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay now? Due to the fact that they occurred in both sub-section (1) and (2), section 96 of the Bill seeks to deal with both. That is why he is saying the words “and approval of Parliament” in sub-sections (1) and (2). Both sub-sections are being dealt with now. 

You are now proposing that it should read, “Without prejudice to the general effect of sub-section (1), the minister shall, on the recommendation of the Authority, issue regulations for procurement and disposal by procuring and disposing entities outside Uganda.” That is what is in the Act. All you are taking out from the Act is “and approval of Parliament”. 

Therefore, in sub-section (1), it will be, “The minister shall, on the recommendation of the Authority, issue regulations for the better carrying out of the objectives and functions of this Act.” 

Then sub-section (2) is the other one. So you are also taking out - So now why are we bringing in Parliament? “The regulations shall be laid before Parliament” Is that what you are saying?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, we are saying that the regulations shall be laid before Parliament, just for information and for use by Parliament but not that Parliament shall consider the regulations. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You know, in the past we never used to say that but because these Front Bench people became very sneaky, they just do anything and we do not even know – because by good practice, if you issue a regulation, it is almost automatic that you should lay it before Parliament. They never used to do that. 

That is why Parliament now insists that they should be laying, whether for information or for approval. It is a cumbersome provision, just responding to the bad faith that has been exercised by – 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, now that there is good faith –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It has not been demonstrated. (Laughter) For years now, we have been doing that. 

MR KAMUSIIME: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. The clarification I am seeking is whether the laying of these regulations on the Floor of Parliament shall not necessitate that they lay before they start implementing them or they can lay any time even when they are implemented?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This is just for information. It should have already been enforced but within a reasonable time they should come and say, “We have made the following regulations for further management of the Act and here they are.” 

Is the amendment clear now? It will now read, “The minister shall, on the recommendation of the Authority, issue regulations for the better carrying out of the objectives and functions of this Act”. How do we bring in this aspect of Parliament? Does it flow with the language that is used?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, we are proposing that we insert immediately after sub section (3) the following: “Regulations made under this section shall be laid before Parliament”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. It now makes sense. Can I now put the question to the amendment? I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 46, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, we propose to delete clause 48. The justification is that the authority should be left with the mandate to issue guidelines. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. I think we have taken that decision before. Honourable members, the proposal from the committee is that clause 48, given the decision you have taken before, should be deleted because it is redundant. I put the question for the deletion of clause 48. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 48 deleted

Clause 49 agreed to.

Clause 50, agreed to.

Clause 51, agreed to.

Clause 52

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 52 by inserting a new sub clause immediately after sub clause (2) to read as follows: “The Executive Director appointed under section 17 of this Act shall be deemed to have transferred his or her service on similar or better terms than those enjoyed by the Executive Director prior to the commencement of this Act and is eligible for reappointment for one further term.”
 
Justification

To save the appointment of the Executive Director under the amended Act. 

MR BAHATI: Chairperson, I concur with the chair.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question to the amendments. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 52, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 53, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now let us go back to the other one. Are we on clause 14? We had agreed to move the number from “five” to “seven”. And now we are dealing with how the composition should be. 

The Member for Koboko raised a constitutional issue of gender constitution. That is where we had not yet finalised. I was hoping you had harmonised. 

What is the final position? I was expecting you to have already drafted that it will be the following and 30 per cent of them will be women. You want technical assistance, which you should have got yesterday?

MR BAHATI: Sorry, Mr Chairperson. Is it possible to go on others and we come back to this?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, you can consult our team at the back. They can draft it for you, once you provide them with the principle. What was the next one, committee chairperson?

Paragraph 22

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, we propose to insert a new clause in the Bill to read as follows: 
“Functions of the Tribunal
(l) 	The functions of the Tribunal are to-
(a) 	hear applications for administrative review of decisions of accounting officers made by a bidder who is aggrieved under section 89 (7);
(b) 	hear and determine applications made under section 89 (8) by a bidder who is aggrieved by failure of the accounting officer to make a decision within ten working days from date of receipt of a complaint;
(c) 	hear applications for review of a decision of the authority with regard to suspension of providers under section 94 of this Act; and
(d) 	perform any other function conferred to the Tribunal by this Act, regulations or any other written law.”

The justification is that this provides for specific functions of the tribunal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, we had also gone through this but the issue of “section” is what has put us back. Can I now put the question to this amendment?

I now put the question to the amendment, as proposed by the committee chairperson on functions of the tribunal.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, we are proposing to amend section 91B of the principal Act –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You are proposing to insert a new clause in the Bill, amending section 91B of the principal Act.

MR BAHATI: Yes, Sir. Yesterday, we agreed that we increase the number of the members of the tribunal; the chairperson and six other members. Today, we are inserting a new sub clause (3)(a) to read as follows: “A third of the members of the tribunal shall be women”, as proposed by hon. Baba-Diri.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, will that now take care of the whole composition of the tribunal or we had already agreed on it? Can we just recap so that our draft people do not look in very many places to get them? What will now be the full text of the composition of the tribunal?

MR BAHATI: We agreed that: 

“There is established the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Appeals Tribunal, which shall consist of a chairperson and six other members appointed in accordance with this part. 

A person to be appointed a chairperson of the tribunal shall be a person qualified to be a judge of the High Court. 

A person to be appointed a member of the tribunal shall be a person with knowledge and experience in public procurement, finance, commerce, business, administration, law or any other relevant profession.

(3)(a) A third of the members of the tribunal shall be women.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it clear now? I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS NANTABA: Mr Chairperson, on the composition of the tribunal, they are saying someone should have knowledge in the areas of public procurement, management. However, the other three areas of “finance”, commerce and business” sound alike. What is the difference between “finance”, “commerce” and “business”? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you suggesting that “commerce” is the same as “finance”?

MS NANTABA: Mr Chairperson, you talk the same business language when you are in “commerce”, “business” and “finance”. We almost have the same people carrying the same knowledge.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: For the avoidance of doubt, committee chairperson?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, “finance”, “commerce” and “business” are not the same. The example I can give is that people who are trained in “finance” are the actuarial people you see in pensions, security exchange and such things. People trained in “business” are business managers and accountants, are professionals who do auditing, taxation and other services. Therefore, these professions are inter-related but different. For avoidance of doubt, we wanted to specify them in the law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I now put the question that the new clause stands part of this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause agreed to.

Paragraph 23

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, we propose to insert a new clause. The Bill is amended by inserting a new clause:

Amendment of Section 91C of the principal Act.
Section 9lC of the principal Act is amended by substituting for the word “three” the word “four”.”

The justification is to enhance the tenure of the members of the Tribunal from three to four years.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Minister?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, we agreed on this with the chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You are not on record so I will disregard what I heard you say. (Laughter) Honourable members, that is the proposed amendment. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, we propose to insert a new clause in the Bill to read as follows:
Amendment of Section 91I of the principal Act.

Section 9lI of the principal Act is substituted with the following:
“91I Administrative review by the Tribunal
(1) 	A bidder who is aggrieved, as specified in sub-sections 89(7) and (8) or who claims to have suffered or to risk suffering loss or damage due to an omission or breach by a procuring and disposing entity under section 89(2), may make an application to the Tribunal against the procuring and disposing entity.

(2) 	The application shall be made within ten working days-
(a) 	from the date of receipt of the decision of the accounting officer; or
(b) 	from the date when the omission or breach by the procuring and disposing entity is alleged to have taken place; or
(c) 	from the date of expiry of a period given to the accounting officer under section 89(8), where the accounting officer fails to make a decision.

(3) 	The application shall be in writing and accompanied by a prescribed fee.

(4) 	Upon receipt of an application for administrative review, the Registrar shall notify the accounting officer of the pending application for review before the Tribunal and shall ask the accounting officer to suspend the procurement and disposal proceedings till the application for review is completed.

(5) 	In reviewing a decision before it, the Tribunal may-
(a) 	recommend suspension of any action by the concerned procuring and disposing entity, until the Tribunal makes a decision on the matter;
(b) 	direct the concerned procuring and disposing entity with respect to anything to be done or re-done in the procurement or disposal process;
(c) 	order that the procurement or disposal process be terminated; and 
(d) 	require the payment of compensation for any costs reasonably incurred by the bidder who is a party to the proceedings as a result of an unlawful act or decision of the concerned procuring and disposing entity or of the Authority; or
(e) 	recommend disciplinary action against an accounting officer, including suspension of the accounting officer.

(6) 	Upon completion of a hearing, the Tribunal shall make a decision in writing, giving reasons for the decision, including its findings on material questions of fact and reference to the evidence or other material on which those findings were based and may do any one or more of the following:
(a) 	Affirm or vary the decision of the accounting officer.
(b) 	Set aside the decision of the accounting officer.
(c) 	Refer the matter to the accounting officer for reconsideration in accordance with any directions or recommendations of the Tribunal.
(d) 	Annul anything the accounting officer has done in the procurement and disposal proceedings, including annulling the procurement or disposal proceedings in their entirety.
(e) 	Give directions to the accounting officer with respect to anything to be done or redone in the procurement or disposal proceedings.
(f) 	Recommend a termination of a procurement or disposal process and commencement of a new procurement or disposal process.
(g) 	In the case of suspension of a provider, lift the suspension of a provider made by the Authority under Section 94 or vary the period of the suspension.

(7)	 For avoidance of doubt, the following matters shall not be subject to review by the Tribunal:
(a) 	A decision by a procuring and disposing entity to reject or cancel any or all bids, prior to award of a contract under Section 75.
(b) 	A decision of a procuring and disposing entity to discontinue a procurement or disposal process, after receiving submissions from the bidders following an expression of interest or a pre-qualification. And 
(e) 	A decision by a procuring and disposing entity to limit the participation of bidders under a preference scheme or a reservation scheme.

(8) 	The parties to an application for administrative review shall be:
(a) 	A bidder who applied for review of the decision of the accounting officer.
(b) 	A provider who applied for review of the decision of the Authority suspending the provider under section 94.
(c) 	The accounting officer of a procuring and disposing entity.
(d) 	The Authority, if the application is in respect to suspension of a provider under Section 94.
(e) 	The bidder notified as best evaluated bidder by the procuring and disposing entity. And
(e) 	Such other person as the Tribunal may determine.

(9) The Tribunal shall issue a decision within a period of not more than fifteen working days, upon receipt of an application for review.”

The justification is to mandate the Tribunal to handle administrative reviews from the accounting officer to the Tribunal.

I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much, chairperson. Honourable members, I did not see any policy issue with this but I see a technical challenge with the way it is drafted. For example, if you look at sub-section (5) which has (a), (b), (c). Subsection (c) has “and” as the closing word in paragraph (c). At the same time, sub-section (5)(d) has “or” as the closing word in paragraph (d) and yet, you still have sub-section (5)(e). So, the “and” was supposed to be – if you are reading it, it would mean “and” in paragraph (d) would have been the last but now you have “or”. So, we do not know which one applies to what. This “or” is alternative to what?

Our drafting people should look at this very carefully. These are instances where if you try to put it technically in drafting, then it comes out like you have changed what Parliament has done. The flow is okay here. However, you have used “or” and “and” at the same time. You are saying “order that the procurement and disposal process be terminated and require the payment of compensation or recommend disciplinary action”. Should we take them out and put them as a new sub-section? Is that okay?

MR SSEMUJJU: Maybe, the chairperson of the committee can help me understand –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let me first deal with this technical matter and then, you can pose your question. The proposal from the drafting team is that we take out the “and” in sub-section (5)(c) because all these are options and we leave the word “or” in sub-section (5)(d). Then it would make sense.

Secondly, you have a similar situation in sub-section (6)(e). It has the word “or” and yet you still have sub-sections (6) (f) and (g). So, you may have to take out the word “or” and put it in sub-section (6)(f) instead of it being is sub-section (6)(e) if they are all options. Is that correct?

So, the “or” in sub-section (6)(e) should be removed and it should come in sub-section (6)(f) so that sub-sections (6)(a) to (g) remain as options. Does that make sense?

Subsection (7) is okay. It is cumulative and it means you do all of them. Is that sub-section (7)(e) supposed to be subsection (7)(c)? It is supposed to be sub-sections (7)(a), (b) and (c). It cannot be sub-section (e). Honourable chairperson, please, confirm this.

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Where I need help is in sub-section (5). There are actions that the proposal says can be taken, in my understanding, during the review. Those actions include passing sentences. There are also actions that are taken after the review in sub-section (6).

In reviewing, you are also recommending disciplinary action and termination during the process. Then, there are actions that are taken upon completion of the hearing. 

So, the trouble I have and where I need help is, I thought all these recommendations and decisions should be taken upon completion of hearing. That is how I understand it. I see you are saying, “When you are reviewing, you can suspend” and yet, there are actions that you are also recommending upon the completion of hearing. I do not know if I am making sense.

MR BAHATI: Let me attempt to give you help. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do not attempt; just give it. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, there are stages of procurement: At every stage, the intention of the Bill is to make sure that we reduce delays. So, there are decisions that the chairperson is proposing in that during the reviewing of the decision, there should be some actions taken that may not wait for a final decision by the tribunal, depending on the information that is before the tribunal. I think that is how he has tried to categorise them - so that we do not have to wait. That is how I understand it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You have, for example, the processes going on and an appeal has been made. Should the process continue? They are saying that when the appeal tribunal begins hearing or processing the appeal, there are interim decisions that they can take. They can say “you first hold on until they finish”. When they finally finish, then they can make the final decisions.

There might be instances where the tribunal is handling its appeal and other processes are going on. That is what they anticipate. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Chairperson, in sub-section (5)(a), you are recommending the suspension of the procurement itself. My understanding is that the reason we have suspended the procurement is because you want to review the decision. Therefore, nothing can go on in regards with the suspension. 

At the same time, you can also begin suspending the accounting officer because you are still reviewing. They will receive an application and say, “Please, do not continue with this procurement; the accounting officer is suspended” and then, the hearing can begin. 

So, I thought the action should come upon the completion of the hearing but not upon receipt of the complaint. 

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, reviews are processes and the processes should not be limited. That is why we are making these provisions to allow the team to be able to have options on managing this process. I would like to persuade my colleague, hon. Ssemujju, to move with the House.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is why they are options; you can suspend the process or you can suspend the accounting officer or a group of them.

MR OTHIENO: Where the concern may be - when you look (c)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Which (c)? There are many.

MR OTHIENO: Mr Chairperson, 5(c), I thought we are dealing with the reviewing process. They say they can order - page 17, they can order the procurement or disposal process to be terminated.

I thought this is something that should come at the tail end. However, you are still reviewing and then, you have got them ordering the whole process to be terminated and yet, you are still in the review process.

I thought this should just be a transitional stage before you arrive at the final decision. Now, when you look at this, once it is already terminated, then what is the reason to even proceed with it? That is where my concern is.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I agree with hon. Othieno. Yesterday, we had said that an appeal- we were dealing with evaluating evidence that is on the file to enable the tribunal to make a decision at the end of the day. Now, if you terminate, what ruling will you give at the end of the day when you have already taken a decision?

Again, you need to evaluate that evidence and the information that is already on the file.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The point is a termination can only be a final decision but not an interim decision. You can suspend but termination at that stage might be tricky.

MS KAWOOYA: Mr Chairperson, I would like to have my mind clear.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Are you suggesting that it is not clear?

MS KAWOOYA: No, when I came in, I found the debate moving smoothly but when hon. Ssemujju posed a question and from the explanation, I thought it was getting clearer. My understanding is before the tribunal reaches a final decision, whatever has been coming in as a matter of a process must not stop. The reason is that in different sections, there has been some options put.

That while you reach here, you may either take this option or the next until the tribunal comes to its final decision, making the whole process transparent and without interfering with the work that is continuing.

Therefore, I did not find any reason that we should give a lee way to termination after hearing of this process when the rest of the process should have continued with the option to the final verdict. That was my understanding. 

MR BAHATI: We would like to propose that 5 (c), which is the procurement and disposal process to be terminated; 5 (d), which is referring to payment of compensation and 5 (e) referring to the disciplinary action be housed now under section 6 after a decision has been made.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Is that okay? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Paragraphs 5 (c), (d) and (e) now move to subsection 6. Is that clear? I now put the question that the proposed new clause stands part of this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause agreed to.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, we propose to insert a new clause in the Bill. The Bill is amended by inserting the following new clause. Repeal of section 91(l) of the Principal Act. Section 91(l) of the Principal Act is repealed. The justification is consequential amendment to section 91(I).

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, I concur with the chairperson of the committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is to insert a new clause whose impact is to delete section 91(l) in the Act. The new clause is being proposed for that purpose. I put the question to the proposal for the new clause?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Section 91(l) deleted.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, we propose to insert a new clause in the Bill. The Bill is amended by inserting the following new clause; amendment of section 94 of the Principal Act. Section 94 of the Principal Act is amended;

    a) By renumbering the existing provision as 1 and
    b) By inserting a new subsection 2 immediately after subsection 1 as follows; 2 “a provider who is agreed by a decision of the authority under subsection 1 may within 10 working days from the date of the decision of the authority apply to the tribunal for a review of the decision.”

The justification is to give providers suspended by the authority an avenue to appeal to the tribunal. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear.	

MR OTHIENO: Mr Chairperson, I propose that we recast it to read that a provider who is aggrieved by the decision of the authority under subsection 1 may within 10 working days from the date of the communication of the decision of the authority and not just date of decision.

Mr Chairperson, the decision may be made and you may not know that it has been made. Then they let you know when it is just one day left. However, then you do not have sufficient time to prepare your appeal and yet, the law is supposed to give you sufficient time.

Therefore, how will I know that a decision has been taken? - because it is made in a tribunal there where I do not sit. Then, I only wait when they communicate to me. Therefore, it would have been fair and proper that this date runs from the time at which the decision has been communicated to me. That is when I get to know that this decision has been made against me.

MR BAHATI: If you say the aggrieved provider should now apply after a decision has been communicated to him or her, then the delay is even longer than what you think. However, if you leave it like this, the burden is on the authority that once a decision has been taken because the authority knows that 10 days after the decision has been taken, the provider must apply to the tribunal.

Therefore, it will be the burden of the authority to communicate quickly but if you say a decision is taken and a provider waits for the communication, the authority can keep quiet if it is in the interest of  - I think this is much better than what the hon. Othieno Okoth is proposing. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If that is the fear, then, we should impose a timeframe within which to communicate that decision.

MR BAHATI: That may be better if hon. Othieno Okoth can propose because he is very good at raising questions. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If he wants to suggest a period after taking a decision, you must transmit or communicate that decision within a specified period to the affected person. Then, it will be automatic that you do not even have to say it because it can only be effective when you have communicated. 

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, my interpretation of this proposal is that you cannot take a decision and fail to communicate it to the affected party. The assumption is that a decision is deemed to have been made when it is communicated to the affected party and the 10 days start running from there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: For avoidance of doubt, we have had situations where the law is clear but ministerial policy statements are brought in April when they should have been brought earlier. 

MR MUSASIZI: For avoidance of doubt, can we indicate two days?

Mr othieno: Mr Chairperson, like the way the courts do, when the judges take decisions, it is only at the time of reading that decision when the parties are made to know the decision but not at the point when the judges are writing it.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, let us read this clause once again and understand it. “A provider who is aggrieved by the decision of the Authority…” - how can you be aggrieved by a decision that you are not aware of? I think it is already implied - “…may, within 10 working days from the date of the decision of the Authority apply to the Tribunal for a review of the decision.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you suggesting that the date of the decision is the same as the date of being aggrieved? Being aggrieved is upon knowledge of the decision.

They have a point because I can make a decision - unless you make a condition that the decision will be made in their presence. Like in the court, when they read the judgement, that is the date the judgment is made. You would be there listening and after that, the time starts running. Now, there is nothing that is not clear. That is what they are saying.

MR BAHATI: Okay, we are working at it.

Mr mawanda: Mr Chairperson, how do they communicate the rulings of the Tribunal? Are they made in public or is it by communication? We need to know. If it is in public and the judgment is known, then you know that you can appeal immediately.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You can say, because you are party to the appeal, you should be there when the final decision is being made and so, it is communicated in your presence. That solves all these other problems because you were there listening when the decision was being read to you or when judgment was passed. You would be aware and the time you are talking about starts running from that moment within 10 days. 

Mr Bahati: That is the assumption.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The law does not operate on assumptions. Honourable minister, can we proceed?

MR BAHATI: I do not see the Attorney the other side – we are proposing to insert clause 2 and this will be clause 3, thus; “The Authority shall communicate to the provider suspended within five working days from the date of the decision.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The decisions of the Tribunal? It is not the Tribunal, because they appeal to it. At that point, the Tribunal is not yet involved. This is a procurement decision that somebody ends up being aggrieved.

Therefore, if they have made an award, which aggrieves a particular person, that decision by the procuring unit should be communicated to all the parties affected by that decision within five days. That is what they are now proposing. From then, it means that once you receive it then the ten days start running.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, in this case, we are inserting a new clause under section (94), which deals with suspension of providers by the Authority.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Have we finished the other one?

MR MUSASIZI: No, I am just clarifying whether we should use the “authority” or “tribunal”. In this case, the matter affects the authority and not the tribunal. Therefore, the minister’s proposal is right and consistent with –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Correct. We have sorted that one out. Honourable minister, what was that proposal?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, we are proposing a new clause under section (94) (2). “The Authority shall communicate to the provider suspended within five working days from the date of the decision.” In other words, if you suspend the provider, you inform them within five days. Within 10 days, if the provider is aggrieved, he is required to apply to the Tribunal.

The chairperson’s proposal will become sub-clause (3)

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, we agree with the minister’s proposal but in effect, our proposal has got to be renumbered. His becomes (2) and ours (3).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is fine. Can I now put a question to that amendment?

Mr othieno: Mr Chairperson, there is a problem. We shall have retained under these two - of course, they are going to renumber them. This will still be stating, “From the date of the decision…” Then, you add another, which mentions five days but there is no connection between the two provisions. This one will have been retained so what is the effect of bringing in the other dates on communicating yet, this one still stands? It does not have any effect. 

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, hon. Othieno Okoth raised a concern that a decision can be made and not communicated to the aggrieved parties. Arising from his concern, we have brought a proposal that a decision made must be communicated within five days. After the five days, if the parties are aggrieved, they must appeal within 10 working days. I do not see any harm in that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is from receipt and not from the date of the decision. Have you changed the text of – It cannot now be from the date of the decision. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Can I help you? The trouble is that you have communicated a decision but you are maintaining that – “The provider who is aggrieved by the decision of the Authority under sub-section (1) may, upon receipt of the decision …” The rest can follow. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Good, that sorts it out. It is “…may, upon receipt of a decision, appeal within 10 days.”  

MR MUSASIZI: Can I read this? “A provider who is aggrieved by a decision of the Authority under sub-section (1) may, upon receipt of the decision, appeal within 10 working days.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is, “…may appeal to the Tribunal within 10 working days.” 

MR MUSASIZI: Yes, “…appeal to the Tribunal within 10 working days for a review.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please, state it properly. (Laughter)

MR MUSASIZI: “A service provider, who is aggrieved by the decision of the Authority, may, upon receipt of the decision, appeal to the Tribunal within 10 working days.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We have taken the other one, which was proposed by the minister that “upon the Authority making a decision, it must communicate within five days.” Then, on communication, when it is received by the person affected and that person is aggrieved, he may appeal to the Tribunal within 10 working days. That is correct. Is that clear now? Can I put the question for those amendments? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the new clause stands part of this bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That was the last one. Do you have another amendment? 

MR MUSASIZI: Yes. Mr Chairperson, we propose to insert a new clause in the Bill immediately after clause 44 to read as follows: 

“Amendment of section 95 of the Principal Act -
Section 95 of the Principal Act is amended in sub-section (1) by inserting the following new paragraphs immediately after paragraph (d):

(e) 	Obstructs or hinders a person carrying out the duty or function or exercising a power under this Act;
(f) 	Delays without justifiable cause the opening or evaluation of bids or award the contract beyond the described period; 
(g) 	Cancels the procurement process after the award decision by the contracts committee without justifiable cause; 
(h) 	Causes loss of public assets as a result of negligence in the implementation of this Act; or 
(i) 	Contravenes recommendations of the Authority or decisions of the Procurement and Disposal Appeals Tribunal.” 

The justification is to provide for more offences in respect of breach of provisions of the Act. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, we agree with the chairperson’s proposal. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, that is the new proposal, to make a new insertion of a new clause. I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause agreed to.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, lastly, we propose to insert a new clause in the Bill to read as follows:  

“Amendment of schedule 1(a) of the Principal Act
The Principal Act is amended in schedule 1(a) by adding a new paragraph (7) immediately after paragraph (6) to read as follows: 

(7) Supply chain or institute of procurement professionals of Uganda.” 

The justification is to provide for a member of the board to be appointed from either the procurement professionals or supply chain. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: For what purpose is that appointment? Are you talking about the other boards? 

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: They are enlarging the profession? 

MR MUSASIZI: Yes, the PPDA Board is a constituency board and procurement professionals have been missing on this board. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to that amendment to the Schedule. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, we propose to amend the main title as follows: 

“The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority Act (Amendment) Bill.”  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, there is no “Authority” there. What does the Bill say?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, this arises from the guidance you made yesterday. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, the guidance is only in relation to “Act”. There is no “Authority.” It is just the word “Act.”

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, I would also like to note that we have another amendment under the interpretation clause, which we have not yet considered.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no amendment. 

Clause 3

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, we propose to insert a new amendment to read as follows, “Section 3 of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Act, 2003 in this Act referred to as the Principal Act is amended by substituting for the definition of “Authority” the following, “Authority” means the Public Procurement Regulatory Authority. 

The justification is to create a difference between the title of the Act, being the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act 2003 and the regulator being the Authority. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is clear. I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

The Title

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that the title to this Bill remains as title to this Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

11.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports there to. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the committee of the whole House report. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

11.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (Amendment) Bill, 2019” and passed it with amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

11.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the committee of the whole House. I put a question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING 

THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

11.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read the third time and do pass.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill Entitled, “The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read the third time and do pass.  I put a question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2020.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister. (Applause) Congratulations chairperson and the committee for the good job and congratulations Members for the perseverance. Today is a Friday but I kept my promise that we would sit for two hours and it is coming to exactly two hours. 

Is the dean of the Independents here? There is designation of a Member. Can someone do it? 

MS SANTA ALUM: Mr Speaker, since the Independents are under your docket, you can suggest the person to do it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, House stands adjourned to Tuesday 4 February 2020 at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 11.53 a.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 4 February at 2.00 p.m.) 
