PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTTHIRD SESSION - THIRD MEETINGTUESDAY , 9 JANUARY 2024PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA11339Tuesday, 9 January 2024work together and complement each other as the arms of Government. I thank the Clerk to Parliament and his staff, for doing a very good job. Still on the same note, I cannot forget to thank Hon. Katuntu, for chairing this committee. Hon Katuntu, you did a very good job with your team. While we were busy with CSPOC, I also know that Members were busy with the sectoral committees. I thank you so much, and I commend you for the good work you are doing and the dedication that you are putting towards work in the sectoral committees. As I have always emphasised, as the 11th Parliament, we shall be known by our deeds and our deeds are now that we must work very hard to deliver the national budget. We are working for humanity and let us maintain that spirit. Honourable members, on 22 December 2023, I received a communication from the Secretary-General of the National Unity Platform Party (NUP) about change of the office bearers in the Opposition leadership in Parliament, as follows: “Pursuant to Article 82(a) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, Section 6(b) of Administration of Parliament Act, Hon. Joel Besekezi Ssenyonyi, MP Nakawa West Constituency is elected as the Leader of the Opposition, replacing Hon. Mathias Mpuuga, MP Nyendo, Mukungwe Constituency, who is nominated as a Backbench Commissioner. IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentTHIRD SESSION - 1ST SITTING - THIRD MEETINGParliament met at 2.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I welcome you back from the long Christmas recess. I also want to wish all of you a happy new year.  (Applause) It has been a rather busy start from the time we started the year. We had to host the 27th Conference of the Speakers and Presiding Officers of the Commonwealth that was held in Munyonyo from 3 to 6 January 2024. Many of you were in various subcommittees and you did an exceptionally good job. Thank you very much. (Applause) As Parliament, we have set the bar high.On that note, therefore, I congratulate the Parliament of Uganda for successfully hosting the conference. On a special note, I thank the President of the Republic of Uganda for enabling us to host the conference; for financing the conference; and for coming to open the conference, himself. That shows the good relationship between the Executive and the Legislature that we should maintain.  (Applause) At the end of the day, we need to 11340 DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENT [The Speaker]Hon. John Baptist Nambeshe, MP Manjiya County, is appointed as the Chief Opposition Whip.”  Honourable members, Section 6(b) of the Administration of Parliament Act stipulates that the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament shall be elected by a party in the Opposition to the Government, having the greatest numerical strength in the Parliament. The person elected Leader of the Opposition shall take office upon formal announcement on the Floor by the Speaker; not anybody else. I take this opportunity to formally announce Hon. Joel Besekezi Ssenyonyi, as the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament. (Applause)  Hon. Joel Ssenyonyi, I congratulate you upon ascending to this very high position. I wish you a productive tenure of office as the Leader of the Opposition. You are most welcome. As Government on this side, and as the leadership of Parliament - you are now part of the leadership of Parliament, and we will work together with you for the good of humanity. (Applause)We are here to work for humanity and for our people, and we promise to leave this Parliament better than we found it. This House is for intellectual debates, not flexing muscles. As the Leader of the Opposition, I urge you to build upon what your predecessor, Hon. Mathias Mpuuga, has done. Hon. Mpuuga, I thank you for your service to the people. My son, Hon. Ssenyonyi, I refer you to Rule 14, and Rule 13(3), which requires the Leader of the Opposition to hold regular consultation with the Speaker in whatever job he does. Our offices are open and we will work with you. Would you like to say something as you hand over? I will accord Hon. Mpuuga a minute to make his remarks as he hands over to his successor, Hon. Ssenyonyi, and I will also allow Hon. Ssenyonyi to make his maiden speech as the Leader of the Opposition, as we move on.By this announcement, Hon. Nambeshe John Baptist assumes the Office of the Chief Opposition Whip, pursuant to Section 61 of the Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Act. Honourable members, you may recall that on 13 July 2021, Parliament approved four backbench commissioners for a period of two and a half years in furtherance of Rule 11(4) and (6) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The tenure of those four expired on 13 December 2023, hence the need for an election of new backbench commissioners, pursuant to Section 2 of the Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Act, and Rule 11(4) of the Rules of Procedure. There are three slots available for the party in Government - that is the National Resistance Movement - and one for the party in the Opposition with the largest numerical strength; in this case, the National Unity Platform (NUP). In line with Section 2(b) of the Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Act, and Rule 11(4) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, I want to invite the nomination of the one backbench commissioner from the Chief Opposition Whip. 2.12THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP  (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me commence by congratulating you on convening a very successful Conference of Speakers and Presiding Officers of the Commonwealth countries - (Applause)  - although it did not end well with Hon. Nkunyingi Muwada, who - THE SPEAKER:  Can you first give me the Commissioner? (Laughter)MR NAMBESHE:  Pursuant to Section 2 of the Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Act, I hereby designate Hon. Mathias Mpuuga, a member of the National Unity Platform, as the Parliamentary Commissioner from the Opposition. I beg to designate. 11341THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 JANUARY 2023THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Is that the only person you have as a backbench commissioner? Hon. Mpuuga has been nominated and that means he is unopposed from the Opposition side. Therefore, I put the question that the House do approve Hon. Mathias Mpuuga as a Backbench Parliamentary Commissioner.(Question put and agreed to.)THE SPEAKER:  Congratulations, Hon. Mpuuga. (Applause)  Government Chief Whip, you are requested to nominate three backbench commissioners. 2.14THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP  (Mr Hamson Obua):  Madam Speaker, and honourable colleagues, happy New Year. Pursuant to Rule 11 of the Rules of Procedure of the 11th Parliament of the Republic of Uganda and in consultation with the top leadership of the National Resistance Movement Party; the National Resistance Movement as a political party hereby nominates the following Members of Parliament as Backbench Parliamentary Commissioners for the period of January 2024 to May 2026:1. Hon. Afoyochan Esther2. Hon. Solomon Silwany3. Hon. Akampurira Prossy Mbabazi. I beg to nominate.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the Member to raise his procedural matter. MR ALIONI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have clearly stated and also referred to the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament-THE SPEAKER: Hon. Odria, I would like to give you this one because there was an amendment and they are the ones that are updated.MR ALIONI:  Madam Speaker, in the month of November, the Government Chief Whip requested Members of Parliament from the NRM party to apply for the position of commissioners. I am reliably informed that over 200 Members applied – THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, listen to Hon. Odria.MR ALIONI:  Madam Speaker, in reference to Rule 11, these Members were meant to be subjected to an election –THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have free sitting today. MR ALIONI:  These Members were meant to be subjected to an election. This has not taken place within the NRM party. Aware that we also had a resolution in Kyakwanzi to have our commissioners undergo primary elections in the NRM Party, and then be presented to Parliament –THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, listen.MR ALIONI: There is no way the Government Chief Whip is going to convince all these members of the NRM Party that we only have the three members who have served as commissioners in the last term and no other can serve in the capacity of a commissioner. That is what I call injustice, corruption, disrespect of the law is taking place in the NRM party. I want to advise the Government Chief Whip that the step you are taking is going to divide the party – THE SPEAKER: He is on a point of procedure. MR ALIONI: Madam Speaker, I do not think we are proceeding well, minus the NRM Party, following –THE SPEAKER:  What is the procedural matter? MR ALIONI:  I do not think we are proceeding well. (Laughter)  The three Members must be subjected to primary elections to be nominated. Madam Speaker, are we proceeding well without the primary elections? 11342 DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENT COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, I will not allow myself to be dragged into party matters. I am not a member of the party. I am neutral; I serve all parties and the whole country. Let the Government Chief Whip respond to your issues. Mine is only to put the question. (Member rose_)  When you start heckling as if you are in – what is her constituency? (Laughter ) When you start heckling as if you are in Ik, Budaka and wherever. (Laughter)  - we are not bound by the resolutions of Kyankwanzi in this House; we are bound by the law.MR OBUA:  Madam Speaker, I beg to repeat and emphasise what I already stated on record. Pursuant to Rule 11 of the Rules of Procedure of the 11th Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, and in consultation with the top leadership of the National Resistance Movement, the three names nominated are the ones in instructions that I got to forward for consideration by this Parliament. I even beg to lay on the Table a formal letter that I wrote on behalf of the National Resistance Movement, communicating this decision to you, the Speaker of Parliament. I beg to lay. I have no other instructions, apart from those.THE SPEAKER:  Can I find out – did you get instructions for only three names?MR OBUA:  Madam Speaker, the instructions I got were primarily for the three, from the many that expressed interest.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the National Resistance Movement (NRM) is supposed to have three Backbench Commissioners. In the circumstances that only three names were sent, it means those are unopposed. (Applause)  I want you to listen to me, Hon. Odria. If the three names were presented – honourable members, I will not allow meetings within a meeting. In the circumstances that only three names were sent, it means those three are unopposed. I now put the question that the House do approve Hon. Esther Afoyochan, Hon. Solomon Silwany and Hon. Prossy Akampurira as backbench Commissioners.(Question put and agreed to.)THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Esther Afoyochan, Hon. Solomon Silwany and Hon. Prossy Akampurira are now the backbench Commissioners. (Applause)  Honourable members, I congratulate the four backbench Commissioners. (Applause)  Honourable members, you know, when we disagree, we disagree respectfully. What he has done is very good. Honourable members, there is a precedent set in this House, especially with the Independents. In the 10th Parliament, we had Independents who were sent to the Pan-African Parliament and they were asked to serve for two-and-a-half years. It is an agreement between the Dean of the Independents and the Independents that they serve for two-and-a-half years. At the Pan-African Parliament, where Hon. Eric Musana has been a representative of the Independents, his term of office ends in two-and-a-half years.  The remaining two-and-a-half years will be taken by Hon. Abdu Katuntu. He is going to be the representative to the Pan- African Parliament (PAP) for two-and-a-half years - (Applause) – and I put the question that the House do approve the nomination of Hon. Abdul Katuntu.(Question put and agreed to.)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, at the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) conference that was held in Ghana, Hon. Elijah Okupa was nominated as a board member of CPA. That makes us to renew Hon. Elijah Okupa’s membership as a representative to the CPA. (Applause)I put the question that the House do approve that as well.(Question put and agreed to.)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in furtherance of what we agreed on in this House regarding the issue of LCs I, II and the women’s council – you must have seen/read 11343THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 JANUARY 2023in social media, the statutory instruments that were being portrayed. I request the minister to lay those statutory instruments on the Table so that they become property of this House and for approval of this House. 2.27THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua):  Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table, General Notice No. 2189 of 2023 under the Local Government Act, Cap 243: Extension of term of office of Administrative Unit Councils (Local Council I and Local Council II), under Regulation 11A of the Local Government Councils Regulations, signed by Hon. Raphael Magyezi, the Minister of Local Government, and all the documents contained therein. I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, you recall that on 28 July 2023, the Government tabled a statutory instrument extending the tenure of local councils I, II, women’s councils and the women’s councils’ executive committee members for a period of 180 days. That was pursuant to Regulation 11A(d)  of the Local Government Councils Regulations and Regulation 2(3) of the Schedule of the National Women’s Council Act. The 180 days were due to expire on 5 January 2024, prompting the minister to issue this extension on the 29th of December to avoid being caught up by the deadline of 5th January. The documents have been laid on the Table. They are fully gazetted and are tabled here for the retrospective approval by this House.3.30MR MEDARD LUBEGA-SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso) : Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank my young brother, the Government Chief Whip. I need your guidance. First, Madam Speaker, how did we get here? Are we going to run the Government like this, where you have a structure of Government whose tenure is dictated by principal legislation and we extend by statutory instrument, more so retrospectively?Madam Speaker, you were here when we amended this law – THE SPEAKER: We are doing it retrospectively because we were not sitting; there was no House at that time. How we reached here will be answered by the Attorney-General.MR LUBEGA-SSEGGONA:  I appreciate – incidentally yes. I do not know whether he will be a lawyer acting with instructions. But the question I am raising is – we amended the law; the Government requested us to amend the law and risk relations in society by providing for lining behind candidates, thereby running away from the secret ballot principle. The reason advanced was that the country did not, at that particular time, have money to conduct the conventional elections, which we normally conduct. I am really wondering how we got there. Number two, I register apologies that I did not attend on that day – Parliament could even be tempted and co-opted into this illegality. Under no circumstances can a statutory instrument amend a principal legislation. The term of Local Councils (LCs)is fixed at five years. Did we have somebody sleeping on the job that we need to punish? Guide me, Madam Speaker. (Hon. Ssewungu rose_)THE SPEAKER:  First wait. Attorney-General?3.32THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka):  Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. Madam Speaker, happy new year! I wish you a very prosperous 2024.We ventilated this issue quite extensively at the time this law was amended. Like my learned friend said, he was not in the House. 11344 DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENT [Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka]Madam Speaker, the law does allow what we did here. The law allowed the amendment and the amendment was made in accordance with the Local Government Act, and the amendment is well within the law. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I put the question that the extension of the term of office of administrative units, that is, LCI and LCII under Regulation 11 of the Local Government Councils Regulations be approved by this House. (Question put and agreed to.)THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the term of office for the LCI is extended by 180 days effective today. 3.34THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to lay the Statutory Instrument No. 38 of the National Women’s Council (Amendment of Schedule) Instrument 2022, and Statutory Instrument No. 86, the National Women’s Council (Amendment of Schedule) Instrument, 2023, and the attendant gazette – the Uganda Gazette that gazetted the instrument. I beg to lay. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, you have heard what has been laid by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development on the office of the Women Councils and Women’s Committees under Section 2 (3) of the schedule of the National Women’s Council, Cap 318. I put the question to that.(Question put and agreed to.)THE SPEAKER:  The office is accordingly extended by 180 days. Honourable members, our Second Deputy Prime Minister, Hon. Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali, was awarded an honorary doctorate from the Islamic University in Uganda. We want to congratulate him as an older person. But on a sad note, yesterday, Hon. Moses Ali lost his wife and burial is today. May we observe a moment of silence in memory of the late.(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)THE SPEAKER:  Can I now invite the outgoing Leader of the Opposition in Parliament to say something -(Applause)-  and then hand over. I will also invite Hon. Joel Ssenyonyi to come and take up this seat. Clap for my LOP. What is wrong with you? (Applause)3.37MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (NUP, Nyendo-Mukungwe Division, Masaka City): Much obliged, Madam Speaker. First of all, a happy new year to everyone here.Secondly, allow me also to join you, in initially congratulating Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali for the recognition, but also pass on my commiserations to him and the family for the great loss. Thirdly, to congratulate you, Madam Speaker, upon successfully hosting the Conference of Speakers and Presiding Officers of the Commonwealth. I was particularly intrigued, but also had my curiosity aroused by your own opening statement to the conference especially when you emphasised the importance of the independence of Parliament and the doctrine of separation of powers in the way we execute this public duty. I hope everybody heard and that you will lead us in asserting our mandate as Parliament right from there onwards.That said, Madam Speaker, allow me to take this singular honour to initially thank the people of Nyendo-Mukungwe who brought me to the fore to be at the service of the country, and made my party recognise my capabilities and humble abilities to serve as a team leader over the last two and a half years. (Applause)  I remain eternally grateful for being allowed to offer myself for service to this great country. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR11345THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 JANUARY 2023Madam Speaker, in the same breath, I would like to thank you and the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker for the immense cooperation we have had as leaders in this House, to be able to steer the House this far with so many challenges, pitfalls, but with the gusto to carry on even when things sometimes looked tough. That is the essence of leadership. I thank you so much, and the Deputy Speaker, in absentia, for what we have been able to do as leaders in this House. Allow me to also immensely thank colleagues across from my side and across the aisle, for according me space and the opportunity to speak to them, sometimes in a tough way - and I know that sometimes I stepped on toes, but I never set out to be personal in any way. I have been at the service of the country, and if anybody felt personally offended by my approach, I take this occasion to apologise. But I always set out to do the best for the country. Madam Speaker, I felt at this moment - probably you allow me an extra minute - to inform the House that I did not just meet the Rt Hon. Speaker in Parliament; we met way back when she was still teaching at Makerere University Business School (MUBS). In fact, at one time, she was seconded by MUBS to teach in my college. So, you can easily say I once signed her pay cheque. So, I am not meeting her in the House as a Speaker but as somebody I had known – probably for more than 18 years. At one time, she was blue and we were in the trenches, and I know she has no apologies for formerly being blue, but along the way the sun shone upon her and she became yellowish.  (Laughter)  You see, that is the beauty of freedom of choice. And all of us, whatever we are and stand, must respect the choices people make. And when they make choices, those choices must be for the service of the common good. That should be well understood in no uncertain terms. I respect the Rt Hon. Speaker because she made her choice. And then see where she is. That was her choice, and I respect that choice. My only call to her is to use that choice to serve the common good. Secondly, with your indulgence, Madam Speaker, neither did I meet the Deputy Speaker here; he was my student of politics. He was a young man and I was a senior in the field. He and others used to get my tutorage when he was still blue, and we worked well. When he chose to cross the blue line and became yellow, that was his choice as an adult. So, we shared a lot then, and the two have my immense respect as leaders of the House.I am bringing this out, to appeal to every one of us to understand that we occupy this public space for a purpose. And that purpose must not be for the sake of it, but to change the trajectory of this one country we call home. And when we are Members of Parliament, then that space is even more distinct, because the call for duty is beyond the ordinary and we must be here and look at each other from both sides of the aisle as servants of the people and at all times, we must invite the common good to prevail. Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to the House to accord my successor the same support so that the common good is served. Hon. Joel Ssenyonyi, young as he is, is very reasonable, and deserves our support so that we continue the duty we have started, both as National Unity Platform (NUP) – a very young party – but also as the Opposition in our quest to see a better tomorrow for our children and for posterity, so that when history books are written, they will have space to say they met in the House, they were different, they opined differently, but they converged to the centre to put forward the common good. That should be etched in the history of our work. Madam Speaker, over the last few days, I have been reading a small book written by Haemin Sunim titled, ‘ The Things You Can See Only When You Slow Down.’  It is a good title. Sometimes the train is so fast that you can mistake a tree for an animal, and you need to stay on the middle peddle to see your direction and the trajectory of the nation. I want to invite every one of us to look for a copy and read it. Sometimes we need to slow down and understand better our surroundings. Maybe some of us are so fast, and therefore, we lose 11346 DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENT [Mr Mpuuga]sight of what matters; so, we need to really look out for our surroundings and understand better where we need to go. To my young brother, Joel, I will look for my copy of a book titled, ‘How to Hug a Porcupine’ . (Laughter)  It was edited by Dr Debbie Ellis. It is very good reading. You know, you will get in your position –  THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, he did not say “concubine”. (Laughter)  That is why you are laughing.MR MPUUGA:  I said a porcupine. P-O-R-C-U-P-I-N-E. Oh! Are people here allowed to hug concubines? I said “porcupine”. (Laughter)  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for correcting them because they were going to look for a title that does not exist. I was only passing on a humble message to my young brother, and now leader, on how to find space to hug porcupines because by their nature, they are difficult people, but are part of life. You cannot change a difficult person, but set boundaries. Communicate so effectively that you are understood; do not take it personal. Take care of your good self, focus on the positive, be patient, seek support; it is all over this place. Remember, you are not alone and where you get space, celebrate your successes.  (Applause)   Madam Speaker, I am indebted to the technical team that I have worked with, as the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament. It has technically backstopped us to work better. I hope my successor will take benefit of that too so that humanity is served well when in occupation of this humble but not eternal space. I thank you. For God and my country. (Applause)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. I thank the former Leader of the Opposition; you are now my Commissioner and staff. The Deputy Speaker and I do not regret being your friend and we will continue being so. I have even told my party not to choose for me who my friends should be. I will work with my friends; for instance, Hon. Sseggona is my daddy. Even if we differ politically, we will work together for the good of humanity. You did a good job as Leader of the Opposition. (Applause)  This country will forever be indebted to you. I would like to welcome my young – you said he is your young brother but he is my son. I welcome the Leader of the Opposition to come and give his maiden speech. 2.51THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Joel Ssenyonyi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Happy New Year to us all. I take this opportunity, firstly, to salute Hon. Mathias Mpuuga for his service and leadership. He led us under difficult circumstances but he managed to remain composed and led us through those difficult times. I salute you, Sir. (Applause)  I am lucky that we will continue working together. There is a lot that I will be connecting with and learning from you and the other colleagues, so as to be able to do this work.Rule 14(1) of our Rules of Procedure provides that the principle role of the Leader of the Opposition is to keep the Government in check. By God’s grace, I will execute that mandate effectively. (Applause)  My hope is that I will get support from this House, not just from my colleagues on this side but also across because keeping the Government in check is to the benefit of all of us here and the people that we represent. When we push back against things like corruption, ensuring service delivery and value for taxpayers’ money, it is not just for the good of the Opposition; it is for all of us. (Applause)  Regardless of the political party you belong to, when you go to a health centre and there is no doctor to attend to you or no medicine, you will suffer. If you are driving on bad roads, either because the money has been squandered or whatever the case might be, regardless of the political party you belong to, poor service delivery will affect COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR11347THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 JANUARY 2023you. Therefore, I hope that I get the support of the entire House in doing this work of keeping the Government in check.I believe we shall agree on a couple of things as far as keeping the Government in check is concerned. I appeal that where we disagree, and indeed we shall have numerous opportunities to disagree, I hope that we can do so respectfully. I also hope that there is space for us to disagree and for divergent views. Otherwise, I look forward to working with everybody to serve the people of Uganda. I thank you. (Applause)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, this morning, we received reports from the Auditor-General and they belong to the Leader of the Opposition. These reports will be laid on the Table for scrutiny. When you hear the Leader of the Opposition talking; an issue on value-for-money audit was also talked about. They are going to do scrutiny of the monies that we appropriate in this House and give feedback. Do not misunderstand his – Government? 2.55THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua):  Madam Speaker, on behalf of the National Resistance Movement (NRM) government, we wish to extend our appreciation to Hon. Mathias Mpuuga for exercising the roles and responsibilities of the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament for the last two and a half years with precision and excellence. (Applause)  Your tour of duty came to an end but we want to say, “thank you” for all the clinical moments that we had in our networking, meeting and execution of the different roles and responsibilities, much as we differed in terms of our political ideologies.On a very light note - because you confessed and it is on record how you came to know the Rt Hon. Speaker and the Deputy Speaker who now serve on this side - you were with them in blue, but now they are in yellow. There is an adage, “They came for the Catholic and I said, I am not one of them and when they came for me, there was no one left to speak for me.” Now that your two important comrades and friends in blue are where they are, we would not wish for you to be the last person to leave. We welcome you in advance to be with us. (Laughter)  That is a formal invitation.To the new Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, first of all, I congratulate you. One thing that is identical with this Parliament is that it is an extremely young Parliament. You can see the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, the outgoing and incoming Leaders of the Opposition, and the Government Chief Whip. I agree with you that the primary role of the Opposition that you will now lead for the last half of the 11th Parliament - January 2024 to May 2026, is to keep us in check. In fact, I normally say that the Opposition is like a mirror. As long as the checks and balances are for the common interest of the people of Uganda that we all represent, that is a welcome idea. We would wish to welcome that; it is your role. As you continue checking us, you make us deliver, and the people of Uganda will continue having faith in the National Resistance Movement. We thank you for that. However, also be mindful, as a student of physics, that we were taught Newton’s three laws of motion. I normally love Newton’s third law of motion, which says, “To every action, there is always an equal but opposite reaction.” I beg to welcome you, my brother. Welcome aboard. (Applause)  Let us see how we take the country in the next two and a half years. Thank you very much.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I can see Hon. Linos trying to rehearse. (Laughter)  This House is not going to be for such. I said it is for intellectual debates.11348 DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENTBILLSFIRST READINGTHE OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, pursuant to Rule 128(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development will lay the Occupational Safety and Health (Amendment) Bill, 2023 on the Table for the First Reading. There is a procedural matter. MR MPINDI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Sometime back, I raised an issue here concerning the grabbing of land for persons with disabilities. The information we have is that the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development is the one in charge of that. You directed that the minister should come with a detailed report concerning the land of persons with disabilities. The minister wrote asking for 14 days to prepare herself to submit the report but up to now, we do not have the report and the rumour is still going on that they are almost at the tail end of concluding the deal. Is it, therefore, procedurally right for the minister to continue presenting issues in Parliament without submitting the report concerning the land of persons with disabilities? THE SPEAKER:  The Bill is not in any way related to the issue of the land. She is only presenting the Bill for the First Reading. The issue of the land that is claimed to have been grabbed is supposed to be debated. The report was presented and we are still looking at it. We also would like to get a report from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to compare both reports. That is what is happening; our team is looking at both reports. Hon. Betty Amongi is aware that there are claims that she is grabbing land and she will have to respond. She has already given us a report. For now, let us receive the Bill. 3.03THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi):  I also want to put it on record that I am not grabbing the land. The land is safe and I have a directive. I have already submitted to Parliament a comprehensive report regarding the directive I got in respect to the land and the allocation.Now, I would like to lay on the Table, for the First Reading, the Occupational Safety and Health (Amendment) Bill, 2023. I beg to lay. The Certificate of Financial Implication is attached as per Section 76 of the Public Finance and Management Act, 2015, as amended, and fully submitted to the Office of the Clerk. I beg to lay. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Pursuant to Rule 129 of the Rules of Procedure, I send the Bill to the Sectoral Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. The rule of 45 days applies therein. MR ALLAN MAYANJA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Are we moving on procedurally well by continuing to receive Bills yet when we pass them, the President does not assent to them? For example, on 7 June 2023, we passed the Employment (Amendment) Bill, 2022 - Article 91(7) gives you powers, as the Presiding Officer, to pass it into law if the President fails to execute his mandate. Madam Speaker, are we moving procedurally well, or we can get clarification from the Office of the Attorney-General because we are just passing these Bills yet they are not being assented to by the President? Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Just for the record, for the time you have been in the 11th Parliament, we have passed over 75 Bills and they have been assented to, compared to the time we were in the previous Parliament. It does not mean that Bills are not assented to. The specific Bill you are talking about; the Employment Bill, was returned by the THE OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 202311349THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 JANUARY 2023President with several issues to be corrected and the researchers are still looking for those issues before we bring it back. It was returned in time. Next item, yes? [A Member rose_]  I know you are going to talk about legal aid. (Laughter)LAYING OF PAPERS4(I) THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE HEALTH SERVICE COMMISSION FOR THE PERIOD JULY 2022 TO JUNE 2023THE SPEAKER:  Pursuant to Article 170(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, I invite the Minister of Health to lay the Health Services Commission Report. 3.08THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua):  Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Ministry and the Minister of Health, I beg to lay, in conformity with the Rules of Procedure of this House, the Annual Report of the Health Service Commission for the period July 2022 to June 2023. I beg to lay. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. That is accordingly referred to the Committee on Health. 4(II) THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2023THE SPEAKER:  Pursuant to Article 163(3) and (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 and Rules 174, 181 and 182 of the Rules of Procedure, I now invite Honourable Commissioner Mpuuga to come and lay the reports on the Table. (Applause)3.09MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (NUP, Nyendo-Mukungwe Division, Masaka City): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the annual report of the Auditor-General for the financial year ending 30 June 2023, constituting consolidated audit findings for the entities so mentioned. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, Commissioner. Honourable members, pursuant to Rules 174(4), 181(3) and 182(4) of the Rules of Procedure, the report is accordingly referred to the Committee on Public Accounts (Central), Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) and Committee on Public Accounts (COSASE). They must report back within six months as per Article 163(5) of the Constitution.DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO STANDING COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 158(1) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURETHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you may recall that on 13 July 2021, the House constituted a standing committee, under Rule 158(1) of the Rules of Procedure, and accords a standing committee two and a half years’ tenure, which expired on 13 December 2023.To ensure the lawful continuity of these committees, the Whips are required to designate their Members as stipulated under Rule 15(10) of the Rules of Procedure.I will, therefore, invite the Government Chief Whip, the Chief Opposition Whip, the Uganda People’s Defence Forces Whip and the representative of the Independents to designate their Members in that order. The Government Chief Whip -COMMITTEE ON BUDGETTHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, we are now looking at the Budget Committee.3.12THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua): Madam Speaker, pursuant to the Rules of Procedure on designation of committees of Parliament, I wish to designate the following honourable members to the standing Committee on Budget:1. Hon. Patrick Opolot-Isiagi – Chairperson;2. Hon. Remigio Achia – Deputy Chairperson;11350 DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENT [Mr Obua]3. Hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro – Woman, Sheema;4. Hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara - Workers; 5. Hon. Moses Magogo – Budiope East;6. Hon. David Kabanda - Kasambya; 7. Hon. Amos Kankunda – Akankuna – Rwampara; 8. Hon. Samuel Okwir – Moroto County9. Hon. Sylvia Nayebale – Gomba; 10.  Hon. Josephat Tumwesigye - Bugangaizi; 11.  Hon. Herbert Ariko - Soroti East Division;12.  Hon. Agnes Atim - Amolator;13.  Hon. Donald Katalihwa – Mwenge County; 14.  Hon. Aggrey Bagiire – Bunya County South;15.  Hon. Samon Bwiire – Bulamogi;16.  Hon. Keefa Kiwanuka – Kiboga County East; 17.  Hon. Maximus Ochai  - West Budama North;18.  Hon. Solomon Silwany – Bukooli Central;19.  Hon. Derrick Orone - Gogonya;20.  Hon. Alex Ruhunda – Fort Portal Central;21.  Hon. Iddi Isabirye – Bunya South;22.  Hon. Mourine Osoru – Arua City;23.  Hon. Annet Katusiime – Bushenyi; 24.  Hon. Gyaviira Ssemwanga - Buyamba;25.  Hon. John Baptist Lokii - Mathenico;26.  Hon. Muhamad Ssentayi – Bukoto County West;27.  Hon. John Teira – Budiope County North; 28.  Hon. Faith Nakut – Napak;29.  Hon. Mwine Mpaka – Mbarara South Division; 30.  Hon. Brenda Namukuta - Kaliro; 31.  Hon. James Kaberuka – Kinizi County;32.  Hon. Lillian Aber - Amolator; 33.  Hon. Catheline Ndamira - Kabale;34.  Hon. Linos Ngompek – Kibanda North; 35.  Hon. Dicksons Kateshumbwa – Sheema Municipality;36.  Hon. Laura Kanushu - Workers;37.  Hon. Fred Opolot - Pingire; 38.  Hon. Bernard Odoi – Youth Eastern;39.  Hon. Juliet Bashiisha - Mitooma; 40.  Hon. Michael Bukenya - Bukuya;41.  Hon. Moses Aleper - Chekwii; and42.  Hon. Fadil Twalla - Tingey.Madam Speaker, I beg to designate.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. The Opposition -3.15THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe):  Madam  Speaker,  in accordance with Rule 160(2) of our Rules of Procedure, I hereby designate the following Members of the Opposition on the Budget Committee: 1. Hon. Nkunyingi Muwada - Kyadondo County East;2. Hon. John Baptist Nambeshe - Manjiya County; 3. Hon. Allan Ssewanyana - Makindye Division West;4. Hon. Patrick Oshabe - Kassanda County North;5. Hon. Mathias Mpuuga - Nyendo-Mukungwe Division;6. Hon. Abed Bwanika - Kimaanya-Kabonera Division;7. Hon. Evans Kanyike - Bukoto County East;8. Hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju - Kira Municipality;9. Hon. Isaias Ssasaga - Budadiri County East;10.  Hon. Yusuf Nsibambi - Mawokota County South;11.  Hon. Geofrey Ekanya - Tororo North County;12.  Hon. Anthony Akol - Kilak North County;13.  Hon. Dr Lulume Bayigga - Buikwe County South; and14.  Hon. Richard Sebamala - Bukoto County Central.THE SPEAKER:  Is that still in regard to the Committee on Budget?MR NAMBESHE:  Yes, these are Members of the six parties that represent the Opposition, Madam Speaker. I am concluding; I am now on the Uganda People’s Congress.15. Hon. Maxwell Akora - Maruzi County; and16. Hon. Santa Okot - Aruu North County.11351THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 JANUARY 2023I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I am going to go back with your lists and whoever has oversubscribed, I will handle it administratively. Independents - Hon. Katuntu, I am the Dean of Independents, but can you assist and read for me?3.18MR ABDU KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Thank  you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, please listen.MR KATUNTU:  The following have been designated to the Committee on Budget by the Speaker:1. Hon. Paul Omara – Otuke County;2. Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba - Ndorwa County East;3. Hon. Stephen Kangwagye Rwakanuma - Bukanga County;4. Hon. Dennis Nyangweso - Samia Bugwe Central County;5. Hon. Paska Menya – Pader;6. Hon. Martin Ojara Mapenduzi - Bardege-Layibi Division;7. Hon. Noah Musa - Koboko North County; and8. Hon. Karim Masaba - Industrial Division – Mbale City.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. UPDF - 3.19LT COL. JENNIFER ALANYO (UPDF Representative):  Thank you, Madam Speaker -THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, listen to the designations. I was just telling my brother from Manjiya that the Independents are even more than the Opposition Members yet they are designating only seven. Let us move on. LT COL. ALANYO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me, at this juncture, to thank God for ushering all of us successfully into the year 2024. May this year be full of good health and a lot of achievements. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. LT COL. ALANYO: I am here, on behalf of my Whip, to designate our colleagues. Pursuant to Rule 158(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I hereby designate Hon Gen. Wilson Mbadi - UPDF Representative, to the Standing Committee on Budget. I beg to move. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. That is the best designation.  Honourable members, I now put the question that the Standing Committee on Budget be constituted as proposed, subject to administrative amendments. (Question put and agreed to.)THE COMMITTEE ON APPOINTMENTS3.21THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua):  Madam Speaker, I beg to designate the following members to the Committee on Appointments -THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, before you go ahead, the members of the Committee on Appointments can have an additional committee. Therefore, the ones you are designating to the Appointments Committee should have another standing committee and that is also still with the business.MR OBUA:  Madam Speaker, I designate the following to the Committee on Appointments: 1. Hon. Irene Muloni – Bulambuli;2. Hon. Sarah Najjuma – Nakaseke;3. Hon. Anthony Okullo Jalon Aabuka – Lamwo;4. Hon. Betty Awor Engola – Apac; 5. Hon. Clare Mugumya – Isingiro;6. Hon. Florence Asiimwe – Masindi;7. Hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara - Workers’ Representative; 8. Hon. Ferigo Kambale - Kasese Municipality;9. Hon. David Kabanda - Kasambya County;11352 DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENT [Mr Obua]10. Hon. Robinah Rwakoojo - Gomba West County;11. Hon. James Kubeketerya - Bunya County East;12. Hon. Patrick Aeku - Soroti County;13. Hon. Fadil Twala - Tingey County;14. Hon. Alex Ndeezi - PWD Representative, Central;15. Hon. Bernard Odoi - Youth Representative – Eastern;16. Hon. Catherine Akumu Mavenjina - Older Persons’ Representative – Northern;17. Hon. Kibedi Nsegumire - Mityana County North; and 18. Hon. Derrick Orone - Gogonyo County.I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Whip -3.23THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe):  Madam Speaker, I beg to designate the following members on the Appointments Committee: 1. Hon. Aisha Nalule Kabanda – Butambala; 2. Hon. Joseph Ssewungu – Kalungu West County; 3. Hon. John Baptist Nambeshe - Manjiya County; 4. Hon. Betty Ocan Aol – Gulu City; 5. Hon. Okin P.P. Ojara – Chua West County; 6. Hon Santa Alum – Oyam;7. Hon. Peter Okot - Tochi County; and8. Hon. Asuman Basalirwa – Bugiri Municipality.I beg to designate, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Independents -3.24MR ABDU KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri):  Madam Speaker, I beg to read out the following names of colleagues who have been designated to the Appointments Committee:1. Hon. Margaret Lamwaka - Chua East County;2. Hon. Margaret Namubiru Rwabashaija - Workers’ Representative;3. Hon. John Musila - Bubulo East County; and4. Hon. Abdu Katuntu - Bugweri County.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. UPDF -3.25LT COL. JENNIFER ALANYO (UPDF Representative):  Madam Speaker, permit me to designate:1. Hon. Lieutenant Gen. Peter Elwelu - UPDF Representative, to the Appointments Committee. I beg to designate. THE SPEAKER: Thank you.MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, by default, the Leader of the Opposition is a Member of the Appointments Committee. It is rather unfortunate that I had to omit it.THE SPEAKER: And by default, I am the Chairperson.MR NAMBESHE: For sure –(Laughter) - so, allow me to read, for your announcement, Madam Speaker, the Hon. Joel Ssenyonyi and Hon. Mathias Mpuuga as members of this important committee that you chair.THE SPEAKER: Thank you.  (Hon. Obua rose_) Do you also have an amendment? Honourable members, I now put the question that the Standing Committee on Appointments be constituted as proposed – Do you have something -MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, Hon. Kibedi Nsegumire stands withdrawn from the Committee on Appointments as his name is in another committee. He was designated in error. THE SPEAKER: I put the question - but it has not been approved. Honourable members, Hon. Nsegumire stands withdrawn from the committee and the rest remain, plus what the Opposition, Independents and the Army have presented. 11353THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 JANUARY 2023I now put the question that the standing Committee on Appointments be constituted as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)COMMITTEE ON CLIMATE CHANGETHE SPEAKER: Hon. Aisha, I said the “ayes” have it. Thank you.3.27THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua):  Madam Speaker, I beg to designate the following Members to the standing Committee on Climate Change:1. Hon. Lawrence Biyika Songa – Chairperson; and 2. Hon. Jacinta Atuto - Deputy Chairperson. The following are the members:1. Hon. Enos Asiimwe - Kabula County; 2. Hon. Kabahenda Rwabuhoro – Kyegegwa;3. Hon. Anthony Esenu Alden - Kapelebyong County;4. Hon. James Mamawi - Adjumani East County;5. Hon. Judith Achan – Nwoya;6. Hon. Benjamin Kamukama - Ruhaama East County;7. Hon. Christine Nakwang Tubo – Kaabong;8. Hon. Nathan Nabeta-Igeme - Jinja South Division East;9. Hon. Grace Kesande B. – Rubirizi;10. Hon. John Bosco Ngoya – Bokora County; 11. Hon. Betty Engola Awor – Apac; 12. Hon. Patience Nkunda Kinshaba – Kanungu;13. Hon. Zumura Maneno – Obongi;14. Hon. John Faith Magolo - Bungokho County North;15. Hon. Molly Musiime Asiimwe – Rwampara;16. Hon. Joanne Aniku Okia – Madi-Okollo;17. Hon. Hellen Wandera Auma – Busia;18. Hon. Prossy Mbabazi Akampulira - Rubanda;19. Hon. Norah Bigirwa - Buliisa; 20. Hon. James Nsaba-Buturo – Bufumbira County East;21. Hon. Jenifer Muheesi Abaho - Woman Rep. Kazo;22. Hon. Flora Natumanya - Kikuube; and 23. Hon. Phiona Nyamutoro – Youth Rep. Female.Madam Speaker, I beg to designate.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. The Opposition -3.29THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe):  I designate the following Members to the Committee on Climate Change:1. Hon. Christine Kaaya – Kiboga;2. Hon. Charles Matovu - Busiro South;3. Hon. Jimmy Lwanga - Njeru Municipality;4. Hon. Ronald Balimwezo - Nakawa East;5. Hon. Hellen Nakimuli – Kalangala;6. Hon. Dr Nicholas Kamara - Kabale Municipality;7. Hon. Asinansi Nyakato - Hoima City;8. Hon. Richard Lumu – Mityana; and9. Hon. Santa Sandra Alum – Oyam.I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Independents - 3.30MR ABDU KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri):  Madam Speaker, the following have been designated to the Committee on Climate Change:1. Hon. Rita Atukwasa - Mbarara;2. Hon. Kenneth Kiiza Nyendwoha - Bujenje County;3. Hon. Moses Kamuntu - Rubanda County;4. Hon. Arthur Mboizi Waako - Budaka County;5. Hon. Juliet Suubi Kinyamatama - Rakai; and6. Hon. Idah Nantaba - Kayunga.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. UPDF -RESOLUTION TO BORROW11354 DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENT3.31LT COL JENNIFER ALANYO (UPDF, Representative):  Thank you. Madam Speaker, no member from UPDF has been designated to the Committee on Climate Change. I submit. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. I now put the question that the standing Committee on Climate Change be constituted as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY3.32THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua):  Madam Speaker, I beg to designate the following honourable members to the standing Committee on National Economy:1. Hon. Ikojo John Bosco – Chairperson; and2. Hon. Robert Migadde - Deputy Chairperson.The following are designated as members: 1. Hon. Joram Ruranga - Elderly;2. Hon. Simon Peter Opolot - Kanyum;3. Hon. Tonny Ayoo - Kwania;4. Hon. Joy Katali - Jinja;5. Hon. Jane Avur Pacuto - Pakwach;6. Hon. James Baba Boliba - Koboko;7. Hon. Geoffrey Eric Mutiwa – Bunyole West;8. Hon. Betty Chelain - Amudat;9. Hon. Nathan Byanyima – Bukanga North;10. Hon. Micah Lolem - Upe;11. Hon. Francis Kazini Twinomujuni - Buhaguzi;12. Hon. Sylvia Bahireira Tumwekwase - Kamwenge;13. Hon. Peggy Joy Waako – Elderly;14. Hon. Aisa Agaba – Bugangaizi East;15. Hon. Midius Natukunda - Rukungiri;16. Hon. Peterkhen Lochap - Bokora;17. Hon. Godfrey Were Odero – Samia Bugwe South;18. Hon. Jennifer Ayoo - Kalki;19. Hon. Jane Awich - Kaberamaido;20. Hon. Stella Atyang - Moroto;21. Hon. Hillary Lokwang – Napore West;22. Hon. Joseph Komol – Dodoth North;23. Hon. Alex Byarugaba - Isingiro;24. Hon. Naome Kibaaju – Sheema North;25. Hon. Moses Ogwal Goli – Dokolo North;26. Hon. Juliet Achayo Lodou – Ngora County;27. Hon. Simon Peter Wokorach – Aswa County;28. Hon. Bashir Lubega – Mubende Muncipality;29. Hon. Agnes Taaka - Bugiri;30. Hon. Sylvia Vicky Awas - Nabilatuk;31. Hon. Henry Maurice Kibalya – Bugabula South; 32. Hon. Oliver Katwesigye - Buhweju;33. Hon. Stephen Kangwagye - Bukanga; and34. Hon. Abdi Fadhil Kisos Chemaswet - Soi.I beg to designate. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. The Opposition - MS LOY KATALI:  Madam Speaker, my name is “Loy” not “Joy”. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  She is called Katali “Loy”, not “Joy”. Correction taken.3.34 THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe):  To the Committee on National Economy, Madam Speaker, I designate the following:1. Hon. Katabaazi Katongole - Kalungu East County;2. Hon. Hassan Kirumira - Katikamu County South, Luwero;3. Hon.  Derrick Nyeko - Makindye Division East, Kampala;4. Hon. Charles Tebandeke - Bbale County, Kayunga;5. Hon. Denis Lee Oguzu - Maracha County, Maracha;6. Hon. Stella Isodo Apolot - Ngora;7. Hon. Peter Okot - Tochi County, Omoro;8. Hon. John Paul Lukwago M. - Kyotera County, Kyotera; and11355THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 JANUARY 20239. Hon. James Jimmy Akena - Lira East Division. I beg to designate, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Independents -3.35MR ABDU KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The following have been designated to the Committee on National Economy:1. Hon. Allan Atugonza - Buliisa County; 2. Hon. Geofrey Macho - Busia Municipality;3. Hon. Nancy Acora - Lamwo;4. Hon. Muhammad Nsereko - Kampala Central Division;5. Hon. Jonathan Ebwalu - Soroti West Division;6. Hon. David Livingstone Zijjan - Butembe County;7. Hon. Emmanuel Omoding - Serere County; and 8. Hon. Roland Ndyomugyenyi -  Rukiga County.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. UPDF -3.36LT COL JENNIFER ALANYO (UPDF, Representative):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Permit me to designate the Hon. Lt Gen. James Mugira to the standing Committee on National Economy. I beg to designate.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question that the standing Committee on National Economy be constituted as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)COMMITTEE ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITIESTHE SPEAKER:  Government -3.36THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua):  Madam Speaker, I beg to designate the following to the standing Committee on Equal Opportunities:1. Hon. Judith Alyek – Chairperson; and 2. Hon. Dorcas Acen – Deputy Chairperson.The following are designated as members:1. Hon. Derrick Kabuura – Bushenyi-Ishaka;2. Hon. Ann Mary Tumwine - Ntoroko;3. Hon. Abdul Mutumba – Kiboga West County;4. Hon. Sauda Kauma - Iganga;5. Hon. Albert Lokoru – Tepeth County;6. Hon. Peter Teko Lokeris – Chekwii East County;7. Hon. James Olobo – Kioga North;8. Hon. John Lematia – Ayivu Division;9. Hon. Sharifah Taban Aate - Koboko;10. Hon. Margaret Ayebare - Mbarara;11. Hon. Henry Nkwasiibwe – Ruhaama County;12. Hon. John Kamara – Bufumbira North;13. Hon. Stephen Kasaija Kagwera – Burahya County;14. Hon. Cuthbert Abigaba Mirembe - Kibale;15. Hon. Peninah Busingye - Kuruhura;16. Hon. Edson Rugumayo – Youth Western;17. Hon. Joy Peggy Waako - Elderly;18. Hon. Yorke Alioni Odria – Aringa County;19. Hon. Paul Akamba – Busiki county; and20. Hon. Solomon Chelangat – T’oo. Madam Speaker, I beg to designate.THE SPEAKER : Thank you. The Opposition -3.38THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Madam Speaker, to the Committee on Equal Opportunities, I designate the following: 1. Aloysius Talton Mukasa - Rubaga Division South, Kampala;2. Hon. Juliet Nakabuye –11356 DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENTTHE SPEAKER: Whip, there is clarification that a Member wants to make. He says he has –MR LOLEM: Madam Speaker, I saw my brother, Hon. Peter Lokeris, who is a minister, being designated to a committee. I do not know whether – (Laughter)  MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, this could be a typing error; he stands withdrawn. I would like to thank the honourable member and the House for being keen.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We are removing Hon. Peter Lokeris Teko ; that was a typo. He is a minister, so he is not supposed to be in a committee. This makes me know that you are all attentive.MR NAMBESHE: I was designating members on the Committee on Equal Opportunities and the other Members are:1. Hon. Aloysius Talton Mukasa - Rubaga Division South;2. Hon. Juliet Nakabuye Kakande - Masaka City;3. Hon. Frank Kabuye - Kassanda County South;4. Hon. Christine Nandagire Ndiwalana - Bukomansimbi North County;5. Hon. Denes Sekabira - Katikamu County North;6. Hon. Joab Businge - Masindi Municipality; and7. Hon. David Isabirye Aga - Jinja North Division.I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Independents –3.40MR ABDU KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The following have been designated to the Committee on Equal Opportunities:1. Hon. Emmanuel Komol - Dodoth East County;2. Hon. Mary Annet Nakato - Buyende;3. Hon. Miriam Mukhaye - Mbale;4. Hon. William Museveni - Buwekula South County;5. Hon. Moses Walyomu Muwanika - Kagoma County; and6. Hon. Margaret Rwabushaija Namubiru - Workers Representative. THE SPEAKER: Yes, UPDF.3.41LT COL JENNIFER ALANYO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. No honourable member from the UPDF has been designated to the standing Committee on Equal Opportunities. I submit.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question that the standing Committee on Equal Opportunities be constituted, as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE3.42THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua): Madam Speaker, I wish to designate the following to the standing Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline:1. Hon. Abdu Katuntu – Chairperson;2. Hon. Rev. Fr Charles Onen – Deputy Chairperson;3. Hon. Yusuf Mutembuli - Bunyole East County;4. Hon. Catherine Akumu Mavenjina - Older Persons Representative;5. Hon. Margaret Aleper Achilla - Kotido;6. Hon. Dorothy Nyakato - Kitagwenda;7. Hon. Yoweri Ssebikaali - Ntwetwe County;8. Hon. Isaac Otimgiw - Padyere County;9. Hon. Robina Rwakoojo Gureme - Gomba West County;10. Hon. David Wakikona - Bushigai County;11. Hon. Peter Abrahams Lokii - Jie County;11357THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 JANUARY 202312. Hon. Ismail Muhammed Lomwar - Kotido Municipality;13. Hon. Yovan Adriko - Vurra County;14. Hon. Gabriel Okumu - Okoro County;15. Hon. Michael Kamugisha Timuzigu - Kajara County;16. Hon. Mohammed Kato - Katerera County;17. Hon. Paul Asaba Nsabimana - Kyaka North County;18. Hon. Alex Ndeezi - PWD Representative; and19. Hon. Nuru Joseph Byamukama - Kitagwenda County.I beg to designate.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Opposition –3.43THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): On the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, Madam Speaker, I designate the following members:1. Hon. Aisha Nalule Kabanda - Butambala;2. Hon. Wakayima Musoke - Nansana Municipality;3. Hon. Atkins Katusabe - Bukonzo County West; and4. Hon. Harold Tonny Muhindo - Bukonzo County East.I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Independents?3.44MR ABDU KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Madam Speaker, in addition to the two members, Hon. Charles Onen and Hon. Abdu Katuntu, designated as leaders, the following have been designated to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline:1. Hon. Margaret Makhoka - Namayingo District;2. Hon. Abdu Adidwa - Bukooli South County;3. Hon. John Musila - Bubulo East County; and 4. Hon. Prof. Elijah Mushemeza - Sheema County South.THE SPEAKER:  Yes, UPDF.3.45LT COL JENNIFER ALANYO (UPDF REPRESENTATIVE):  Madam Speaker, no honourable member of the UPDF has been designated to the standing Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. I submit.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question that the standing Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline be constituted, as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS AND RELATED MATTERS3.45THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua): Madam Speaker, I beg to designate the following to the standing Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters:1. Hon. Sarah Netalisire Kayagi – Chairperson;2. Hon. Stephen Kisa – Deputy Chairperson;3. Hon. George Bhoka Didi - Obongi County; 4. Hon. Melsa Avako Naima - Yumbe District;5. Dr Elisa Rutahigwa, Rukungiri Municipality;6. Hon. Jennifer Driwaru - Maracha District;7. Hon. Julius Acon Bua, Otuke East County;8. Hon. Christine Akello - Erute County North;9. Hon. Alex Byarugaba, Isingiro County South;10. Dr Charles Ayume - Koboko Municipality;11. Hon. Boaz Ninsiima Kasirabo - Kooki County;12. Hon. William Chemonges - Kween County; 13. Hon. Christine Apolot - Kumi;14. Hon. Jackson Lee Atima Buti, Arua Central Division;15. Hon. Pius Wakabi - Bugahya County;11358 DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENT16. Hon. Ephraim Biraro - Buhweju West County;17. Hon. Tarsis Rwaburindore - Ibanda Municipality;18. Hon. Josephine Bebona Babungi - Bundibugyo;19. Hon. Davis Kamukama - Bunyangabu County; and20. Hon. Faith Kunihira - Kyenjojo.Madam Speaker, I beg to designate.THE SPEAKER: Thank you.MR BYARUGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Colleagues, my name has been read under the Committee on National Economy and accordingly approved. I do not know how privileged I am to serve on two standing committees.THE SPEAKER: Can we remove you from this committee?MR BYARUGABA: Yes, Madam Speaker. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: The honourable whip will withdraw it.MR OBUA: Hon. Alex Byarugaba stands withdrawn from this committee and remains where he was earlier on approved.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. (Hon. Ebwalu rose_)  Yes, honourable?MR EBWALU: That was my observation, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Opposition –3.48THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): The Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Diseases, the following –(Interjection) - matters – (Laughter)  - thank you for the correction. Madam Speaker, the following are the Members I am designating to this committee:1.    Hon. Michael Kakembo - Entebbe Municipality;2.   Hon. Veronica Nanyondo - Bukomansimbi;3.   Hon. David Sserukenya - Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality;4.   Hon. Geoffrey Lutaaya - Kakuuto County;5.   Hon. Amere Oneka Lit - Kitgum Municipality;6.   Hon. Joan Acom - Soroti City;7.   Hon. Yusuf Nsibambi - Mawokota County South. I beg to designate. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, Independents - MR ONEKA LIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have heard my name being designated. I want to understand, when you talk about HIV/AIDS and other related matters, what are these other related matters? (Laughter) THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a procedural matter here. We are designating Members to different committees that are prescribed in our Rules of Procedure, not examining what the committee does or why it was given that name. Now, during orientation is when the chairpersons of the committees will tell you what the other related matters are. Yes, there is a procedural matter. Doctor, I will come to you. MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, our Rules of Procedure require that Whips of parties, and on our side the Chief Opposition Whip, consult with the Whips of the parties. It is assumed that at this point in time, the Whips of the parties have engaged their Members and explained to them where they are being designated and what exactly they are going to do. If a colleague has issues, procedurally, the colleague should address the issue to the Whip because the Whip of JEEMA was consulted on the membership and designation and he is in agreement with the designation. [Mr Obua]11359THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 JANUARY 2023THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, “landlord”, Hon. Kawalya. MR KAWALYA : Thank you, Madam Speaker. I heard Hon. Nsibambi was read in one of the committees before; I think it was Budget. We have also heard his name being read again. We need the Chief Opposition Whip to clarify on that matter. I beg to submit. MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, let me clarify to the honourable colleague that committees that are special - let me use that term, in our Rules of Procedure, which accord one latitude to go for more than one committee or membership of more than one committee are that of Appointments Committee, the Committee on Budget and the Business Committee. Thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: No, what he meant is that you have already designated Hon. Nsibambi to the Committee on Budget. Why are you designating him again to the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters? You double - no, it is only the Appointments Committee and the Business Committee that allow you to have more than one designation.MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, respectfully - THE SPEAKER: You are complaining about him being in the Committee on Budget - no, it is allowed. Yes, Independents. 3.53MR ABDUL KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Madam Speaker, the following have been designated to the Committee of HIV/AIDS and Related Matters: 1.   Hon Christopher Komakech - Aruu County;2.   Hon. Nathan Twesigye - Kashari South County;3.   Dr Patrick Isingoma - Mwesigwa, Hoima East Division;4.   Hon. Isaac Katenya - Bulambuli County;5.   Hon. Suzan Abeja - Woman Representative, Otuke;6.   Hon. Joan Namutaawe - Woman Representative, Masaka; and7.   Hon. Margaret Lamwaka - Chua East County.  THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Uganda People’s Defence Force (UPDF)? 3.54LT COL JENNIFER ALANYO (UPDF Representative):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. To the standing committee of Parliament, allow me to designate Lt Col Dr Jennifer Alanyo to the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters. I beg to designate. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I now put the question that the Standing Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters be constituted as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.) COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS3.55THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua): Madam Speaker , I beg to designate the following to the standing Committee on Human Rights: 1.   Hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo - West Budama North East County – Chairperson; and2.   Hon. Janepher Mbabazi - Woman Representative, Kagadi – Vice Chairperson - THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, kindly listen. Hon Fox Odoi-Oywelowo is the Chairperson of the Committee on Human Rights. He has been designated by his party. MR OBUA: The following are designated as members: 1.   Hon. Rose Obigah, Woman Representative, Terego;2.   Hon. Christine Sendawula, Woman Rep. Kyankwanzi;3.   Hon. Stephen Mugole - Kabweri County;11360 DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENT4.   Hon. Stephen Baka- Bukooli County North;5.   Hon. Rachael Magoola - Bugweri6.   Hon. Milton Muwuma - Kigulu County South;7.   Hon. Michael Wanyama- Namayingo South County;8.   Hon. Yona Kayogera - Busiki North County;9.   Hon. Godfrey Wakooli - Butiru County;10. Hon. Paul Chelimo - Kongasis County;11. Dr Abraham Isamat - Kapir County;12. Hon. David Lagen - Agago County;13. Hon. Ben Baatom - Dodoth West County;14. Hon. Ruth Lematia - Marach East County15. Hon. Agnes Acibu - Nebi;16. Hon. Helen Kahunde - Kiryandongo;17. Hon. Gaffa Mbwatekamwa - Igara County West; and18. Hon. Caroline Kamusiime - RukigaMadam Speaker, I beg to designate. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, Opposition. 3.57THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe):  Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Human Rights, I designate the following colleagues: 1.   Hon. Shamim Malende- Woman Representative, Kampala;2.   Hon. Francis Zaake - Mityana Municipality;3.   Hon. Muhammad Ssegirinya - Kawempe Division North;4.   Hon. Flavia Nabagabe - Woman Rep. Kassanda; and5.   Hon. Allan Mayanja - Nakaseke Central County;6.   Hon. Anna Adeke - Soroti;7.  Hon. Tom Ekudo - Geri County;8.  Hon Geofrey Okello - Nwoya East County, Nwoya;9.  Hon. Jonathan Odur - Erute South, Lira; and10.  Hon. Eunice Atuko Apio - Oyam North. I beg to designate, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Yes, Independents.3.59MR ABDU KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri):  Madam Speaker, the following have been –THE SPEAKER:  Is there any problem? MR ALLAN MAYANJA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. They have read my name under the Committee on Human Rights - THE SPEAKER:  On which committee? MR ALLAN MAYANJA:  The Committee on Human Rights yet I was – (Laughter)THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I know that Hon. Allan Mayanja is a vice-chairperson of a committee. MR NAMBESHE:  Madam Speaker, I come to withdraw his name from the Committee on Human Rights because he is going to deputise the chairperson of the committee he has just mentioned. THE SPEAKER:  He is a very big man. Why do you –MR NAMBESHE:  I beg to withdraw his name. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Yes, Independents?MR KATUNTU:  Madam Speaker, I beg to present the names of those who have been designated to the Committee on Human Rights: 1. Hon. Florence Wamala Nambozo - Sironko;2. Hon. Joseph Andrew Kolou - Toroma County; 3. Hon. Vincent Shedrick Obong - Lira West Division; 4. Hon. Rauben Arinaitwe - Isingro West County; and5. Hon. Polycarp Ogwari - Agule County.[Mr Obua]11361THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 JANUARY 2023THE SPEAKER:  UPDF? 4.00LT COL JENNIFER ALANYO (UPDF Representative):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. To the Standing Committee on Human Rights, I beg to designate Hon. Brig. Gen. Charity Bainababo. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question that the Standing Committee on Human Rights be constituted as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES AND IMPLEMENTATIONTHE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter.MR SSEWUNGU:  I am rising on a procedural matter related to the Committee on Human Rights. Fortunately, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is here. This House has raised a lot of complaints about this committee being chaired by the Opposition because it is an accountability committee. Who causes atrocities to its citizens? We have been out of this House for almost a month because of missing persons. I do not know whether the Human Rights Commission, the Leader of the Opposition plus the Government will find time to sit and sort out this matter, other than going for litigation. We said - even in the previous Parliament - that the Committee on Human Rights should be chaired by the Opposition. That is why when they raised Hon. Fox Odoi’s name, Members complained. Whose rights are being violated? Who violates the rights of the people? I wish the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs would come out to express the same view. THE SPEAKER: Honourable, is there any problem with litigation? I thought that is why courts are in existence. MR SSEWUNGU:  Madam Speaker, the courts are there but in good spirit, with your guidance and leadership, we must exhaust and clear this issue of the Committee on Human Rights. Once we fail, that will be the option. 4.02MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro):  Madam Speaker, with all due respect to my colleague, I have travelled the length and width of this country, our neighbours and the Commonwealth. I think it is not necessarily a right for these practices that we have here, where some of these committees are being chaired by the Opposition. Let me tell you this: at one time, South Africa was under the British and some of these PAC - accountability committees are chaired by Members from the government side. It does not mean that we do not care about human rights or about accountability. We do care but we want to coexist. I want everybody to understand this. We can change this because it is not cast in stone. Thank you very much. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, we have the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs here – (A Member rose_)  - what are you seeking clarification on? Honourable Members, I am here to do designation. Bring the issues of human rights after you have sat in a committee and had a report; all those should come later. Let us first have Members designated to the committee. 4.04THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Norbert Mao):  Madam Speaker, the honourable Member for Kalungu West is also a lawyer –THE SPEAKER:  And formerly a Member of the Democratic Party. MR MAO:  And a Member of the Democratic Party at heart. ( Laughter) Madam Speaker, the statement by the honourable Member 11362 DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENTfor Kalungu West has been a long-standing position of the Democratic Party and these are the reasons: Despite what happens in other jurisdictions, in Uganda, there has been an unwritten rule that accountability committees should be chaired by the Opposition. Now, if that is the unwritten rule, how can that be enshrined in the rules? I advise that the proper way is to amend the parliamentary rules. That is the way to achieve it; whether in this term of Parliament or the future. However, many of the best things are really negotiated. Therefore, I assure you, honourable Member for Kalungu West, that I am with you on this. I do believe that it is something that we have to negotiate with the ruling party on for purposes of consistency to see to it that accountability committees are chaired by the Opposition. The ball is in your court as the House. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I am happy that you have talked about the amendment of the Rules of Procedure. Based on the submission of the Minister of Constitutional Affairs, I ask the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, now that it is constituted, to do a comprehensive clean-up of the rules and report within two months. Where I see a mistake - for instance, when you look at Rule 158(2) on standing committees, it is wrong to say that if one is on the Committee on Budget, they cannot be in another committee. Therefore, anybody already designated on the Committee on Budget should not have another committee. First of all, we have ex-officios in the Budget Committee. Then you will have a bloated committee. In your review, you should also define the number of Members in the committees because we cannot allow this business of people bringing whichever number they want. That does not stop me from going to do the administrative reviews.MR MAO:  Madam Speaker, I thank you for that directive and I support it fully. I wish you could also open up the process to the citizens of Uganda who own this House because the sentiments out there can also help in cross-pollination. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  There is clarification – do you want us to open up our rules to the public on how we conduct the House on a day-to-day basis? No, first bring for us the Constitutional Review Commission. (Applause)MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the Minister -THE SPEAKER:  I am still on the Floor. Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, we want the Constitutional Review Commission set up. The issues of day-to-day running of the House - there is clarification from Hon. Asuman Basalirwa.MR BASALIRWA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issue of considering the rules, this is not the first time you are guiding that these rules be considered. I recall we had an interpretation issue that I raised here and the late Speaker, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah advised the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline - and even set timelines. Incidentally, that has not happened. Now that there is a new window, I only hope and pray that this time around, the timetable will be set. Madam Speaker, I humbly ask that colleagues who have issues with some provisions in these rules be allowed to present them before the committee, either through written memoranda or by physically appearing before the committee. Also, a formal programme be put out for us to appear because, as you have rightly said, there are a couple of issues in these rules –THE SPEAKER:  It should be consultative within Parliament.[Mr Mao]11363THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 JANUARY 2023MR BASALIRWA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  Let me hear from the chairperson.4.11MR ABDU KATUNTU  (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity –THE SPEAKER:  Before I hear from you, I put the question that the Standing Committee on Human Rights be constituted and proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo is the chairperson. (Laughter)MR KATUNTU:  Madam Speaker, I think the record does not bail out Hon. Asuman Basalirwa. All the specific matters that were referred to us, we executed and even brought the report. Parts of it were rejected by this House, and Hon. Basalirwa was in the House. One of the issues that the committee had proposed was to allow us to do exactly what you are telling us to do. The Hon. Prof. Mushemeza objected to it and the House carried that objection. They said, “If you want to review any part of those rules, please come here.” Now, you are telling us to go and do exactly what we had proposed, which you rejected. It is better you always look through the record. Having said that, Madam Speaker, we shall do exactly as the House pleases.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Katuntu, you have been directed to do a comprehensive review of the Rules of Procedure. The only two rules that you should not review are rule 7 and 8. (Laughter)COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCE AND IMPLEMENTATION4.13THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP  (Mr Hamson Obua):  Madam Speaker, I beg to designate the following honourable members to the Standing Committee on Government Assurance and Implementation as members:1. Hon. Ibrahim Kyoto Mululi - Budiope West County;2. Hon. Enock Nyongore - Nakaseke North County;3. Hon. Noah Mutebi Wanzala - Nakasongola County;4. Hon. Pauline Kemirembe Kyaka – Lyantonde;5. Hon. Patrick Bingi Nyanzi - Butemba County;6. Hon. Richard Oseku Oriebo - Kibale County;7. Hon. Sam Otukol - Pallisa County;8. Hon. Emmanuel Otaala Otiam - West Budama County South; 9. Hon. Robert Wandwasi - Bungokho County South;10. Hon. Apollo Masika - Namisindwa County;11. Hon. Emma Rose Cherukut – Kween County;12. Hon. Cosmas Elotu - Dakabela County;13. Hon. Richard Ricky Anywar - Agago West County;14. Hon. Tom Alero Alero - West Moyo County;15. Hon. Sulaiman Hashim - Nebbi Municipality;16. Hon. Noeline Kisembo Basemera – Kibaale;17. Hon. Harriet Businge – Hoima;18. Hon. Clare Mugumya – Isingiro;19. Hon. Eddie Kwizera Wa Gahungu - Bukimbiri County; and 20. Hon. Bright Tom Amooti - Kyaka Central County. I beg to designate.4.14THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP  (Mr John-Baptist Nambeshe):  Madam Speaker, the Committee on Government Assurance and 11364 DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENTImplementation is one of those accountability committees that are chaired by Members from the Opposition. The Hon. Dr Abed Bwanika of Kimaanya–Kabonera Division has been designated as the Chairperson. He will be ably deputised by Hon. Joyce Bagala Ntwatwa of Mityana District. Others designated are the following:1. Hon. Betty Nambooze Bakireke, Mukono Municipality, although she has requested to be shifted, which may come later. I may withdraw her –THE SPEAKER:  Read the list as it is first.MR NAMBESHE: 2. Hon. Joseph Ssewungu Gonzaga - Kalungu West County;3. Hon. Stephen Sserubula - Lugazi Municipality;4. Hon. Robert Ssekitoleeko - Bamunanika County;5. Hon. Paul Nsubuga - Busiro County North;6. Hon. Brenda Nabukenya – Luwero;7. Hon. Hanifa Nabukeera Hussein – Mukono;8. Hon. Peter Julius Emigu - Ochero County;9. Hon. Florence Kabugho – Kasese; and10. Hon. Nelson Okello - Maruzi North County.I beg to designate.4.16MR ABDU KATUNTU  (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri):  Madam Speaker, I present the following names of honourable members who have been designated to the Committee on Government Assurance and Implementation:1. Hon. Sylvia Bahireira Tumwekwase – Kamwenge;2. Hon. Julius Mukasa Opondo - Bujumba County; 3. Hon. Agnes Ameede – Butebo;4. Hon. Connie Nakayenze Galiwango - Mbale City;5. Hon. Moses Acrobat Kiiza – Bughendera; and6. Hon. Godfrey Were Odero; Samia-Bugwe County South. THE SPEAKER:  Yes, UPDF.4.17LT COL JENNIFER ALANYO (UPDF Representative):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. To the standing Committee on Government Assurance and Implementation, no honourable Member of UPDF was designated. I submit. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I now put the question that the standing Committee on Government Assurance and Implementation be constituted as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT)4.18THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Denis Obua):  Madam Speaker, I beg to designate the following Members to the standing Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government): 1. Hon. Isaac Modoi - Lutseshe County;2. Hon.  Michael Mawanda - Igara County East;3. Hon. John Twesigye - Bunyaruguru County;4. Hon. Xavier Kyooma - Ibanda County North; 5. Hon. Fredrick Angura - Tororo South County;6. Hon. Florence Nebanda - Butaleja; 7. Hon. Pamela Kamugo - Budaka; 8. Hon. Joseph Ruyonga - Hoima West Division;9. Hon. Isaac Ssejjoba - Bukoto County Mid-West;10. Hon. Jesca Ababiku - Adjumani;11. Hon. Wamakuyu Mudimi - Elgon County; 12. Hon. Sharon Balmoyi - Gulu;13. Hon. Jane Awich - Kaberamaido;14. Hon. Catherine Lamwaka - Omoro;[Mr Nambeshe]11365THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 JANUARY 202315. Hon. Felix Okot-Ogong - Dokolo South County;16. Hon. Ronald Afidra - Lower Madi County; 17. Hon. Rukaari Mwesigwa - Mbarara North Division;18. Hon. Cissy Namujju - Lwengo;19. Hon. David Muhumuza - Mwenge County North; 20. Hon. Amos Okot - Agago North County;21. Hon. Hope Nakazibwe - Mubende;22. Hon. Basil Bataringaya - Kashari North County;23. Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo - Lwemiyaga County;24. Hon. Muhamad Nsegumire - Mityana County North;25. Hon. Sarah Opendi - Tororo;26. Hon. Herbert Kinobere - Kibuku County;27. Hon. Richard Wanda - Bungokho Central County; and 28. Hon. Philiphs Lokwang-Ilukol - Napore West County. Madam Speaker, I beg to designate.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Opposition.4.20THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): The designation of Members on the Public Accounts Committee (Central Government) is as follows: 1. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi – Chairperson; 2. Hon. Gorreth Namugga – Deputy Chairperson;3. Hon. Susan Mugabi - Buvuma;4. Hon. Godfrey Saazi - Gomba East County;5. Hon. David Kalwanga - Busujju County; 6. Hon. Manjeri Kyebakutika - Jinja City;7. Hon. Teddy Nambooze - Mpigi;8. Hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi - Budadiri County West;9. Hon. Moses Kabuusu - Kyamuswa County;10. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal - Dokolo;11. Hon. Bob Okae - Kwania North County;12. Hon. Asuman Basalirwa - Bugiri Municipality; and13. Hon. Joseph Ssewungu - Kalungu West County. I beg to designate - yes, he is on appointments, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Ssewungu is on the Committee on Government Assurance and Implementation - you read it. Please correct it from here.MR NAMBESHE:  Madam Speaker, assuming he was mentioned wrongly -THE SPEAKER:  Do not assume.MR NAMBESHE:  Hon. Ssewungu is hereby withdrawn from the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. The Independents on Public Accounts Committee (Central Government)?4.22 MR ABDU KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri):  Madam Speaker, I beg to present names of honourable colleagues who have been designated to the Public Accounts Committee (Central Government).1. Hon. Everlyn Chemutai - Bukwo;2. Hon. Silas Aogon - Kumi Municipality;3. Hon. Peter Ocen - Kole South County; 4. Hon. Baroda Kayanga - Kamuli Municipality;5. Hon. Susan Amero - Amuria; and6. Hon. Julius Tusiime - Rwampara East County. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. 4.23MR JONATHAN EBWALU (Independent, Soroti West Division, Soroti):  Madam Speaker, I think the Government Chief Whip has some work to go and look through his list. Hon. Jane Awich, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido was designated to the Committee on Climate Change. The same lady has been designated to PAC. THE SPEAKER:  You are really very attentive. 11366 DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENTMR EBWALU: Oh, yes! (Laughter)MR OBUA:  Madam Speaker, much as he is attentive, he is wrong because she is saying that he was earlier on designated to the Committee on Climate Change. That is not correct. For the record, she was designated to the Committee on National Economy and she is No.22 on that list. I beg to, therefore, withdraw her name from the Public Accounts Committee where she is No.13.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you.MR EBWALU:  Madam Speaker, I delivered my point. It was the correct position. Thank you. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, Hon. Ebwalu. 4.24LT COL JENNIFER ALANYO (UPDF Representative):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. To the standing Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government), I beg to designate the Hon. Maj. Gen. Sam Kavuma. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I now put the question that the standing Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) be constituted as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES)4.26THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Denis Obua):  Madam Speaker, I beg to designate the following Members to the Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises): 1. Hon. Jane Bainomugisha - Ibanda; 2. Hon. Richard Gafabusa - Bwamba County;3. Hon. Charles Bakabulindi - Workers’ Representative;4. Hon. Josyline Kamateneti - Ntungamo; 5. Hon. Gerald Nangoli - Elgon North County;6. Hon. Martin Muzaale - Buzaaya County;7. Hon. Linda Irene - Fort Portal City; 8. Hon. Dononzio Kahonda - Ruhinda South County;9. Hon. Ferigo Kambale - Kasese Municipality; 10. Hon. Pascal Mbabazi - Buwekula County;11. Hon. Mariam Naigaga - Namutumba District; 12. Hon. Alex Brandon - Kagoma North County; 13. Hon. Alfred Edakasi - Kaberamaido County;14. Hon. Benard Sekyanzi - Budyebo County;15. Hon. Esther Afoyochan - Zombo District;16. Hon. David Karubanga - Kigorobya County;17. Hon. Dan Atwijukire - Kazo County;18. Hon. Mutono Lodoi - Butebo County; 19. Hon. Thembo Mujungu - Busongora County South;20. Hon. Robert Kasolo - Iki-Iki County; 21. Hon. Peter Okeyoh - Bukooli Island County; and22. Hon. Herbert Tayebwa -Kashongi County. Madam Speaker, I beg to designate. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Opposition.4.27THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Madam Speaker, Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises) will be chaired by Hon. Medard Lubega-Sseggona. He will deputised by the Allan Mayanja, Nakaseke Central County. The other honourable members are:1. Hon. Hillary Kiyaga - Mawokota County North;2. Hon. Bashir Kazibwe Mbaziira - Kawempe Division;3. Hon. Abdallah Kiwanuka - Mukono County North;4. Hon. Geoffrey Kayemba Ssolo - Bukomansimbi South County;11367THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 JANUARY 20235. Dr Timothy Batuwa - Jinja South Division, West;6. Hon. Lucy Akello - Amuru;7. Hon. Moses Okot - Kioga County;8. Hon. Francis Mwijukye - Buhweju County; 9. Hon. Fred Kayondo - Mukono County South; and10. Hon. Fortunate Nantongo Rose - Kyotera. I beg to designate.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Do you have something to say, Hon. Kayondo.MR KAYONDO: Yes. It is a correction. It is Kayondo Fred, Mukono County South, not North .THE SPEAKER: Okay, it has been corrected.MR KAYONDO: Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Can I have the Independents?4.29MR ABDU KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to present names of colleagues who have been designated to the Committee on Commissions Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises. They are as follows:1. Hon. Elijah Okupa - Kasilo County – Chairperson;2. Hon. Mpindi Bumali - PWD – Deputy Chairperson;3. Hon. Patrick Nsanja - Ntenjeru County South;4. Hon. Peter Mugema - Iganga Municipality;5. Hon. Naome Kabasharira - Rushenyi County; 6. Hon. Aled Ronald Akugizibwe - Buruli County; and7. Dr Samuel Opio Acuti - Kole County North.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, UPDF.4.29LT COL JENNIFER ALANYO (UPDF Representative):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. To the Standing Committee on Public Accounts Commissions Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE), I hereby designate the Hon. Col Dr Victor Nekesa, UPDF I beg to designate.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question that the standing committee on Commissions Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) be constituted as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (LOCAL GOVERNMENT)THE SPEAKER:  The Committee,  on Public Accounts (Local Governments).4.30THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, I beg to designate the following honourable members to the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Governments) as members:1. Hon. Mary Begumisa - Ssembabule;2. Hon. Jacob Karubanga Ateenyi - Kibanda South County;3. Hon Lilian Paparu Obiale - Arua; 4. Hon. Agnes Abwoli - Workers;5. Hon. Jovanice Twinobusingye - Kiruhura;6. Hon. Acan Joyce Okeny - PWD;7. Hon. Kevin Oginga Kaala - Palisa;8. Hon. David Lagen - Agago County;9. Hon. Joel Leku - Terego West County;10. Hon. Sowedi Kitanywa - Busongora County North;11. Hon. Godfrey Onzima - Aringa North County;12. Hon. Phyllis Chemutai - Kapchorwa;13. Hon. Okullu Aabuka Jalon - Lamwo County;14. Hon. Etuka Isaac Joakino - Upper Madi County;15. Dr Emely Kugonza - Buyanja East County; 11368 DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENT16. Apollo Yeri Ofwono - Tororo Municipality; 17. Hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimre - Buyaga West; 18. Hon. Agnes Kirabo - Youth; and19. Hon. Norman Jimbricky Ochero - Labwor County. I beg to designate.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Ebwalu, are you hearing?MR EBWALU: Madam Speaker, it is true that a Member of Parliament called Lagen is mentioned twice. He was mentioned in an earlier committee, but I did not note it.  MR WOKORACH: It was not on HIV; it was on Human Rights.MR EBWALU:  Whether it was on whose rights, he was mentioned twice –(Laughter)MR OBUA: For the record, Hon. Ebwalu will always be correct in principle but wrong in the details. I beg to withdraw the name of Hon. Lagen. He had earlier on been designated to the Committee on Human Rights THE SPEAKER:  Hon. David Lagen is duly withdrawn from the Public Accounts Committee, Local Government.MR EBWALU:  Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. This is a House of records. Next time, Hon. Government Chief Whip, go through your list one by one so that you do not have these things again in Parliament.THE SPEAKER: To error is human and the same error that he has made, can be made by you.MR OBUA: I wish one day you had the opportunity to manage not a nuclear family but an extended family like the National Resistance Movement; you would know. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER:  Yes; you are satisfied because you have a nuclear family. Welcome to the family. Yes, Opposition.4.34THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Madam Speaker. Public Accounts Committee, Local Government will be chaired by Hon. Gilbert Olanya, Kilak South.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Gilbert Olanya is there; congratulations.MR NAMBESHE:  He will be deputised by Hon. Kawalya Abubaker, Rubaga Division North. The other Members are:1. Hon. Betty Naluyima Ethel, Wakiso;2.  Dr Twaha Kagabo, Bukoto - THE SPEAKER:  Where is Dr Twaha? First clap for Dr Twaha –(Applause)MR NAMBESHE: 3. Hon. Fred Ssimbwa - Nakifuma County;4. Hon. Emmanuel Ongiertho - Jonam County;5. Hon. Naboth Namanya - Rubabo County;6. Hon. Paulson Luttamaguzi Semakula - Nakaseke South County; and7. Hon. Patrick Ochan - Apac Municipality. I beg to designate.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, so much. Can we have the Independents?4.36MR ABDU KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri):  Madam Speaker, I present the names of colleagues who have been designated to the committee on Public Accounts Committee Local Government. 1. Hon. Shartsi Kuteesa Nayebare - Mawogoola County North;2. Hon. Victorious Zawedde - Nakasongola;3. Hon. Stephen Aseera - Buhaguzi County East;4. Hon. Dr Abdulhu Byakatonda - Workers;5. Hon. Ibanda Rwemulikya - Ntoroko County;6. Hon. Linda Auma Agnes - Lira; and7. Hon. Eric Musana - Buyaga County East.[Mr Obua]11369THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 JANUARY 2023THE SPEAKER: Yes, UPDF?4.38LT COL ALANYO JENNIFER (UPDF Representative):  Madam Speaker, to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government), I hereby designate the Hon. Maj. Gen. Henry Masiko. I beg to designate. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question that the Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) be constituted as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.) COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOV ATION4.38THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua):  Madam Speaker, I beg to designate the following to the Standing Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation:Hon. Eng. Alex Niyonsaba – Chairperson; and  Hon. Florence Asiimwe Akiiki – Deputy Chairperson. The members are:1.  Hon. Luke Kyobe – Luuka Ciounty North;2.  Hon. Seth Wambede – Mbale North Division;3.  Hon. Esther Mbayo - Luuka;4.  Hon. Tony Awany – Nwoya County;5.  Hon. Ojok Andrew Olanya – Omoro County;6.  Hon. James Kubeketerya – Bunya County East;7.  Hon. Bosco Okiror – Usuk County;8.  Hon. Adome Francis Lorika – Moroto Municipality;9.  Hon. Okot Boniface Henry – Youth, Northern;10.  Hon. Werikhe Peter Christopher – Bubulo County West;11.  Hon. Joel Leku – Terego County West;12.  Hon. Okori-Moe Janet – Abim;13.  Hon. Ezama Siraji – Aringa County;14.  Hon. Feta Geoffrey – Ayivu Div. East;15.  Hon. Irene Muloni - Bulambuli;16.  Hon. Yona Musinguzi – Ntungamo Municipality; and17.  Hon. Ninkusiima John Paul – Ibanda County South.For the record, Hon. Kubeketerya and Hon. Irene Muloni were earlier on read as members on the Appointments Committee, which is allowed under the rules of this House. I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you . (Mr Ebwalu rose_)  Do you have something? MR EBWALU:  Madam Speaker, Hon. Kubeketerya was mentioned on the list the Committee on Budget. THE SPEAKER:  Appointments Committee.MS OBIGAH:   Madam Speaker, for the record, Hon. Joel Leku is already designated but his name has appeared again. You could check under local government. MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, Hon. Leku stands withdrawn from the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation and remains under the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government). This is one of the challenges of running a big family like the National Resistance Movement. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. The Member is stands duly withdrawn.4.42THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): To the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation, the following members have been designated:1. Hon. Oshabe Patrick Nsamba – Kassanda County North;2. Hon. Aol Betty Ocan – Gulu Municipality;3. Hon. Namugga Gorreth – Mawogola County South; and4. Hon. Auma Kenny of UPC from Kwania District. I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.11370 DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENTTHE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Yes, Independents.4.43MR ABDU KATUNTU (Bugweri County, Bugweri): Madam Speaker, I do not have the list of the Independents. I think they have not been designated.THE SPEAKER:  We shall designate them later.MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, Hon. Namugga has been read as the Vice-Chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) but has also been assigned to this committee. That needs to be corrected. Thank you.MR NAMBESHE: I think that is very true. She has been a very active member of that committee and we were oblivious of the position that she had ascended to. So, I beg to withdraw her name from the list for the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Yes, UPDF?4.44LT COL JENNIFER ALANYO (UPDF Representative) : Thank you, Madam Speaker. To the Standing Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation, no honourable member of the UPDF has been proposed for designation. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that the Standing Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation be constituted as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)COMMITTEE ON BUSINESSTHE SPEAKER:  To the Business Committee, it is only the Independents.4.44MR ABDU KATUNTU (Bugweri County, Bugweri):  Madam Speaker, I present to you names of colleagues who have been designated to the Business Committee: 1. Hon. Acora Nancy, District Woman Representative, Lamwo; and 2. Hon. Prof. Elijah Dickens Mushemeza, Sheema County South. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. The Business Committee is represented by the whips of all the different parties, chairpersons of all committees and two Independents. The two Independents are the ones we have read. I now put the question that the Business Committee be constituted as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, in the public gallery, we have Muslim religious leaders from Mbale City. They are represented by Hon. Karim Masaba, Hon. Seth Wambede and Hon. Connie Nakayenze Galiwango. You are most welcome. (Applause) Thank you for coming to Parliament of Uganda. Hon. Masaba, where are you? Please, stand up. (Laughter)  That is your Member of Parliament. He is a very good young man. So, you need to bring him back. Have you heard? (Applause)Honourable members, this has brought us to the end of the designation exercise. I request you, Members, to work diligently, efficiently and effectively in your committees. I will continue tracking your performance in your committees. Some of you have missed the committees you wanted because of your performance, or absence; you were never there. You were there by name, so chairpersons need to be tough on Members. At times, you need to use a carrot and stick approach. If you allow these Members to come at will, then you will have a problem.We are here to work for our people who expect a lot from us. If you do not go to the House and committee - I have always asked: then where 11371THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 JANUARY 2023are you? If you are not in the committee or House, you will end up in the corridors of this House. I have seen the sectoral committees are busy doing a lot of work and as said before, we want them to make a presentation to the Committee on Budget from the 15th. The Committee on Budget should bring the report to this House on the 25th such that we have several days to discuss the Budget Framework Paper. We are going to give time to the sectoral committees to look at all the reports from the different institutions and present them to the Committee on Budget. By the 25th, we shall be here in the House discussing the report. We should not discuss it for one hour. Let us have time to discuss the report. We are going to – I saw somebody standing – Ethel, Mugole  – 4.49MS ETHEL NALUYIMA (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to say Happy New Year to each Member here. I have come to appreciate you, Madam Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, the former Leader of the Opposition (LOP), Hon. Mathias Mpuuga and the current LOP, Hon. Joel Senyonyi - I cannot mention the entire list but many of you stood with me as I celebrated Holy Matrimony. (Applause)  I would like to thank my Chairperson, Hon. Nsamba and his deputy, Dr Lulume, Hon. Brandon who did serious publicity work and all of you, together bestowed to me another name – Mrs Lugolobi Nsubuga. (Applause)  I am proud to associate with this Parliament, which is a key family in all our celebrations. I also thank the Minister of Works and Transport for their great support. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, during the festive season, one of us lost a husband and it was such a traumatising time. It was not an easy time for our sister – Hon. Melisa Avako - on 24th December.4.50 MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego):  Madam Speaker, on a humble note, that is why I was standing. The whole of West Nile and the Uganda Muslim fraternity, I appreciate you and His Excellency the President of Uganda. At the peak of the Christmas celebrations, our dear sister, Hon. Melisa Avako, the Woman Member of Parliament of Yumbe lost her husband. It so happened that I had not travelled. I do not know what held me. Thank you so much for picking up our calls and all the support. Dear colleagues, words alone cannot appreciate you enough. You all stood with us. You were able to communicate with us until we led Gule to rest. The Mufti was there and he appreciated this House so much. On a humble note, I say, “thank you” and may his soul rest in peace.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, may we rise for a moment of silence in memory of the late.(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, with all that I have said – another Mugole .4.52MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (NUP, Makindye Division West, Kampala):  Madam Speaker, this is an upcoming Mugole . (Laughter)  Allow me to thank the whole House and its leaders for the support to my family and I, when we started on the journey of trying to correct what had gone wrong by being introduced formally to the family of my beloved wife to be. I thank the committee members, Hon. Kawalya, Hon. Kayemba Ssolo, Hon. Hilderman  and all Members who contributed immensely financially and psychologically because I had feared going through that process, which is not very easy according to our culture. 11372 DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENTI thank all those who took part in these celebrations. My senior has gone through it twice. (Laughter) I thank you and congratulate you too. Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Can I have the whip announce the Shadow ministers? We had left them out. As we wait for this side, let us have your side first.4.54THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Madam Speaker, I commence with our representatives internationally and they are as follows: 1. Pan African Parliament (PAP) - Hon. Patrick Nsamba, Kassanda County North;2. Commonwealth Parliament - Hon. David Lukyamuzi Kalwanga, Mityana Busujju County;3. Inter-Parliamentary Union - Hon. Flavia Nabagabe Kalule, Kassanda;4. Parliamentary Pension Scheme - Hon. Aisha Nalule Kabanda, Butambala;5. The Caribbean-European Union Parliament - Hon. Hanifa Nabukeera, Mukono; and 6. The Parliamentary Union of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) Member States - Hon. Hassan Kirumira, Katikamu County South. I beg to designate.THE SPEAKER:  I congratulate all of you. One thing I would like to remind you is that –(Member rose_)  - no, hold on - in these international bodies, when you are out of Uganda, you represent the country and not a political party. I reserve the right to stop anybody, whether from the ruling party or the Opposition, from going to represent Uganda in the international bodies, if I realise you are becoming unprofessional. If you are not doing what is expected of you as a Ugandan, we will not allow you to go. I want it on record that you will not be allowed to go. If you are going into these things, be like Hon. Kirumira. Where is Hon. Kirumira? (Applause)  Thank you. MR NAMBESHE:  These are the Members of the Shadow Cabinet on our side of the political divide - (Interjections)-  Cabinet, yes, of course. 1. Attorney General – Hon. Wilfred Nuwagaba, Ndora County East;  2. Justice and Constitutional Affairs – Hon. Jonathan Odur, Erute County South;  3. Finance, Planning and Economic Development – Hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju, Kira Municipality;4. Gender, Labour and Social Development – Hon. Fortunate Nantongo, Woman Representative, Kyotera;5. Public Service – Hon.  Adeke Ana Ebaju, Woman Representative, Soroti; and6. Presidency and Security – Hon. Francis Zaake, Mityana Municipality. (Laughter)  Madam Speaker, I designate this honourable together with another portfolio deputising the Chief Opposition Whip. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable member, we do not have that position in our Rules of Procedure. Withdraw it. MR NAMBESHE:  Since you are the custodian of – I do withdraw but pending. THE SPEAKER:  We have a Whip, who is your good self. We do not have a deputy in our Rules of Procedure. MR NAMBESHE:  Madam Speaker, I will not engage you - THE SPEAKER:  That is air. If somebody has been given air, it is air. (Laughter)  MR NAMBESHE:  Thank you. Most obliged, Madam Speaker. You being the custodian of the rules, I will not engage you on this. However, the truth of the matter is that there is a provision in the Administration of Parliament Act. THE SPEAKER:  Can you designate the ministers? MR NAMBESHE:  Indeed, I resume from where I stopped. (Laughter)  [Mr Ssewanyana]11373THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 JANUARY 20237. Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries – Hon. Asinansi Nyakato, Woman Representative, Hoima City;  8. Education – Hon. Joseph Ssewungu, Kalungu West County;9. Trade and Industry – Hon. Manjeri Kyabakutika, Woman Representative, Jinja City;10. Internal Affairs – Hon. Betty Nambooze, Mukono Municipality;  11. Health – Hon. Dr Timothy Batuwa, Jinja South West Division;12. Works and Transport - Hon. Francis Mwijukye, Buhweju County;  13. Kampala Capital City Authority – Hon. Ronald Nsubuga, Nakawa East Division;  14. Foreign Affairs – Hon. Muwada Nkunyinji, Kyadondo County East;  15. Lands, Housing and Urban Development – Hon. Paulson Luttamaguzi, Nakaseke South County;  16. Energy and Mineral Development – Hon. Evans Kanyike, Bukoto County East;  17. Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities – Hon. Karim Masaba, Industrial Division, Mbale City;18. Youth and Children Affairs – Hon. Frank Kabuye, Kassanda County South;19. Defence and Veteran Affairs – Hon. Derek Nyeko, Makindye Division East;20. Local Governments – Hon. Betty Naluyima, Woman Representative, Wakiso;21. Human Rights – Hon. Shamim Malende, Woman Representative Kampala City;22. Water and Environment – Hon. Christine Kaaya, Woman Representative, Kiboga;23. Science, Innovation and Technology – Hon. Okin P.P. Ojara, Chua West County;  24. Culture and Performing Arts – Hon. Hillary Kiyaga, Mawokota County North;  25. Information and Anti-Corruption – Hon. Helen Nakimuli, Woman Representative, Kalangala;26. Cooperatives and Microfinance – Hon. Joan Acom, Woman Representative, Soroti City;27. Special Regions, Luwero, Karamoja, Northern Uganda, Bunyoro, Teso – Hon.  Santa Okot, Aruu North County;  28. East African Community Affairs – Hon. Lucy Akello, Woman Representative, Amuru;  29. Animal Industry and Fisheries – Hon. Susan Mugabi, Woman Representative, Buvuma;  and30. Sports – Hon. Godfrey Kayemba, Bukomansimbi.  I beg to designate, Madam Speaker. (Applause)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much -(Interjections)-  no, Namugga is the vice chair. Honourable members, on the international bodies, let us maintain the status quo until we feel we need to make a change; we will come back to the House then. The pension scheme still remains with Hon. Rwakajara. That is all. I now adjourn the House to 25 January 2024 when the Committee on Budget will come with a report to this House and we debate it. (The House rose at 5.04 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 25 January 2024.)  