

Tuesday, 22 January 2019

Parliament met at 2.48 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. In the last session, I informed you that Parliament was developing an application whereby the public can interact with the committees on Bills, policies and other programmes. It has been developed now for the members of Parliament and the public to view and participate and follow up on what we are doing. The app is called Bungeni. You will be able to locate it. We expect that we shall be able to get feedback from the population about our work.

There was an attempt by the ICT committee to arrange training for the Members but it was not successful. Therefore, the ICT officers will be coming to the committees when they are in session and maybe use 30 minutes to train the Members on the use of this application. I hope you will be able to give them that time. It will help us to keep abreast with the Bills tracking system.  

I would like to thank the Members and the Clerk to Parliament for the Parliament Week under the theme, “Championing Accountability to Increase Service Delivery”. Over 5,000 members of the public participated in those activities; I would like to thank you all for that. Our next major activity will be the annual Health Week from 4 to 7 March 2019. It will be under the theme “Wellness is My Choice.” Therefore, honourable members, get ready for that.

Aside from that, honourable members, I am very distressed about the upsurge of Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) in the country. You will recall that in 2009, His Excellency the President launched the campaign against FGM in Amudat. However, since then, I have not seen or heard of any Government programme or plan of action. In fact, the campaign has been left to the NGOs. 

I was in Bukwo last week. We went there because we thought they were the ones suffering the most FGM. It had come down for some time but when in Bukwo last week, we were told there is an upsurge and no one could explain to us why now. 

Then, there was a headline in the newspapers about Kween. Therefore, I really would like to ask the Government to have a plan of action. We cannot continue like this while we allow Ugandan children to get circumcised; this is against the law.

Again, in relation to Bukwo, I was told that there is a community of Kenyans who moved there following the violence after the 2007 Kenya elections. They have been living in Riwo Sub-county and they continue to live there. They are neither Kenyans nor Ugandans. I would like to ask the Government to arrange for them to go back to their homes because Kenya is stable now. Otherwise, we are going to have a community like the Maragoli - so, the Government should take interest in what is happening in Riwo and assist those people to go back home. 

I also got information from there that Government had planned for a seed school in Riwo Sub-county but it has been moved to another sub-county which is 20 miles away and yet according to them, Riwo is a sub-county which was displaced during the Karamojong raids about 17 years ago. They need schools but this school is moving; therefore, I would like the Ministry of Education and Sports to take interest in that issue and see that it is resolved so that these people’s children can attend school. 

That is what I have to communicate for now. There were a few matters of national concern. 

2.54
MR TERRENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national concern. Recently, while in my constituency, I found that on 9 January 2019, a team led by one of the resettlers - a resettler from Serere who went there with his family and some of his friends to settle in Karamoja - developed a bad attitude and went to mobilise some of the youths in the adjacent sub-county of Nyakwai. 

They came and burnt 45 homesteads in the Karamoja side. This was done selectively as this man called Obua showed them which homes to burn and not to. 

Credit goes to the Division Commander, Brig. Richard Otto, who swiftly swung into action to save the situation. Otherwise, it was going to escalate further. 

My prayer is that knowing that the root cause of the arson comes from the prolonged conflict between the Katakwi and Napak border, it is therefore imperative for us, as Government, to expeditiously handle this matter. The good news is that there is a mark stone which has been discovered, which can help these two communities resolve this matter. This mark stone was put by the British in 1958.

Therefore, we ask the two RDCs of Napak and Katakwi to expeditiously reach there and get the coordinates as the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development sends the surveyors to establish the coordinates. That is when the situation will be handled. Thank you.

2.56
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you. I would like to give information that today, hon. Kizige, the Minister of State, Office of the Prime Minister (Karamoja) and hon. Byabagambi are in Karamoja. I would like to pledge that when they come back, they will tell us what their findings are. However, hon. Byabagambi called me this morning and told me that they have rushed to Karamoja because of the incidents that happened there. 

THE SPEAKER: Shall we get a report from the Minister of State for Karamoja Affairs on this issue this week? Thank you. 

MR OKOT-OGONG: I would like to bring to the attention of this Parliament that our brothers from Karamoja are now heading towards Otuke. (Laughter) I do not know whether these ministers will also go to Otuke. 

THE SPEAKER: No. Hon. Terrence Achia’s issue was about destruction of homesteads between Katakwi and Napak. It was not a general issue of the annual sojourn surge of the Karamojong. Still, the Government Chief Whip should take interest in the fact that the Karamojong are headed to Otuke as they did last year.

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I think Ugandans are free to move to wherever they want as long as they are not destructive. The agreement that we made during my time when I was Minister of State for Defence, is for people to look for pasture without having guns. If you possess guns, you will be dealt with. However, saying that the “brothers” - as you call them, since they are your brothers heading to Otuke, maybe they are looking for pasture. 

However, destruction is what we do not agree with. Even brothers from Kenya are allowed to come to Uganda as long as they are not armed. Ugandans are allowed to go to Kenya as long as we are not armed and destructive.

Therefore, what hon. Okot Ogong has raised on record that the brothers are aggressively heading to Otuke - as if they are not supposed to move - is not right. However, the point is they should not be destructive. That is the information I wanted to give. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last year and in 2017, some members of Parliament came and complained here that the Karamojong were running through their fields, eating their food and taking over their granaries. That is not about moving; it is about mishandling their property. You walk into my compound, take the granary and eat my food, graze in my garden? That is what they are complaining about. The Minister of Karamoja is alerted that that situation is developing again.

3.00
MR CHRISTOPHER KALEMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Kyotera): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the influx of Burundians coming through Mutukula. They come by bus through Tanzania and when they reach Mutukula, the Ugandan security officials alight them from the buses. They then camp in the no-man’s land. They are not checked and are without proper movement documents.

They have coordinators in Kampala who pick them and bring them here. It is alleged that they are thereafter recruited into private security agencies here and they –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order. The Government Chief Whip has just been on the Floor and said it is okay for people to move from Kenya to Uganda for as long as they are just moving. Is it in order for the honourable member to rise and complain about movement when the Government Chief Whip has just given information about how movement should be into the country?

THE SPEAKER: The Chief Whip did not talk about the Burundians. He is quite in order.

MR KALEMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that protection. They come in groups of 30 and 50 people and they are recruited. The most serious issue here is that they are aged between 18 and 40. However, they pass through the porous borders and come to Uganda. 

My prayer is that the health ministry should check these people because we are afraid of Ebola and other diseases that they might come with. They may also be armed. Where are they going? Are they recruited in private security agencies? Most of them are youth thus they may become a threat to our nation. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You talked about recruitment into security organs; that is serious for Burundians to be recruited into our security organs. Is the Minister of Internal Affairs aware of this?

3.03
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County Tororo): Madam Speaker, before the minister comes, let me also say something about the same. A few weeks ago, I requested to raise a matter of national importance concerning our interstate movement.

However, the Deputy Speaker asked me to raise it in form of a question. The question was raised and forwarded to the relevant ministry to come and respond. However, what I would like to add is that these Burundians may not end up in Kampala, as the honourable member has said.

In fact in the last few weeks, our security at the border has been arresting Burundians but most especially women crossing to Kenya. Therefore, due to the good teamwork between Kenya and Uganda, they have been repatriating most of these people as they attempt to cross the border. They move with unclear documents but their agents are highly connected in such a way that once they cross into Kenya, they are found with documents that purportedly enabled them to pass through the borders. Therefore, it is a very sensitive issue and I thought I should raise it. 

Secondly, let me also take this opportunity to inform you that I was in Nairobi about a month and half ago. I was with Brig. Oula and we went to our High Commission. We found many of our girls who had been arrested by the Kenyan security -

THE SPEAKER: There is a report from the Committee on Foreign Affairs dealing with that issue. I am aware that they are about to report. The Committee on Foreign Affairs is going to report on that issue very shortly. Let us concentrate on the people who are coming in; that is what we are dealing with. 

3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, the East African Community Treaty allows free movement of persons within the region. However, there are documentary regulations which are required and ordinarily therefore, as long as people are moving with legitimate documents like identity cards and passports, we would not hesitate to allow them in.

However, at the border posts, the teams there work as a security team including immigration and all the security agencies. Therefore, when there is suspicious movement, they will always address their minds to that and it will be handled.

This is new information. We will take it up and work on it - whether the people are coming for work just like our people go across for work in the other countries, we will investigate and take appropriate action.

3.07
MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. I would like to bring to your attention that media houses and some radio journalists and presenters in Lango sub-region are under serious intimidation, harassment, threats and arrests that are affecting the freedom of speech, as enshrined under the Constitution of Uganda.

The intimidation, threats and harassment came as a result of them reporting about the death of Dickens Okello who was allegedly murdered by some Indians on 9 November 2018. As I speak, over five journalists have been suspended from work by UCC. They include Patrick Rolex Akena, Billy Otok, Charles Ocenduro, Walter Ojok and other radio directors like Jimmy Ohuru who is called Deejay Cool.

Even other radio stations in Lira had their popular programmes suspended. Death threats have been issued against some of the journalists especially Mr Rolex Akena and Mr Billy Otok. The threats have been reported to police and the security is investigating.

Based on the above, I would like to appeal to this honourable House that:

    i) The suspended staff resume their duties with immediate effect and fines and orders by Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) be revoked.
    ii) The staff be accorded a fair hearing as demanded by the principles of natural justice and the rule of law.
    iii) The harassment, intimidation and arrest of media practitioners who are helping in the fight against corruption in this country and poor service delivery, among other things at the grass roots, be stopped.
    iv) The suspended programmes be reinstated as a matter of urgency.
    v) The exorbitant fines that have been levied by UCC on these radio stations in Lira be reviewed by this Parliament.
    vi) Lastly, the losses of income incurred by the employees and the radio especially Unity FM, be compensated.

I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall direct the minister of the sector to come and speak to us on those issues so that we know how to move.

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I heard well from the presentation by hon. Judith Alyek that the case is being investigated. After that she went on to make recommendations.

I would like to suggest that the minister in charge picks interest in the investigation and after that we get proper information. It is good that the honourable member told us that investigations are ongoing.

Therefore, when the security personnel are doing investigations, I do not know what role the politician or the minister is going to perform other than making sure that the investigations are fast-tracked.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let the sector minister come and speak to us about what the Member has raised. He will confirm to us whether there are investigations or not. Minister Tumwebaze should come and speak to us over this issue on Thursday, this week.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Point of procedure, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: There is no one on the Floor so what is the procedure about? 

3.11
MR LAWRENCE MANGUSHO (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to make a statement on a very important matter now in the Sebei sub-region. 

Most people read in The New Vision newspaper yesterday that there was an increase or resurrection of Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) in Sebei Sub-region, particularly in my constituency, Kween.

I would like to put the record clear. It is true that there is an upsurge or resurrection of FGM in Sebei and more particularly in Kween. I do not know what has happened in the short time but it is not true that there are people who are armed and are forcing the girls into circumcision. However, it is true that these girls are forcefully going for circumcision by themselves; they get armed in order to have the exercise done – (Interjections) – I am putting the record clear because I am from –(Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I am aware that this Parliament, with the guidance of the Speaker, passed a law criminalising genital mutilation of our girls. Any action or act of dehumanising our women, intimidating and denying them the rights of enjoyment is a matter that has already been banned and criminalised by this Parliament.

Is it in order for an honourable Member of Parliament who swore by the Constitution of Uganda to defend and protect the rights of every human being, to stand on the Floor of Parliament and turn a blind eye to the law that has been passed by this Parliament that he is sitting in?

THE SPEAKER: No; you are out of order. If it was happening, it was your responsibility to come and tell this House that there is a problem.

MR MANGUSHO: Madam Speaker, I was bringing a fact – (Interjections) – I am at the forefront of fighting FGM.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you were, you should have come in December. The news says it started on 1st December; where were you all that time?

MR MANGUSHO: Madam Speaker, this started in January not December –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a serious issue. We have already tasked the Government to give us their plan of action for addressing FGM in the country. 

3.15
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I entirely agree with you. This is inhuman and unacceptable. It has been criminalised for heaven sake. As Government, we are moving. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We expect a plan of action to be presented in this House.

MS KAROORO: I will present the plan of action. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like you to join me in welcoming Miss World Africa, Quiin Abenakyo. She is up there. (Applause) We would like to thank you for supporting her with your votes. They helped her get where she is.

She is accompanied by her father, Mr Charles Sembera. There he is; you are welcome. She is also accompanied by her mother, Mrs Alice Sembera; she has also come with her grandmother, Mrs Joyce Kimpwita. She is has also come with her aunt, Grace Abenakyo as well as a sister, Margaret Dwaya. They are made in the other place. (Applause)

She is accompanied by the Executive Director of Miss Uganda Foundation, Brenda Nanyonjo together with Mr Kevin Zziwa, who is the Deputy Executive Director, Miss Uganda Foundation. You are welcome

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, I am raising a procedural matter in regards to Miss World Africa, Ms Quiin Abenakyo. This young lady   who just graduated the previous day from Makerere University with a degree in business computing has made Uganda and Africa as a whole, proud.

In addition, the issues that she raised to get that award are very pertinent to this country. Girl-child school dropout rates and defilement in Uganda are very high and she is very passionate about those issues.

Madam Speaker, this lady sold Uganda in just a few days while at the pageant. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for Quiin Abenakyo to be recognised by this House since it is the first time that Africa and Uganda becomes No.3 at the world’s pageant because it has implications in regards to tourism? I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I acknowledge the importance of the victory to Uganda. Therefore, we shall allow you to move a substantive motion tomorrow; let us do it formally tomorrow. I shall give it time on the Order Paper.

3.21
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the shortage of blood and oxygen in Mulago Hospital.

Madam Speaker, I went to the Uganda Cancer Institute yesterday in Mulago Hospital but I was appalled by the number of children who were dying as a result of shortage of blood. We tried -

THE SPEAKER: No, it is not a debate; he is bringing up an issue.

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Madam Speaker, we tried to move around to the nearby clinics but there was no blood. We were given an explanation that the blood kits at Nakasero Blood Bank are not there. However, there is also lack of oxygen in Mulago. We moved around and discovered that there are a lot of problems in Mulago - (Member timed out.)

3.22
MR HILLARY LOKWANG (NRM, Ik County, Kaabong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an urgent matter regarding communication masts in Ik County. Madam Speaker, on 17 October 2016, Members of the 10th Parliament received communication from the Minister of Information and Communications Technology and National Guidance that together with the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC), they were carrying out baseline survey assessment of all areas in the country partially or not covered by telecommunication network services.

The minister requested us to submit data on specific areas in our constituencies that include villages, parishes and sub counties not covered or partially covered by telecommunication networks services.

Madam Speaker, I was one of the people who responded in writing on 1 November 2016. I had also written to MTN and Airtel managers on the same issue on 13th October.

On 23 May 2017, I also wrote to UCC with a follow-up letter. On 3 July 2018, I again wrote to the honourable minister a follow-up letter, reminding him on the same issue.

The people of Ik are not benefiting from these services including mobile money and airtime services. They have to move 40 to 50 kilometres to access them.

I pray that the Minister of ICT and National Guidance should come out and update this House on how far he has gone with his letter and whether there is hope for the people of Ik and other Ugandans in similar situations of getting network services and how soon.

Secondly, Government gives the people of Ik water; and beefs up deployment of security personnel at the porous borders of Kenya and South Sudan. 

Madam Speaker, for the record, I beg to lay the honourable minister’s letter dated 17 October 2016 accompanied by my letters. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this issue is really critical. In the last session after I came back from Kapchorwa, I informed the House - as I have always done - that our people there cannot even receive Ugandan radio stations; they listen to Kenyan radio stations. For telephone services, they are on Safaricom, which is not a Ugandan network but it seems no one is doing anything about that.

Can we again ask the Minister of ICT to come and tell this House how all those Ugandans can access services - they do not have radio stations, mobile phone services, etcetera. The minister should come on Thursday and explain that to us.

3.36
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I have a matter of national importance about forceful eviction of my people in Butemba Town Council by one rich man called James Mansa.

Madam Speaker, since 2000, the villages of Rwebunjumbura, Kayunga, Butemba, Kagarama, Kiterede, Kyampagi, Bugaba and Kigambanankwale have suffered at the hands of this rich man. The torture involves burning people’s houses, torture of people, mysterious deaths of some people around this man’s farm, grazing of cattle in people’s gardens under the guard of gun-wielding people and shooting and injuring of people. 

For example, Justus Tinka was put at gun point by this rich man, Mansa, in front of other people. There is evidence to that. An old woman called Victo Nabuleme was shot by one of this man’s guards; fortunately, she is still alive and she can testify. 

There are various tramped up charges that this man, Mansa, has slapped on these people in different courts in Kyankwanzi Grade II Magistrate Court, in Kiboga Chief Magistrate’s Court and Mubende. They are the same people suffering with charges and transport. Even when you try to stand surety for them, the money they charge is too high; a common person who has not harvested any crops for over two years is being told to pay cash of Shs 500,000 for bail. 

Madam Speaker, the rich man is armed and has armed guards who go on threatening people. Last July, they brought over 1,000 animals in people’s gardens under guard – I was actually called and I informed the DPC. The police managed to withdraw two guns from the guards grazing animals in people’s gardens. However, I do not know how that case ended. 

Recently – 

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers?

MR KAMUSIIME: Madam Speaker, there is too much torture and forceful eviction and the police is not responsive, despite registering a lot of complaints with evidence of reference numbers. 

I, therefore, pray that: 

    1. Government urgently helps these people. 
    2. Due to the problem I have seen within our security forces, the mantle be spearheaded by the Ministers of Internal Affairs, Security and Presidency. 

On Thursday last week, the same rich man called me and he intimidated me, warning me to stay out of these matters; meaning he is capable of doing anything. I have evidence to that effect.

In the same call, he claimed that he knows the President; that is why I think the Minister for Presidency should be there. I pray that Government comes in urgently because my people are suffering. I do not think this is the law and order we are promoting. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.31
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, the case that hon. Pentagon has raised is a very old one and I am one of those who are surprised and disappointed. In 2006, when Kyankwanzi was still part of Kiboga, I visited the place where Mansa had burnt houses and had sealed off a public utility - the dam which was dug by the late Cardinal Nsubuga.

We raised the matter to the President and we were at Bukwiri when he visited. He gave a directive to the DPC then to make sure that Mansa is handled. I am so surprised that the President’s directive was not obliged to. 

I would like to make a commitment to follow it up together with the Ministers of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and Internal Affairs because it is a very old case. This man harasses people and uses names of people in Government but the President gave a directive publically. Therefore, I am undertaking it so that we rescue the people of Butemba. I am informed.

THE SPEAKER: When can you come back to us? We need answers for hon. Pentagon Kamusiime.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Since the case is old, we must at have a preliminary report within two weeks. 

THE SPEAKER: Does that include you and the Ministers of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Internal Affairs and the Presidency? Will you work on that issue? 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Yes, Madam Speaker. 

3.33
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you for giving me the opportunity, Madam Speaker. I rise on a very pertinent matter concerning the fatal accident that took place around Opuyo in Soroti District regarding our businesspeople from Ngora, who were travelling to Otuboi Market. That was on Saturday.

As we speak, eight of them have perished and 21 are hospitalised in different hospitals in the country. The cause of this accident is related to a car registration number UAD 468U that had a mechanical fault and was just stationed at that corner for four days. The police did not bother to remove the car off the road. We have buried our people and unfortunately the injured have a big problem of meeting treatment costs. 

Madam Speaker, I have a few prayers:

1. That the Ministry of Health to tells me the steps they are taking to address the issue of accident emergencies on highways. For example, on Saturday I was in Soroti for seven hours; from 10 o’clock up to past 8 o’clock. Incidentally, there was no plan for emergency and that is why some of these people died – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: We shall ask the minister to tell us what arrangement they have to handle emergencies. You have made your point, hon. Abala. How are emergencies handled? That is what you are talking about. 

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to first of all respond to hon. Luttamaguzi’s issue. He made some statements that children were dying because there was no oxygen and blood. He also talked about the Uganda Cancer Institute. 

I would like to inform the House that we have adequate quantities of blood. The only challenge we have is blood group O, which was and is missing at the Uganda Cancer Institute. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we do not have –(Interruption) 

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order in regard to the statement that has been made by the minister. As you realise, my colleague from Ngora, hon. Abala raised an issue concerning the mourning that we had in the whole district over the weekend. 

I went to Soroti Regional Referral Hospital because some of our people were admitted there. I also went to Ongino General Hospital because some were referred there as well as Atutur. As we speak, Madam Speaker, most of those people have been referred to Mulago National Referral Hospital. The reason they gave us was not due to any blood group but they clearly told us that there was no blood in the hospital. 

Secondly, they told us that the equipment – because I lost relatives, I feel pain even if you see me happy; I should be crying. They told us that there is no equipment to manage those people in the whole of eastern Uganda. Therefore, is my honourable sister, in order to come and tell a lie to this honourable House when the people of Ngora are mourning?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, she had not yet spoken about Ngora. She was talking about blood at Mulago and that is what she was responding to. I wish you could sometimes listen. She has not yet talked about Ngora. Proceed, minister.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker for your wise ruling. I was addressing myself to hon. Paulson Luttamaguzi’s issue. I would like to repeat what I said. Have you heard?

THE SPEAKER: No, for the record, say it again because there was disruption. 

MS OPENDI: I want to repeat and be clear, Madam Speaker. I have contacted the Director of Uganda Cancer Institute, Dr Jackson Orem. It is not true that children have died or were dying because of lack of oxygen and blood at the Uganda Cancer Institute. Whle we acknowledge that blood group ‘O’ is lacking but the other blood groups are available at the Uganda Cancer Institute.

What is on the record is that they have not had any children die at the Uganda Cancer Institute because of lack of blood or oxygen.

Madam Speaker, you are aware that we have just constructed the specialised women and children’s hospital. This hospital actually manufactures oxygen; so it cannot be true that we also lack oxygen. However, because he talked about Uganda Cancer Institute and then said Mulago - Mulago is broad and you have to be specific. Is it the old Mulago you are referring to? Sometimes, people talk about Kawempe and they are referring to Mulago because the National Referral Hospital of Mulago, as we speak, is under renovation. 

Therefore, he has to be clear and tell me which Mulago he was referring to and then I can follow up.

Regarding Ngora, I have just received this issue here on the Floor. Allow us to investigate because it is wrong for people to be moved all the way from Soroti to Mulago because of just blood. There must be other reasons. We have regional referral hospitals in Mbale and Jinja. Usually, if there is lack of blood in a certain hospital, they have their ways of coordinating with other facilities. 

Therefore, allow us to investigate and come back to this Floor with answers. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, as you investigate that, there is a big headline in the New Vision, “High blood pressure drug linked to cancer.” When you come back on the issue of Ngora, can you explain this? 

3.41
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have raised this issue on this Floor for quite a long time now and directives have been but they have not been followed.  I have a sub-county called Lolwe with eight schools. These eight schools had about 3,600 pupils. As we speak, there are 1,400 pupils. Every year, we have over 200 pupils sitting for Primary Leaving Examinations. The distance from Lolwe to Sigulu is about four hours. These pupils cannot join secondary schools. 

They have now resorted to early marriages and fishing. The parents say they cannot take their children to school because they do not have secondary schools. You had directed the minister to come and give a statement. Lolwe is not in the main land but it is very far away. What do we do about these pupils who have completed Primary Leaving Examinations?

Madam Speaker, my prayer to this Parliament is that the Minister of Education and Sports should come and give a statement on what they are going to do in Lolwe, this financial year, to help these children have a secondary school. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Education and Sports should come and explain to us the plans they have for the islands. As you recall, honourable members, I told you that when reporting, we should report separately on the islands so that we can capture their special problems. Therefore, the minister should come and explain to us the plans for Lolwe Island.

Join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Ruyonza Child Development Centre in Ntungamo. Please, stand up. They are represented by hon. Beatrice Rwakimari and hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana. You are welcome. I also have a delegation from Kisoro Municipality. They are represented by hon. Rose Kabagyenyi and hon. Sam Byibesho. You are welcome.

3.44
MR NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. Over Shs 41 billion was invested by Government to establish two factories; one for tea and another for Irish potatoes, in Kisoro District. These two factories were expected to revolutionise life in our district as well as drastically improve living standards of our people.

His Excellency the President even commissioned these two factories. Unfortunately and mysteriously, these two factories were closed immediately the commissioning took place. This has resulted into low farm-gate prices for these two commodities, loss of employment and income, loss of revenue, loss of money invested by Government and partners, loss of weight on tea because it has to be transported to Kabale, which is quite far and also leads to high transport costs.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that Government explains this deplorable and regrettable state of affairs. Beyond the explanations though, Government should intervene to ensure that these two factories are in full production.
 
Three key ministries have played a major role in the story of these two factories. They include the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development take charge of the coordination on that issue because you funded them?

3.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we will come with an explanation on Tuesday, next week. Thank you.

3.46
MR KENNETH ONGALO-OBOTE (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of grave importance concerning the creation of new districts in Uganda. 

On 3 September 2015, this House passed a motion for a resolution of Parliament under Article 179(1)(b) of the Constitution for the creation of 23 new districts in Uganda. The 23 new districts were to be rolled out in four phases. In 2016, four districts were to become operational. In 2017 and 2018, six each were to become operational. In 2019 seven districts of Obongi, Kazo, Rwampara, Kitagwenda, Madi-Okollo, Karenga and Kalaki were to become operational.

Madam Speaker, on 17 January 2019, when the Electoral Commission appeared before the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to present their Budget Framework Paper, they had deleted Kalaki from their list and replaced it with a new district called  Lusot.

My prayer is, that the Minister of Local Government immediately rectify this problem with the Electoral Commission as it has caused a great deal of mental distress and worry in Kalaki.

Secondly, I request that this House investigates how a dully-passed resolution can be tampered with and a new name “Lusot” appears in the place of Kalaki. I have here a copy of the Hansard of 3 September, 2015 in which the aforesaid resolution is contained. If I am allowed, I can lay it at the Table. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will ask the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to come and explain to us about those constituencies. For hon. Abott Ouma, his islands were missing and now hon. Obote says he does not understand the name of the district and preparations for elections are on. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should come and give us a response on that issue.

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Here is the Hansard of 3 September 2015 in which the resolution creating 23 new districts in Uganda was moved and passed by this House. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Gideon Onyango, you have two minutes.

3.49
MR GIDEON ONYANGO (Independent, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE) results that were released last week by Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB).

There is a lot of public outcry regarding the way results were graded. There are allegations that regions were graded differently, according to performance. There is also an allegation that the grading tool was raised too high, which ended up affecting the performance of various candidates.

My prayers, Madam Speaker, are that;

    1. The Minister of Education and Sports comes and explains to the public what exactly happened.
    2. If possible, we should have a probe because this has now become a continuous habit. The grading is done differently, according to performance of different regions and schools.

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Before we probe, give us an example of this discrepancy. Which area was given lower marks? I do not know whether you have facts on this issue.

MR ONYANGO: Madam Speaker, there is an allegation that in last year’s PLE, the grading bar was lifted very high. For example, in all subjects, distinction one started from 95 to 100 per cent. Distinction two was from 90 to 94 per cent.

Madam Speaker, by all standards this affects performance of students, especially in some regions of this country. We are aware that we have Universal Primary Education (UPE) programme in this country. There are schools that are able to compete at that level –(Interruption)

MR WOBOYA: Thank you for giving me way. I think what my colleague is trying to raise is something which I also read in the media. It is alleged that when the results came out, the schools in the urban centres, particularly Kampala and others municipalities, performed poorer in comparison to some schools which were advantaged.

This allegation was raised by some parents that, in particular, for schools which have been known for scoring Aggregates 4, this time there were only one or two candidates with Aggregates 4. Aggregates 4 are now more in other unknown schools. That is the allegation that I read in the newspapers. When you look at the trend, it is something that needs to be investigated.

THE SPEAKER: No, are you suggesting that children in rural areas should not get Aggregate 4, really? No.

3.53
MS AGNES TAAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of the Youth Skilling Programme and Jua Kali centres. Since 2011, Government pledged in the manifesto to construct Jua Kali centres for the youth and this reoccurred in the 2016 manifesto. The Jua Kali centres were only constructed in Kampala. Right now, there is a programme of skilling the youth, which is concentrated in Kampala, Mukono and Wakiso.

I would like to know from Government the criteria they used to concentrate that programme in the three districts only.

Secondly, there is information circulating that girls should come and register for the skilling programme in Kampala. Should we register our girls and Government accommodates them in Kampala and skills them? We are grappling with girls who have dropped out of school but the programme of – (Member time out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MS TAAKA: The programme is only concentrated in Kampala. Can Government explain to us the plans they have to extend the programme to the other parts of the country? I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is a very valid point. Even the sacks of money are around Kampala. You do not see the sacks in Iganga or other places. Yes, we need a serious statement here because we are budgeting for this money and it is only working in Kampala. Is it a national programme or a Kampala programme?

3.56
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, as far as I can recollect, the President came up with an initiative to handle, especially the youth who have not benefitted from Operation Wealth Creation, where we have been taking animals and coffee seedlings to villages whereas there is a big number of youth who are in urban areas.

We appropriate money for the President and he has his initiatives. I will find out the plan he has to roll out the programme to other urban or rural areas because even in municipalities and town councils, we still have that problem where the youth do not have land to plant coffee seedlings or rear cattle.

I will come back to this august House to tell you how the presidential initiative has been worked out to cover all the relevant areas in the country.

THE SPEAKER: When can you return? You know, we are budgeting. We want information before we finish with the National Budget Framework Paper. (Members rose_)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Would you like to answer the question? (Laughter) I have been asked a question on when I should return. Can you offer the answer? Madam Speaker, I can come to this August House with an answer next week.

3.58
COL FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise under rule 56 (a) and (c). The plan by United Nations to abandon Entebbe Regional Services Centre from hosting the Global Shared Service Centre is going ahead. On 8 July 2018, the UN selected the following four countries; Kenya, China, Hungary and Canada to host shared service centres.

I am seeking leave to table a motion tomorrow to urge Government to do whatever it takes and whatever is necessary to ensure that this base is not moved from Entebbe. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Permission is granted to bring the motion tomorrow.

4.00
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Madam Speaker, I rise to present to this House the Justice, Law and Order Sector (JLOS) Human Rights Defender Award 2018, presented to Parliament’s Committee on Human Rights. (Applause) This was done at the JLOS Annual Sector Review 2018.

I would like to appreciate and congratulate my members of the committee and request that they stand up for recognition. I would like to recognise my vice chairperson, hon. Safia Nalule. I would like to thank the Members for their dedication and commitment.

I would like to thank the JLOS sector for recognising performance. I thank the House for your support because without you, it could not be done. Madam Speaker, we would like to pay special tribute to you for your resilience in the defence of human rights of the people of Uganda. 

You have stood for human rights, especially of the vulnerable persons who include women, children, youth, Persons with Disabilities including persons living with albinism and now the people who are being subjected to Female Genital Mutilation (FGM). We deeply appreciate you for that.

Lastly, I would like to appreciate the NRM Government for the 1995 Constitution that has a whole chapter on the enjoyment of rights and also creates the institutions like the Uganda Human Rights Commission, Equal Opportunities Commission and others. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and the Committee on Human Rights for your work and visibility. It will give us more courage to continue doing the work. Thank you very much.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, although I would like to lay this award on the Table, I think it should be in the custody of the committee so that it can remain a challenge to successor committees; that they know they have to live up to this challenge. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: It will sit in the office of the Committee on Human Rights. Thank you very much.

4.03
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, raising from a statement made by the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. David Bahati, while representing the President at the closure of Brethren Conference 2019 of the Diocese of Kigezi.

The minister stated that the President had issued a directive to ban sports betting and gambling in Uganda, thereby guiding the ministry not to renew licenses for the existing companies and even not issuing licenses for new companies.

Betting has existed in this world, even in developed and developing countries. It is an industry that fetches Uganda more than Shs 50 billion in taxes. We can only set guidelines to guide the way sports betting is done but banning it will endanger the lives of some people. Uganda is a country of all people who enjoy rights. We should also take an example of other countries.

My prayer -

THE SPEAKER: First find out whether this is what the minister stated. Did you state it before we hear the prayers? Did you say it or not?

4.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, it is true that I represented the President at the Annual Conference in Kigezi on Sunday. During that time, I made a comment – which is true - that the President has directed on reforms in the sports betting sector as follows:

    1. He has proposed to us that we should not license new betting and gambling companies. 
    2. Those licences that are expiring should not be renewed.
    3. We look at a mechanism on how we can strengthen and better regulate this sector, with a view of looking at different options that include a limited number of them; the location and areas where they operate. (Applause)

At the moment, all these sports betting are everywhere in the country. There is a great outcry by the parents that even some students who are given school fees go out to bet this money. (Applause) Therefore, it is important to regulate it better to be more specific and strengthen it. Those were the three points I made. Also, looking at the way limited space will be given, probably only Ugandan companies will be allowed. What happens now is that when you bet, the money goes out of the country. So, we are looking at the local content.

His Excellency the President will give more details in a few days to come. Therefore, I beg that we wait for his communication before we open this up for debate. However, the issue is better regulation for this sector to protect our young people while at the same time balancing other factors. (Applause)

4.08
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance to ask Government to brief Parliament on the steps they are taking to end the strike at Makerere University. There are more than 40,000 students who are not attending classes. You know what that means.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. We shall expect the Minister of Education and Sports to update us on Government’s plans to ensure continuity at the university. We expect a statement by the end of this week.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF PREPAREDNESS BY GOVERNMENT TO TABLE ELECTORAL REFORMS BEFORE PARLIAMENT

4.09
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs requested me to request you to allow him bring this statement on Thursday this week.

THE SPEAKER: Let it really Thursday. The country needs to know what to do and how to move and so, would Parliament. So, we expect the minister’s statement on electoral reforms on Thursday.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO STANDING COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 15(10)(C) AND RULE 157 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

4.11
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you. I beg to designate the following Members of Parliament on the following standing committees:

THE SPEAKER: Just a minute, honourable Government Chief Whip. In relation to the Committee on Budget, I believe you are oversubscribed. They are supposed to be 30. You may need to make an adjustment. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I beg to designate the following Members of Parliament on the following standing committees and also the Chairpersons and Vice Chairpersons of the respective standing committees:

In case I oversubscribe, I will be able to adjust. I may not be able to do it right now but I pledge that I will come back and do the adjustment.

Committee on Budget

    1. Hon. Amos Lugoloobi - Chaiperson
    2. Hon. Patrick Opolot – Vice Chairperson
    3. Hon. Fred Mwesigye
    4. Hon. Charles Ilukor
    5. Hon. Sulaiman Hashim
    6. Hon. Kenneth Lubogo
    7. Hon. David Mutebi
    8. Hon. Ann Nankabirwa
    9. Hon. Otieno Okoth
    10. Hon. Margaret Komuhangi
    11. Hon. Justine Khainza
    12. Hon. Remigio Achia
    13. Hon. Elly Asiku
    14. Hon. Christopher Kalemba
    15. Hon. Wilberforce Yaguma
    16. Hon. Sylivia Nayebale
    17. Hon. Jane Avur
    18. Hon. Genensio Tumuramye
    19. Hon. Margaret Aleper
    20. Hon. Charles Ngabirano
    21. Hon. Peter Ogwang
    22. Hon. Idah Nabayiga
    23. Hon. Henry Musasizi
    24. Hon. Solomon Silwany
    25. Hon. Judith Alyek

The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson of this committee are hon. Amos Lugoloobi and hon. Patrick Opolot respectively. I beg to designate.

4.13
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): I would like to designate the following to the Committee on Budget:

    1. Hon. Winfred Kiiza
    2. Hon. Cecilia Atim
    3. Hon. Roland Mugume
    4. Hon. Joy Atim
    5. Hon. Paulson Luttamaguzi
    6. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi

4.17
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): On behalf of the Speaker, I beg to designate the following Members to the Committee on Budget:

    1. Hon. Robert Ntende
    2. Hon. Gerald Karuhanga
    3. Hon. John Bagoole-Ngobi
    4. Hon. James Kakooza
    5. Hon. Samuel Okwir
    6. Hon. Kenneth Soyekwo
    7. Hon. Julius Mukasa

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: I think you may have to make some adjustment. (Maj. Lakot rose_)In the meantime, - Oh, UPDF.

4.15
MAJ. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to designate Lt Gen. Ivan Koreta to the Committee on Budget.

I request to delegate Maj. Everlyne Asiimwe to designate on my behalf because I have a cold and my voice is not clear. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. As I said, we may need to do some further cleaning up of that list. However, for now, I put the question that those names be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

4.16
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): On the Committee of Equal Opportunities, I designate:

    1. Hon. Hellen Asamo - Chairperson
    2. Hon. Robinah Rwakoojo – Vice Chairperson
    3. Hon. Stephen Kangwagye
    4. Hon. Rosemary Tumusiime
    5. Hon. Alex Ndeezi
    6. Hon. Norah Bigirwa
    7. Hon. Eric Musana
    8. Hon. Lillian Nakate
    9. Hon. Jovah Kamateeka
    10. Hon. Albert Lokoru
    11. Hon. Paul Chelimo
    12. Hon. Tarsis Rwaburindora
    13. Hon. Geoffrey Macho
    14. Hon. Cissy Namujju
    15. Hon. Terrence Achia
    16. Hon. Susan Amero
    17. Hon. Jacqueline Aol
    18. Hon. Alex Burundo
    19. Hon. Richard Gafabusa
    20. Hon. Tophace Kaahwa
    21. Hon. Ruth Katushabe
    22. Hon. Kezekia Mbogo
    23. Hon. Isaac Mulindwa
    24. Hon. Taban Idi Amin
    25. Hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire

The chairperson of the committee is hon. Hellen Asamo and the vice is hon. Robinah Rwakoojo. I beg to designate.

4.17
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Equal Opportunities, I delegate the following Members:

    1. Hon. Gershom Sizomu
    2. Hon. Naggayi Nabilah Ssempala
    3. Hon. Fred Turyamuhweza
    4. Hon. Lee Oguzu
    5. Hon. Peter Okot

4.17
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): On behalf of the Rt Hon. Speaker, I would like to designate the following Members to Equal Opportunities Committee:

    1. Hon. Lucy Achiro Otim 
    2. Hon. Francis Zaake 
    3. Hon. Kenneth Eitunganane Isiangu 
    4. Hon. Christopher Kipterit
    5. Hon. William Nokrach 

I beg to designate.

4.18
CAPT. EVERLYNE ASIIMWE (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, I would like to designate hon. Maj. Suzan Oruni Lakot on the Committee on Equal Opportunities. I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that those Members be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS AND RELATED MATTERS

4.18
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): On the Committee on HIV/ AIDS and Related Diseases, I designate the following:

    1. Hon. Wamala Namboozo - Chairperson
    2. Hon. Yoweeri Ssebikaali – Vice Chairperson
    3. Hon. Rose Mutonyi
    4. Hon. Molly Lanyero
    5. Hon. Lawrence Akugizibwe
    6. Hon. Caroline Burungi
    7. Hon. Joseph Kakooza
    8. Hon. Denis Obua
    9. Hon. Connie Nakayenze
    10. Hon. Julius Acom Bua
    11. Hon. Justine Ayebazibwe
    12. Hon. Pauline Kemilembe 
    13. Hon. Tom Alero Aza
    14. Hon. Sarah Nakawunde
    15. Hon. Mariam Naigaga 
    16. Hon. Doreen Amule
    17. Hon. Bebona Babungi 
    18. Hon. Grace Kesande 
    19. Hon. Nelson Lufafa
    20. Hon. Gaffa Mbwatekwa
    21. Hon. Suubi Kinyamatama 
    22. Hon. Sam Lyomoki

The Chairperson is hon. Wamala Namboozo and the Vice Chairperson is hon. Yoweeri Ssebikaali. I beg to designate.

4.19
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Madam Speaker, for HIV/AIDS committee, I have the following Members: 

    1. Hon. Francis Gonahasa
    2. Hon. Ibrahim Kasozi
    3. Hon. Charles Angiro 
    4. Hon. Robina Sentongo 
    5. Hon. Alum Santa

4.20
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (INDEPENDENT, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): On behalf of the Speaker, I beg to designate the following Members to HIV/ AIDs and related matters committee: 

    1. Hon. Godfrey Watenga 
    2. Hon. Ann Maria Tumwine 
    3. Hon. Jane Nabulindo Kwoba
    4. Hon. Julie Mukoda Zabwe and 
    5. Hon. Veronica Babirye Kadogo. 

I beg to designate.

4.20
CAPT. EVERLYNE ASIIMWE (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, on the Committee of HIV/AIDS and Related Matters, I would like to designate hon. Brig. Francis Takirwa. I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I put the question that those Members be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is something we have not quite concluded. I reported to you that the chairpersons of the committees who are also members of sessional committees have difficulty to attending to both. They wanted that we approve them and maybe, give them leave while they are still chairing because they may be unable to sit in the standing and sessional committees at the same time.

We need to address that. If they are in the sessional committee and required to sit there, yet, they are chairing standing committees on this side - we may have to discuss that. Let us keep it in mind.

4.22
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline has been handling that issue, they invited us to give our views and at an opportune moment, we shall be able to debate and come up with a way forward.

On the Committee on Human Rights, I designate the following Members: 

    1. Hon. Jennifer Egunyu  - Chairperson
    2. Hon. Agnes Taaka – Vice Chairperson
    3. Hon. Jackson Kafuuzi 
    4. Hon. Veronica Isala Eragu 
    5. Hon. Sofia Nalule 
    6. Hon. Patrick Okabe
    7. Hon. Elizabeth Karungi 
    8. Hon. Monica  Amoding 
    9. Hon. Rose Ayak Atima 
    10. Hon. Fred Bwino Kyakulaga 
    11. Hon. Joseph Kasozi Muyomba 
    12. Hon. Rapheal Magyezi
    13. Hon. Simeo Nsubuga 
    14. Hon. Moreen Osolu
    15. Hon. Andrew Koluo 
    16. Hon. Caroline Birungi 
    17. Hon. Sylvia Rwabogo 
    18. Hon. George Ouma 
    19. Hon. Sylvia Akello
    20. Hon. Denis Sabiiti  
    21. Hon. Spellanza Baguma

The Chairperson is hon. Jennifer Egunyu and the vice is hon. Agnes Taaka. I beg to designate.

4.23
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Madam Speaker on the Committee on Human Rights, I have the following Members:

    1. Hon. Lucy Akello 
    2. Hon. Harold Muhindo 
    3. Hon. Angeline Ossege 
    4. Hon. Veronica Nanyondo 
    5. Hon. Komakech Lyandro

4.24
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): On the Committee on Human Rights, I designate the following Members: 

    1. Hon. Fred Mudukoi 
    2. Hon. Ishma Mafabi
    3. Hon. Kyagulanyi Sentamu
    4. Hon. Lydia Chekwel. 

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: I did not see a nomination for the UPDF. Honourable Government Chief Whip, do you have anything to say?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, before you put the question, I would like to remove hon. Carolyn Birungi from the Committee on Human Rights because her name has been already considered on the Committee of HIV/ AIDs and Related Matters. I would like to leave her on this Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Diseases.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, after deleting the name of hon. Carolyn Birungi, I put the question that those Members be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY

4.25
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I would like to designate the following Members; 

    1. Hon. Syda Bbumba  - Chairperson
    2. Hon. Lawrence Bategeka - Vice Chairperson
    3. Hon. Aston Kajara
    4. Hon. Lawrence Mangusyo
    5. Hon. Apollo Yeri Ofwono 
    6. Hon. Keefa Kiwanuka 
    7. Hon. Seguya Lubyayi 
    8. Hon. Paul Sebulime
    9. Hon. Herbert Kabafuuzaki 
    10. Hon. Isaac Etuka 
    11. Hon. Michael Ayepa 
    12. Hon. Hatwib Katoto 
    13. Hon. Samson Lokeris 
    14. Hon. Abdu Kitata
    15. Hon. Cosmas Elotu
    16. Hon. Rwqemulikya Ibanda 
    17. Hon. Sam Bintaganro 
    18. Hon. Robert Miggadde
    19. Hon. Thomas Tayebwa 
    20. Hon. Amos Mandela
    21. Hon. Wamakuyu Midimi
    22. Hon. Anthony Okello
    23. Hon. Geoffrey Dhamuzungu
    24. Hon. Guma Gumisiriza  
    25. Hon. Peter Sematimba

The Chairperson is hon. Syda Bbumba and the Vice Chairperson is hon. Lawrence Bategeka. I beg to designate.

4.26
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on National Economy, I have the following Members of Parliament:

    1. Hon. Anthony Akol
    2. Hon. Elijah Okupa 
    3. Hon. Herbert Ariko 
    4. Hon. Deogratius Kiyingi
    5. Hon. Betty Nambooze 
    6. Hon. James Jimmy Akena

4.26
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (INDEPENDENT, Kabale Municipality, Kabale):  On behalf of the Speaker, I would like to designate the following Members on the of Committee on National Economy:

    1. Hon. Andrew Baryayanga Aja 
    2. Hon. Andrew Kaluya 
    3. Hon. Rosemary Nauwat 
    4. Hon. Olive Koyekyenga 
    5. Hon. Paul Akamba 
    6. Hon. Bernard Atiku
    7. Hon. Reagan Okumu 
    8. Hon. Kasiano Wadri Ezati. 

I beg to designate.

4.27
CAPT. EVARLYNE ASIIMWE (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on National Economy, I designate hon. Maj. Gen. Pecos Kuteesa.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that those members be approved.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

4.27
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): On the Committee on Public Accounts, I designate:

    1. Hon. Catheline Ndamira 
    2. Hon James Waluswaka 
    3. Hon.  Jesca Ababiku 
    4. Hon.  Jacqueline Amongin  
    5. Hon.  Alex Byarugaba 
    6. Hon. Sarah Najjuma 
    7. Hon. Paul Asaba 
    8. Hon. Innocent Kamusiime 
    9. Hon. Moses Kahima 
    10. Hon.  Maria Gorret Ajilo 
    11. Hon.  Robert Kasule 
    12. Hon.  Esther Anyakun
    13. Hon. Pamela Kamugo 
    14. Hon.  Stephen Kisa 
    15. Hon.  Jalia Bintu 
    16. Hon.  Robina Mukisa 
    17. Hon.  Michael Tusiime 
    18. Hon.  Gordon Arinda 
    19. Hon.  Fredrick Anguro 
    20. Hon. Tonny Ayoo 
    21. Hon. Loy Katali 
    22. Hon. John Baptist Lokii
    23. Hon. Muwanika Walyomu 
    24. Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo 

I beg to designate.

4.28
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Public Accounts, I have the following Members:

    1. Hon. Maxwell Akora – UPC
    2. Hon. Joseph  Ssewungu  - DP
    3. Hon. Mathias Mpuuga – DP
    4. Hon. Odonga Otto – FDC
    5. Hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi - Chairperson
    6. Hon. Okin P.P.Ojara –  Vice Chairperson

4.29
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (INDEPENDENT, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): On behalf of the Speaker, I designate the following Members to the Committee on Public Accounts:

    1. Hon. Yorke Alioni 
    2. Hon. Stephen Mukitale 
    3. Hon. Hood Katuramu
    4. Hon. Peter Ocen 
    5. Hon. Jacklet Atuhaire

I beg to designate.

4.29
MS EVERLYNE ASIIMWE (UPDF): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Public Accounts, I designate hon. George Oula.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that those Members be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

4.30
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): On the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges, I designate the following Members:

    1. Hon.  Ongalo-Obote –Chairperson
    2. Hon.  Edward Otto –Vice Chairperson
    3. Hon.  Rose Akello 
    4. Hon.  Anthony Ssemuli 
    5. Hon.  Jacob Opolot 
    6. Hon.  Oketayot Lowila 
    7. Hon.  James Acidri 
    8. Hon.  John Ikojo
    9. Hon.  Rose Kabagenyi 
    10. Hon. Kafeero Sekitoleko 
    11. Hon. Rosette Kajungu 
    12. Hon. Emmanuel Kalule 
    13. Hon. John Kamara
    14. Hon. Margaret Lamwaka 
    15. Hon. George Nsamba 
    16. Hon. Apollo Masika 
    17. Hon. Gaster Mugoya 
    18. Hon. Margaret Mugisa 
    19. Hon. Stella Namoe 
    20. Hon. James Niringiyimana 
    21. Hon. Felix Ogong 
    22. Hon. Lawrence Biyika 
    23. Richard Oseku 

I beg to designate.

4.31
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges, I designate the following members:

    1. Hon. Abdu Katuntu 
    2. Hon. Ogenga-Latigo  
    3. Hon. Betty Bamukwatsa 
    4. Hon. Atkins Katusabe 
    5. Hon. Emmanuel Kigozi 
    6. Hon. Asuman Basalirwa 

4.32
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): On the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges, I beg to designate the following Members:

    1. Hon. Jacob Oboth 
    2. Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba 
    3. Hon. Edward Otto 
    4. Hon. Lilly Adong  
    5. Hon. Jacob Opolot 

I beg to designate. The names have come up twice from also the ruling party. So, I do not know.

THE SPEAKER: What?

MR BARYAYANGA: On the committee, hon. Jacob Oboth and hon. Edward Otto Makmot are mentioned on the list of the NRM Chief Whip.

THE SPEAKER: The independents will be designated by you.

MR BARYAYANGA: They are already here.

THE SPEAKER: We shall delete them.

4.33
MS EVERLYNE ASIIMWE (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges, I designate hon. Everlyne Asiimwe; myself. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that those Members be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

4.33
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): On the Committee on Appointments, I beg to designate the following members:

    1. Hon. Margaret Rwabushaija 
    2. Hon. Rukia Chekamondo 
    3. Hon. Nsaba Buturo 
    4. Hon. Moses Balyeku 
    5. Hon. Hellen Adoa 
    6. Hon. Abbas Agaba 
    7. Hon. Ashraf Olega 
    8. Hon. Rwakajara Arinaitwe 
    9. Hon. Dorothy Azairwe 
    10. Hon. Henry Makumbi 
    11. Hon. Okori-Moe 
    12. Hon. Oscar Omony 
    13. Hon. Beatrice Rwakimari 
    14. Hon. Faith Alupo 
    15. Hon. Anifa Kawooya 
    16. Hon. John Baptist Nambeshe 
    17. Hon. Patrick Nsamba 

I beg to designate.

4.34
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence. I am still in some consultations. I beg to present the names later.

THE SPEAKER: On the Committee on Government Assurances?

MR SSEMUJJU: No, for the Committee on Appointments.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

4.34
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): On behalf of the Speaker, I beg to designate the following members to the Committee on Appointments:

    1. Hon. Margaret Rwabushaija 
    2. Hon. Herbert Kinobere 
    3. Hon. Moses Kasibante 

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Rwabushaija is an independent.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Since she has been designated to the same committee, I do not need to withdraw the name.

THE SPEAKER: We will just correct the record.

4.35
MS EVERLYNE ASIIMWE (UPDF): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Appointments, I designate hon. Felix Kulayigye.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that those names be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

4.35
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): On the Committee on Government Assurances, I designate the following members:

    1. Hon. Patrick Kasumba 
    2. Hon. Sarah Babirye
    3. Hon. Stephen Mayende 
    4. Hon. Caroline Kamusiime 
    5. Hon. Hellen Kahunde 
    6. Hon. Paul Amoru 
    7. Hon. Moses Bildad Adome 
    8. Hon. Fred Angella
    9. Hon. Betty Awor  
    10. Hon. Sam Byibesho
    11. Hon. Everlyn Chemutai 
    12. Hon. Catherine Lamwaka 
    13. Hon. Margaret Mbeiza 
    14. Hon. Robert Musoke 
    15. Hon. Boaz Ninsiima 
    16. Hon. Jack Odur 
    17. Hon. Ali Ogama 
    18. Hon. Kamugisha Timuzigu 
    19. Hon. Pius Wakabi 
    20. Hon. Brenda Asinde
    21. Hon. Henry Kibalya 

I beg to designate.

4.37
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Madam Speaker, for the Committee on Government Assurances, I designate the following Members:

    1. Hon. Mary Kabanda	
    2. Hon. Francis Mwijukye	
    3. Hon. Simon Oyet
    4. Hon. Mbaju Jackson
    5. Hon. Hassan Fungaroo Kaps - Chairperson	
    6. Hon. Michael Kabaziguruka  - Vice Chairperson 

4.37
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): On behalf of the Speaker, I beg to designate the following on Committee on Government Assurance:

    1. Hon. Stephen Kisa	
    2. Hon. Silas Aogon	
    3. Hon. Zaitun Driwaru		
    4. Hon. Ann Adeke Ebaju	
    5. Hon. Onesimus Twinamasiko	

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Everlyn Asiimwe -

4.38
CAPT. EVERLYN ASIIMWE (UPDF, Representative): Madam Speaker, on Committee on Government Assurances, I designate Hon. Col Flavia Byekwaso.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, I had applied to go either to PAC or COSASE but my application did not reach. I do not know what happened but I have a copy here.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that those Members be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Go and serve there. (Laughter)

4.39
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Local Government Accounts, I designate the following:

    1. Hon. Noah Mutebi	 
    2. Hon. Joseph Ssekabiito	
    3. Hon. Edward Ssembatya 	
    4. Hon. Rehema Watongola 
    5. Hon. Mugeni Milly	
    6. Hon. Gordon Bafaki	
    7. Hon. Kisembo Basemera	
    8. Hon. Hilary Lokwang		
    9. Hon. Stella Atyang	
    10. Hon. Zerubabel Nyiira	
    11. Hon. Robinah Nabbanja	
    12. Hon. Daniel Muheirwe	
    13. Hon. Alex Ruhunda	
    14. Hon. Jovrine Kaliisa	
    15. Hon. Fredrick Angura	
    16. Hon. Johnson Ssenyoga	
    17. Hon. Ismael Orot	
    18. Hon. Christen Achen	
    19. Hon. Gordon Arinda 	
    20. Hon. Mark Dulu 
    21. Hon. Robert Kasolo 	
    22. Hon. Judith Nabakoba	

I beg to designate.

4.43
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Madam Speaker, for the Committee on Local Government Accounts, I have the following members:

    1. Hon. Jonathan Odur	
    2. Hon. Florence Namayanja 	
    3. Hon. Centenary Robert	
    4. Hon. Emmanuel Ongiertho	
    5. Hon. Franca Akello - Chairperson
    6. Hon. Gilbert Olanya - Vice chairperson	

4.44
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): On behalf of the Speaker, I beg to designate the following Members to the Committee on Local Government:

    1. Hon. Abdulatif Sebaggala		
    2. Hon. Fred Baseke	
    3. Hon. Sarah Wekomba
    4. Hon. Julius Ochen	
    5. Hon. David Lukyamuzi 	
    6. Hon. Francis Mukula		
    7. Hon. Lydia Mirembe	

I beg to designate

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that those members be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

4.45
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, on Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE), I beg to designate the following:

    1. Hon. Nathan Twesigye	
    2. Hon. Bonny Okello	 
    3. Hon. Jenifer Mbabazi	
    4. Hon. Margret Baba Diri	
    5. Hon. Violet Odome Akurut	
    6. Hon. Michael Bukenya	
    7. Hon. Cuthbert Agaba	
    8. Hon. Vincent Waboya		
    9. Hon. Mugabe Dononzio	
    10. Hon. John Twesigye	
    11. Hon. Aisha Sekindi	
    12. Hon. Muyanja Mbabali	
    13. Hon. David Abala	
    14. Hon. Moses Angundru	
    15. Hon. Peter Mugema	
    16. Hon. Sheila Mwine Kabaije	
    17. Hon. Nagwomu Moses	
    18. Hon. Mwine Mpaka
    19. Hon. Kunihira Agnes
    20. Hon. Abraham Byandala
    21. Hon. Agnes Ameede	
    22. Hon. Prossy Akampulira	
    23. Hon. Paula Turyahikayo	
    24. Hon. Judith Babirye	
    25. Hon. Naome Kibaju	

I beg to designate.

4.46
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Madam Speaker, for the Committee on COSASE, I have the following members:

    1. Hon. Patrick Ocan	
    2. Hon. Medard Ssegona
    3. Hon. Allan Ssewanyana	
    4. Hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju	
    5. Hon. Paul Mwiru	 
    6. Hon. Mubarak Munyagwa - Chairperson
	
Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence and the indulgence Parliament because I have designated hon. Moses Kasibante as the Vice Chairperson. I would request you to withdrawal his name from the Committee on Appointments so that he can deputise hon. Munyagwa on the Committee on COSASE.

4.46
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): On behalf of the Speaker, I beg to designate the following Members to COSASE:

    1. Hon. Okin P.P. Ojara	
    2. Hon. Michael Mawanda Maranga
    3. Hon. Gideon Onyango
    4. Hon. Stella Kiiza	
    5. Hon. Beatrice Anywar	
    6. Hon. Muhammad Nsereko	
    7. Hon. Kato Lubwama	

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Kasibante will serve on the Committee on Appointments. Honourable members, I put the question that those Members be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, hon. Okin is the Vice Chairperson Committee on Public Accounts but he had also been designated on another committee.

THE SPEAKER: We shall sort that one out. Item five.

RESPONSES BY MINISTERS TO QUESTIONS RAISED

    I) ON INSECURITY IN AGAGO DISTRICT, OCCASIONED BY INCURSIONS OF KARIMOJONG HERDSMEN

4.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, on various days in the last two weeks, Members raised matters of national importance and we were unable to answer them at that time but we undertook to answer them.

One was raised by hon. Edward Makmot Otto of Agago relating to the issue of Santo Okot, who was allegedly killed in Agago by the Karamojong herdsmen.

Another related to an incident in Pallisa and Ngora regarding the killing of two persons. This was raised by hon. Abala. The statement I read is in response to the two.

Madam Speaker, this statement is in response to the directives of the Speaker to brief this House on the circumstances surrounding the death of Santo Okot of Agago District and the incidences that occurred in Pallisa on 12 January, 2019, resulting in that death.

Our statement is as follows:
On 6 January 2019, it was reported that Santo Okot, a 24 year old male adult and resident of Arru Kinta Village, Labwa Parish Adilang sub county Agago District had been killed. This report was made to the police.

It was suspected that he had been killed by Karamojong herdsmen on 5 January 2019 while he was grazing. That is the day before.
On the same day of the report, the community of Labwa Parish invaded Kanu Points in Abim District in retaliation and raided six cows, six donkeys, 137 sheep and seven goats. This action caused tension because of fear that the Karamojong of Abim would make a counter move and revenge.

On 12 January 2019, a stakeholders’ meeting chaired by the Third Division Commander and attended by LC5 Chairpersons, Members of Parliament, the District Police Commanders, DISOs and CAOs of Kotido, Abim and Agago districts was held. The purpose of this meeting was to reconcile the communities.

Another meeting for the same purpose was organised on 21 January 2019. That is yesterday. This meeting resolved, among other things, to urge police to conclude investigations on the death of Santo Okot. The police has opened a file to establish the circumstances surrounding the murder of Santo Okot. The scene of crime has been visited and statements from relatives and witnesses have been taken.

There is still the need to exhume the body, since it had been buried in the bush as per custom of the area, for post-mortem. The Uganda Police Force is conducting investigations with a view of establishing the actual suspects and have them apprehended.

Way forward

    i) In light of the fact that there still continues to exist tension between Karamojong herdsmen who continue to graze in Adilang and the local community, local leaders need to continue to hold reconciliation meetings to sensitise the communities.
    ii) Before the Karamojong Kraals move, they must seek consent of hosting districts.
    iii) There is need to regulate and gazette cattle markets in order to minimise cattle theft.
    iv) More Anti-Stock Theft Unit (ASTU) Personnel and police will be deployed to control the area and the theft of animals.

Pallisa Incidents

On 12 December 2018, fishermen from Agule, Pallisa fought fishermen from Kodike, Kobuin in Ngora. Two people were killed. For the sake of the details, this fight apparently escalated because one group said the other group was using prohibited nets while the others were using the correct nets but this has been investigated. This incident was sparked off by complaint of Pallisa fishermen that fishermen from Kodike were using illegal fishing gear. This is what I have talked about.  After that incident, the police have now restored ordered.

On l2 January 20l9 at Ometai village in Kameke sub county in Pallisa, a speeding motorcycle Reg. UEH 444E knocked and killed one Joseph Tukei, who was  also from the same village.

The relatives of the dead from Kobuin in Ngora demanded the body of the deceased be taken to his ancestral home for burial. However, before the body could be taken, the relatives, who had come for the body, demanded for compensation. Due to the fact that there was no agreement on the amount for compensation, the late Tukei's relatives called their relatives from Ngora to come and reinforce them. The LC III Chairman who had been chairing the compensation meeting realising that what was happening would lead to disorder reported to Kameke Police Post, who in turn called for reinforcements from Pallisa District Police Headquarters.

As the reinforcement team headed by Cadet ASP Aliganyira arrived and realising the huge numbers, the people from Ngora attempted to block them from accessing the home of Mr Charles Akurach home, who was the rider of the motorcycle and had knocked Tukei. The rowdy action of the crowd prompted the police to shoot in the air. In the process, Joseph Oumo and Robert Achelum got injured. Later, Oumo died. Police arrested 18 suspects in the course of that chaos.

On 13 January 2019, the Regional Police Commander Kyoga East and some political leaders met with the Regional Police Commander of Bukedi Region. The 18 suspects were released on bond and C/ASP Aliganyira and Sgt Opaya were arrested for using excessive force.

Charles Akurach who knocked Tukei is still on the run. Inquiries continue. These two incidents; the fishing one and the one of knocking the other person, are regrettable. We share the pain of the loss of lives and send our sympathies and condolences to the relatives and members of the bereaved families. The police have now restored calm.

However, we are still continuing to encourage the leaders of the two communities to exercise restraint and we appeal for calm. Investigations will continue and all those who instigated these sad events will be made to answer before the law.

Madam Speaker, that is the statement, which we have on the iPad. However, with your permission, there was an incident, which was raised in Jinja by hon. Paul Mwiru. We had also promised to report on the matter, once we found out what happened. Together with hon. Paul Mwiru, we resolved the matter but we did not make a written statement here. If you do not mind, I can state what we did. 

What happened is that 14 people were arrested on the instructions of the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) of Jinja. They were taken to the police and the police demanded that the RDC writes a statement as to why they were arrested. The RDC delayed for a number of days and the police decided, with our instructions, to release the 14 people. We asked that if the RDC is interested, he would then be able to call them back because they were released on police bond, in case of any allegation against them.

The reason they were arrested was over illegal fishing and that is why together with hon. Paul Mwiru, we decided that they should be released. That is why the statement is not here; we thought it is a small matter, which was resolved and we did not need to waste the time of Parliament.

Again, if you will permit me, I am aware that there is another statement, which I am supposed to make in the second item regarding – I think it is still on today’s Order Paper, regarding the incident in Kole District where five people were also arrested. 

Unfortunately, the circumstances are more or less the same like that of Jinja. The RDC ordered these people to be arrested because they were found digging on a wetland. The arrest was not with the support of the police. However, after arresting them, he brought them to the police and they were detained for a number of days. Once the police found out that these people had no basis for being detained, they were released on police bond.

These two incidences are very regrettable and I bring them because they really show that some of our functionaries over step their power. I would urge colleagues that in order to resolve these matters very quickly - Yes, I do agree that members would like to make such statements for record purposes in the House. However, in order to save such a situation - We always have errant members of society, in the forces and in all organisations all over the country. In order to resolve such matters very quickly, you could, if you wished, contact the ministers, the IGP or the district police commanders so that we take immediate action, instead of delaying.

I thought I should mention those two and this is the statement that I have made. Thank you very much. 

5.02
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. Allow me to also thank the minister for this statement that he has made. It is indeed true that as the minister has stated, two meetings took place and I was privy to those meetings; I attended both meetings, including the one of yesterday. 

The minister has indicated that regarding the killing in Adilang, investigations are still on-going and no arrest has been made at the moment. I believe that at a later time, it would be important for us to know how this is concluded. 

Having attended both meetings, I also think that there is a lot of other information that is very helpful to this situation, which has not been stated here. When I presented this matter on 20 December 2018, before we broke off, when I warned about this situation before the killing and eventually after the killing, when I presented this matter, I talked about the killing, which I think is a result of a problem that exists on the ground.

More importantly, we have been having serious cattle theft to the extent that we had about 143 animals unrecovered. We get this problem year in, year out. This year alone, we have lost about 28 cattle. What I would like to say is that the members have noted that there is now commercialised cattle theft by traders who are coming from outside the country –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are introducing new matters; supplementary questions should relate to his answer. You are now bringing new matters. 

MR EDWARD OTTO: Madam Speaker, these are things I presented here; they are not new matters.

THE SPEAKER: They do not arise from his answer. Supplementary questions should be out of his answer.

MR EDWARD OTTO: Madam Speaker, with your indulgence, if I could just get to the other –

THE SPEAKER: No, give the information to the minister. You are now going into other issues. Hon. David Abala, do you have a supplementary?

5.04
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Yes, I do.

THE SPEAKER: It should arise from his answer; no new issues.

MR ABALA: Exactly. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for the report. The first one is correct. However, the second one has challenges regarding the man that was shot in Pallisa and I am not comfortable with his report. 

I have a few questions. One, the minister said, in his report that the police shot in the air. Paragraph (c)(1) states that the man was shot from Okapel in Kobuin sub-county. Was he shot when he was in the air or when he was down? Was he flying, because he was shot twice in the stomach? 

Secondly, the report is saying that they were using illegal fishing gear. The question is, should we kill somebody who is using illegal fishing gear or he should be apprehended and face the law?

Thirdly, who commanded the operation that resulted into the killing of Opedun and his colleague in Omunyokol, Odike? Who commanded this operation on 12 December 2018? Thank you.                 

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, in my statement I have said that Cadet ASP Aliganyira has been arrested for using excessive force. What that means is that although his preliminary statement says he was shot in the air, he has been arrested for further investigations because there is suspicion that obviously, any shooting in the air would not have killed somebody. 

Therefore, this matter is under investigation from the position of a crime. Since it is a criminal investigation, I do not want to debate the merits of what is here and there. I cannot condemn anybody on either side and that is why I am just stating the facts as they are in the police occurrence book. 

I appeal to my colleagues, particularly the one who comes from this area, to take interest and follow up the matter on a daily basis. However, we shall be able to give our own position on the matter. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ojara, do you have a supplementary question? He is not here. Next item.

RESPONSE BY MINISTERS TO A QUESTION RAISED BY HON. WAMAKUYU MUDIMI ON THE CONTINUED INTERDICTION OF SOME CIVIL SERVANTS, NAMELY; MR APOLLO KAZUNGU, THE COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES AND MR GODFREY SASAGAH WANZIRA, THE DIRECTOR CITIZENSHIP AND IMMIGRATION CONTROL, IN CONTRAVENTION OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE STANDING ORDERS

5.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Madam Speaker, I stand here to seek for an extension of time, following your directive. When we received your directive, we contacted all the responsible officers in the various votes with cases exceeding six months but we have not got all the responses. Therefore, as a ministry, we are requesting for an extension of time so that we can come up with a comprehensive report.

THE SPEAKER: When will that be, honourable minister?

MR KARUBANGA: We are requesting for two weeks. We have the lists on our payroll; all those cases, which are under disciplinary procedures but we have not got the reasons on a case-by-case basis. We therefore requested the responsible officers in the votes to avail us with the reports on a case-by-case basis.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, in the first week of February, you should be able to come back to this House with a statement.

MR KIYINGI: Madam Speaker, the response from the minister is not satisfactory. The question raised by hon. Wamakuyu is specifically about two people. Why has it taken you that long to get information from the responsible sectors on just two people and why they remain on suspension?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the questions were about two people but during the course of the debate, a demand came out that we need a report on many of them. Honourable minister, maybe we can separate them. You can answer on the two first and the comprehensive one can come in February. For these two, if you could answer by the end of this week.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, it is a common practice in civil service that when a particular ministry, department or agency suspends an officer, the reason is always given and passed on to the Ministry of Public Service. Therefore, to say that you need to get back to the parent ministries is something that I fail to understand. By the time you put them on half pay, you would have already got the reason. 

What more information is the honourable minister going to get, say from the Ministry of Internal Affairs when he already has instructions given to him in black and white that he should effect a change in the payroll amount in that particular vote?

MR KARUBANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a point of clarification to hon. Kassiano Wadri, when any civil servant is interdicted, it is the responsible officers for the votes that handle the process. The central appointing commissions and the Ministry of Public Service are informed and we effect the half-pay on the payroll and our system captures it. 

However, the responsible officers go ahead to do the investigations. As a ministry, we have to get the response from the responsible officer for the vote about the status and that is what the letter required us to do. We cannot have the status unless we have the report from the responsible officers.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, let us separate them. For the two, let us have them by Thursday and we can have the other longer one in February.

Before we go to item No. 6, honourable members, we have already set the committees. The Clerk will arrange for the handovers but with respect to the Committee on Public Accounts-COSASE, they will complete their work and report in February before the change.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LAW REVISION (PENALTIES IN CRIMINAL MATTERS) MISCELLANEOUS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

THE SPEAKER: Where is the mover? The mover is not here. Let us go to item No. 7

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE SECURITY INTEREST IN MOVABLE PROPERTY BILL, 2018

THE SPEAKER: Is there no mover for item No. 7? Item No. 8.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

THE SPEAKER: Is there no minister? Item No. 9.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE VALUE FOR MONEY AUDIT ON THE COMPENSATION OF PROJECT-AFFECTED PERSONS UNDER THE REFINERY PROJECT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson or vice-chairperson? They are not there. Item No. 10.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE VALUE FOR MONEY AUDIT REPORT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF SOLAR ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE IN SELECTED EDUCATION AND HEALTH FACILITIES UNDER THE ENERGY FOR RURAL TRANSFORMATION PROJECT II (ERT II)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson or vice-chairperson? Absent? Item No. 11. Is it the same with item No.11?

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, when an item of this nature is put on the Order Paper, I would like to believe that the responsible chairpersons and vice chairpersons or the relevant ministers are informed that their docket is due for discussion on such a day so that they are here.

If it is a matter of having all these things put on the Order Paper and the responsible people are not there, it really makes work very difficult for the House. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, these matters have been on the Order Paper since last week and everybody is aware that this work is coming. By the way, they have been demanding to be put on the Order Paper.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, God works in a very big way. There is a last item on physical exercise. God wanted us to have enough discussion about it and I would urge that we go for that one by hon. Mbwatekamwa so that we discuss it thoroughly. God saw it. 

I would like to believe that God arranged it so that we discuss this item today and be given enough time. We should leave the Bills and go for that item on physical exercise. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: There are some small motions.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO STREAMLINE THE REMOVAL AND REINTEGRATION OF CHILDREN IN STREET SITUATION

THE SPEAKER: Can we go to item 13?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO PROMOTE NATIONAL MORAL CONSCIOUSNESS AND SOCIAL ETHICAL NORMALCY

THE SPEAKER: Try to be brief on your justifications.

5.19
MR NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, 

“WHEREAS Parliament is given the mandate under Article 79 of the Constitution to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda; 

AWARE that law and morality are intimately related and laws are generally based on the moral principles of society and both regulate the conduct of the individual in society;

CONCERNED that Uganda’s moral landscape is going through a tumultuous period, which renders millions of Ugandans to be concerned that the nation’s moral fabric is unravelling;

CONCERNED FURTHER that there is currently a systematic erosion of our moral values to an extent that threatens, in both medium and long term, the security, unity, stability and prosperity of Uganda and this phenomenon causes grave danger to the cohesion, viability, integrity and respectability of the Ugandan nation among the community of other nations;

NOTING that the entire citizenry has not been spared the debacle of moral decline, which is glaringly evident in the conduct and behaviour of an increasing number of leaders such as politicians, policy makers, religious leaders, civil servants, businessmen and women, youth, mothers, fathers and even children;

ALARMED that a prolonged period of seemingly unstoppable moral decline is likely to derail Ugandans toward a state of dependence, exploitation, domination by external interest and more overarching poverty throughout the country;

REALISING the urgent need to refocus the nation’s moral agenda and elevate Uganda’s moral consciousness towards socio-ethical normalcy at personal, institutional and societal levels, based on common aspirations buttressed by norms and values that uphold individual, institutional and societal virtues, which together create a culture of integrity;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that:

    1. Government introduces value systems on which both our Constitution and legal system hinge and on which we shall commit ourselves as Ugandans.
    2. Government develops and promotes a national policy and standards that will reposition Uganda on a pedestal of ethics and integrity, both of which are the foundation of sustainable peace, security, unity, stability, freedom and development.
    3. Government convenes national debates to discuss the on-going phenomenon of moral decline and social ethics in order to come up with strategies to mitigate the moral decline.
    4. Government institutes an education system that will emphasise values, morals, ethics, character and community engagement and increase public awareness of citizens’ moral obligations.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded. Give your justification in five minutes.

MR BUTURO: Madam Speaker, it is of historic importance that we, members of Parliament, have been given an opportunity to debate one of the most important motions ever to be presented on the Floor of this House. (Laughter)

The timing of this debate is propitious. For this, permit me to salute you for leading the way, yet again, in a matter that has overwhelming implications for Uganda. Why is this debate so important and timely? 

One, there is no other subject on earth that is as important as this one, which addresses ethics, morality and character. Secondly, Uganda is standing on the doorstep of take-off stage to a middle income status but this feat is being threatened and disfigured by forces of moral decay and depravity, which are creeping to imperil our motherland.

Never before has any other subject been so emotive and fundamental in as far as Uganda's fortunes are concerned. Examples of moral decline are everywhere for one to see. They include the following:
    i. High levels of dishonesty in society
    ii. Runaway greed
    iii. Low levels of accountability and transparency
    iv. Lack of integrity
    v. Distribution of condoms in places of convenience
    vi. Commercialisation of politics
    vii. Abuse of road traffic laws 
    viii. Sexual harassment 
    ix. Underage sex and marriages
    x. Sex for jobs
    xi. Sex for marks in institutions of higher learning 
    xii. Selling of vacancies and jobs in schools and Public Service respectively
    xiii. Promotion of perversions such as homosexuality, and
    xiv. Rampant stealing of public resources with impunity by officials, many of whom have formed cartels or syndicates, as well as acceptance of bribes by Government employees for services that should be provided free.

Madam Speaker, in primary and secondary schools, some teachers and headmasters have transmogrified into shadowy figures of the underworld with a view to procure and sell examination papers to students, pupils and parents yet these educators are the ones society has entrusted with bringing up children who are virtuous, empowered and ethical.  

In today’s New Vision, the Auditor-General reported a loss of Shs 385 billion in the Financial Year 2017/2018. He said that this money was misappropriated, misused or stolen from the Government coffers. It is disheartening to know that this pilfering of national resources has gone on unchecked. 

As this is going on, many young people are growing up today with an exaggerated sense of entitlement; a presumption that the society owes them a living and a predisposition to want to con their way to greatness. Moral decline is also witnessed in the conduct and behaviour of an increasing number of citizens who include political leaders. More and more people are feeling that they have the right to do whatever they want, even though they know that it is unlawful and at the expense of others.

Raucous events in Parliament last year demonstrate succinctly this disturbing development. We saw then and continue to witness, in this very august House, wanton and deliberate disregard of Rules of Procedure by some members. Apparently, up to the time, their behaviour was motivated by a false belief that the more rowdy, cantankerous and disruptive one is, the more one was likely to improve one’s political stock with one’s voters and the media. 

To be more precise, Madam Speaker, we are witnessing, at every level in our country, systematic erosion as well as corrosion of moral values. More ominous though is that this on-going moral decline is already causing ravaging effects at the family, work place and Governmental levels. 

If this insidious moral decline, which is creeping upon us, continues to play up unabated to its logical conclusion, it is likely to have far reaching and dire consequences for our motherland. A prolonged, controlled and unstoppable trend of moral and ethical decline could, if no drastic measures are taken to avert it, firmly anchor Uganda into a catastrophic state of non-governability, instability, insecurity, disunity, underdevelopment, dependence, oppression, exploitation and domination by external interests whose affinity for their inverted morality, such as homosexuality, is now legendary.

Madam Speaker, in order to reverse the on-going overbearing spectre of moral decline, a radical rethink is needed. Granted that Martin Luther King Jr observed that morality cannot be legislated, he also noted that behaviour can be regulated.

Finally, the current declining state of ethics and morality in our country cannot be ignored any longer. A tipping point is about to be reached. Addressing this state of affairs would return hope to Ugandans. It would also serve to redeem our image, as legislators, and reset parameters for a corruption free and ethically and morally driven society. 

Additionally, Madam Speaker, it would also lead to national unity, good governance, equitable development, civilised public discourse, mutual political accommodation and coexistence, consolidated national independence as well as an enhanced sense of public and individual obligations. 

Voters would be empowered to use to criteria or considerations such as ethics, morality and character in their determination of a candidate’s suitability to represent them. The burden of ensuring that lives of Ugandans are conditioned and informed by ethical and moral values will fall squarely on the shoulders of those who love God. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can I have hon. Kenneth Lubogo to speak for three minutes, please?

5.31
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate my colleague for this very important motion. I agree with him that this is probably the most important motion we are handling in the Tenth Parliament. 

This motion is an awakening call to the country for a matter we know but have taken for granted. The morality of Ugandans and issues of ethics have been given a secondary position in this country. Therefore, we are calling upon Ugandans in leadership, the old and young, women and men, the leaders and the led that there is need for us to review ourselves and try to put ourselves in the right direction as a country.

In this country, it is easier to find gold than integrity. It is easier to find mercury than ethics in this country. We must be concerned, as Ugandans, and ask ourselves, are we supposed to behave this way? Are we supposed to handle our country in that way? 

In this country, if you try to do something right, you are going to be fought left, right and centre. People will ferociously fight any person who tries to stand for standards and integrity in this country. I think that is not how we are supposed to act while we see our country going down the drain. 

It is reported that we lose more than Shs 500 billion annually in this country. I believe this is an understatement. You will recall that the Auditor-General also reported on the finances of the Youth Livelihood Programme where he said that 65 per cent of that money is wasted or stolen. 

As a country, we must rediscover ourselves. We must ask ourselves questions. As Uganda, we need to turn around and take the right direction. 

In this country, there are many people who have a lot of wealth; they are very rich but are unwilling to tell where they get their money from. Why would someone put up huge buildings but fail to explain where they are getting the money from?

I think Government must change this. As a policy, people must account for their wealth. Why shouldn’t you explain your wealth unless you have stolen the money? Why shouldn’t people explain the sources of their wealth?

I think there is a spoilt generation of probably 95 per cent of Ugandans. What do we do? Probably, we must look to the young ones; maybe those in nursery schools and we start teaching them issues of ethics. Maybe we should start teaching values in primary schools. Otherwise, the country has no future and we must be worried. Every Ugandan must be worried. This is not the kind of country we should be happy to live in.

Madam Speaker, if you may grant me the permission, I would like to tell this House something that happened during Christmas. I was at home and young children came to my home. They were in primary school and when I saw them coming, I was very glad. I wanted to talk to them and started speaking to them in English. I asked who amongst them was in P6 and P7.

I asked them how old they were and I allowed them to ask me questions. They said they were not going to ask me questions but that they had come for something. I asked them to say what they had come for and they said they wanted me to give them some money. I looked at them and said, these are the people who are coming up. Some of them were 14, 15 or 16 years and they are going to be voters in future. This is the kind of society that we are bringing.

That is why I am saying that probably, we should look to nursery schools for people who are three years old and start telling them about ethics, integrity and morality as a country.

Otherwise, we must rise up and Government - Moreover when we say Government, sometimes you ask, who should you be telling anyway? Government must rise up and we have to do something as a country to turn the direction of this country. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I support the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, someone who should have been listening to issues of the curriculum is the Minister of Education.

5.36
COL. FELIX KULAYIGYE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A man called Warren Buffet, one of the richest men in the World, had this to say, “When you are looking for labour, you want three things: energy, brains and character. But if the third is missing, do not bother about the first two.” 

Man is a conscious being and must have a moral campus that governs him or her. Every society has a value system that has evolved through generations and these values have stood the test of time. What protect these values are rules that have passed down from descendants, generations after generations, the dos and don’ts and every community had them. These rules were strictly enforced by society in various ways and punishments ranged from fines to canes, banishment and even execution if you breached them. 

Over the years of instability in this country, morality has been eroded, the authority of the elders has been eroded. No wonder today, it does not matter your age, the young people do not recognise that you have something to offer. You could not sit when an elder is standing but today, it does not matter whether you have grey hair. Somebody will just look at you and he/she thinks they have a right to be where they are.

Even when people make a mistake on the street, when you comment - For instance, I found a man urinating on the roadside near shops and when I asked him why he was dirtying the city, he asked me, “Are you Jennifer Musisi?” You can imagine and I think that I am not unknown in this city but somebody had that audacity to respond to me in that way. 

It is imperative to note that every community, including animals, has recognised leadership. Among the hyenas, it is the most senior female hyena. Among the lions, they have a king. The only animal without a community is the leopard because it is loner –(Member timed out.)

5.39
MS JOY ONGOM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the movers of this motion on issues of morals and ethics in this country. Sincerely speaking, Ugandans have lost it all on issues of morals and integrity. This is not just specific persons; it is the young, old, women and men alike.

You would think it is the cultural institutions, political leaders or religious leaders that should come to our rescue but the cultural institution is divided, politicians are equally divided and instead of religious leaders instilling morals in the people, they are focused on money.

Corruption is the order of the day in this country. Drunkenness is found in both women and men alike. You wake up in the morning and find them all drunk irrespective of what they are supposed to do. Sexual harassment is on the increase, idleness; a situation where people want to live on handouts and nobody wants to work - This is too much! There is negligence where no parent is willing to take care of their own children, children depend and defend on themselves. There is theft and lack of hygiene where somebody eats and just throws the maize cobs, sugar cane - 

THE SPEAKER: Conclude.

MS ONGOM: I have been asked to be the acting Leader of the Opposition. However, this is what is happening in this country. If we are to bring this country to norm, there are areas that we have to check. We do not need to politicise a few things. We should leave politics away from this, train Ugandans and show them the right direction. I think that is where we are going to achieve our moral ethics and integrity in this country.

If you want to give Ugandans an example, we talk of Rwanda and other countries. What can’t we do as a country? We go to school and we benefit from all these things. Therefore, we have to start in the right direction by training our children. In addition, we also have to be exemplary. I thank you so much.

5.43
MS DOREEN AMULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of morality and ethics in Uganda is alarming. This is a concern that all of us take the blame for. The leadership, right from the grassroots to the top most peak of the country, seem to be neglecting -

Recently when I went for a football tournament in my constituency, I almost shed tears when I found a team of people dancing on 1 January 2019 in a trading centre where we have the LCIs, cultural leaders, religious leaders and all categories of leaders including me, a Member of Parliament. That trading centre is being named, no age limit. The people are saying that my honourable colleague and I have removed the age limit and therefore, you can have any girl of whatever age and any man of whatever age and nobody is rising up. 

In our villages, we have markets within a community that are named “an old person is sweet from the west”. Religious leaders and politicians go to those markets but nobody is waking up to say that what we are feeding our children on is wrong. 

This is the right time that we do not only legislate but take up the mantle to make sure that we revamp the pride that we once had. As I was growing up as a young girl, you would know that when an elder passes when –(Member timed out.)

5.45
MR EMMANUEL KALULE (NRM, Gomba East County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This motion should have been brought yesterday because it is very crucial. This nation has gone to the dogs. You do not need to go very far away, start here. Look at that board saying we are 191 members in this House. However, can you assure me that we are even 50 in this House right now? How can you talk of morals when in your own House, people are saying they are present but almost all of them are gone?

This reminds me of the problem of street children. How do you raise a nation where people think that you earn a living by begging? We are trying to promote tourism but our tourists are always embarrassed on the streets. Go to the traffic lights along Entebbe road. When these children see a muzungu, they will cling and pressurise him or her for money and they get fed up. Perhaps that is one of the reasons why we are not getting enough tourists in this country.

I ask myself, where do these children come from? How do children of two years move from the villages to town centres? Who brings them and what is the motive –(Interruption)

MS NAKIWALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to inform my colleague that we have expeditiously put up a spirited fight against this. We sampled out in June and July and we were successful in emptying all streets of street children. Unfortunately, we ran out of funds. 

We have been allocated more money, which we are going to get at the beginning of February. I can assure my colleague that in a few weeks to come, he is yet to see another stage altogether when we are trying to empty the streets. Therefore, his fears should rest in the meantime.

MR KALULE: Thank you, honourable minister, for the information. I will be happy to see these children away from the streets. 

This is a country where you go to toilet facilities that are used by all age groups and find a pile of condoms placed there. How does this affect our children who visit these toilets? (Member timed out.)

5.48
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Madam Speaker, I wish to thank hon. Nsaba Buturo for bringing this motion.

Prof. Lombroso of Criminology, in one of his principles says, “The character of a person is formed by his morphology.” This has been criticised by a number of scholars because character formation is as a result of socialisation in which case therefore, families play a pivotal role in ensuring that children are brought up properly hence a healthy nation. 

However, in our country today, criminals are increasingly exalted. They are the ones who are seen to be hard working. The corrupt, who have mansions mushrooming every other day, are the ones being praised that so and so is hardworking and clever. Those who are genuine in whatever they do are instead being despised that so and so is lazy and unproductive. 

Just go next door to Rwanda. Why has Rwanda performed very well in terms of moral upbringing, especially in public offices? It is because they meticulously follow any development by any person holding an office or one who claims to be doing business. The moment you begin thinking about building a house and you have thrown the first lot of sand, bricks and the rest, you are investigated. What is your salary? If you say you are a businessman, can we see your tax returns?  If you claim that you have bought –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: You are given a half a minute to conclude. 

MR WADRI: Even if you say that you have taken a loan, they will want to know from what bank and what are the collateral securities that you presented. That makes everybody to make sure that whatever he or she does is something out of genuine earnings.

In our country, shamelessly, the most corrupt are those who are in very key positions. They are known but nothing is done to them. They are untouchable and here we are. Even to the extent that when you talk about religious leaders being responsible for character formation, time and again in our newspapers, you hear of pastor so and so who has sexually molested his followers.

Where are we going?  We all need to strategise right from our families. Parental responsibility must be seriously taken by parents. Education –(Member timed out.)

5.52
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I will need 10 minutes because this is a very big debate.

The biggest challenge that we have, as a country, is how we can be able to find people who have the moral power to teach others about morals. Why am I saying so? The most challenging aspect is the politicians. If we paused a question right now, even among the three people who have moved this; the mover and the seconders, when it comes to matters of bribes in Parliament, I would think that they never picked anything on the decision of ”Togikwatako” (Amended Article 102 (b) of the Constitution). Did they or didn’t they?

Therefore, the issue of getting people who are morally upright is very challenging. The money can be found by Government and you can have the vehicles to go to the field but to have people who have the moral authority to tell people something and they believe can be another matter. It needs the Holy Spirit to intervene.

Madam Speaker, I am not saying that the people who moved this amendment are not morally upright but the question is, are they? In this gathering, are we upright? The best thing we would do is for us to find a day of repentance; to go down before God then we open another chapter. Otherwise, we shall waste our time. 

If you talk about moral consciousness, today you are talking about this but if you are told that tomorrow you are going for another meeting, a meeting where you are up in impunity against the law – (Member timed out.)

5.54
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. Among the Alur people, there is a saying that a puppy picks the way the parent squats. I am even questioning myself if I have the moral authority to debate this. This is because I have mentioned before, like my colleague has said, that a lot of times when we are discussing critical issues here, particularly Bills, there are rumours around us. All those rumours are bad for us and they do not give us the moral authority to debate. 

When we say that we want to go back and follow the rules, society has put in place values and principles but a lot of times we fail on them because when those values touch on us, we quickly want to shift the goal posts. As long as the values touch on other people we say yes, those values should be followed. I think that is where we have problems.

I also want to challenge each one of us, just like he says that we need to repent, let us get back to our individual self and let us get back to our homes. What are we doing to our children? How are we bringing up our children? That is the –(Member timed out.)

5.56
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Buduuda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I should also thank the mover of the motion. However, Madam Speaker, you remember in the State of the Nation Address, the President decried the level of mercenarism as form of corruption - where one is hired as a mercenary and only cares about money to execute a mission for the one who has paid. 

There is a fundamental question: are we the right people with the moral authority to preach water while we drink wine? For example, do you remember the controversial Article 102(b) of the Constitution, where a number of us were used as mercenaries to execute a mission? (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, when the issues of moral consciousness, as we moralize, intellectualize and philosophize on this very important matter, one wonders - and actually my mind is flooded with so many questions but the critical one is: wouldn’t places of worship, churches and mosques, be places of refuge for moral rearmament? However, these are the very places where the people are exploited right, left and centre. They preach prosperity, play on the psychology of the flock and reap them of –(Member timed out.)

5.58
MR MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and Happy New Year to you all. To be honest, at least each profession has a conduct of behaviour and ethics and a supervisory body that supervises the conduct and behaviours of the members.

Therefore, the right point to begin with is perhaps to have a look at these bodies. A good number of us here are professionals in different fields. Unfortunately today, the language has changed. When I was a young boy, I used to hear about people earning money through hard work. 

However today, people talk about deals, making money while the children are listening very carefully. We are the very people teaching these children to be the way they are, which is not good. It is also not right to think that it is the sole responsibility of Government to do it - that is not true. For example, I am an accountant, if I go to audit your books of accounts and there are a lot of errors, which are unbecoming, ACCA - (Member timed out.)

6.00
MS MARGRET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion because this is an important topic. I would like to inform all of us that we are the ones who have created for ourselves that very dangerous situation we are in. We are now very unsafe including our children because we have created it.

That is why these days children no longer respect adults. They just destroy property as if they have acquired from nowhere, they just pick anything, now prostitution begins from children to adults; we have created this situation.

We are born innocent though with few instincts, for example, eating, crying, laughing and the rest are acquired from our environment; we have acquired these bad behaviours. The children learn from the parents and their family in general. If the parents are thieves, the children will grow up to be thieves; if the parents move out every night, the children will grow to move out; and if the parents are lazy and play cards every day, the children will do the same. Children observe things from us right from the beginning. 

Therefore, if we want to reform our society, let us start right from the family. Let us give good examples to our children so that they can follow. In a home where people insult each other using bad language, the children grow up that way. Let us go to the root of our behaviour and bring up our children very well - (Member timed out.)

6.02
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also add my voice to the voices of the movers of the motion. Madam Speaker, morality cannot be taught at school; this starts at home. The perceptions of our children and us is also to blame.

Madam Speaker, one time I went with hon. Atiku and other members to meet street children - they told us that it was the problems they encountered in their homes that made them run to the streets. What would you now expect of someone who has been chased from home because of our own bad character and is now in the streets?

We have a poor perception. You see our children especially the boys putting on trousers ending in the buttocks with no parent raising a finger over a child behaving that way.

Our children are excited when we show them new things. Technology is good to us but many parents will allow their children to watch what is alien but at the end of the day, it grows within our communities and we start blaming ourselves.

People have talked of money – I remember we used to go to school with Shs 200 as pocket money but today, there are parents, I am told, who tell their children to pick bundles of money for pocket money. What do you expect? 

Madam Speaker, family setups are to blame for the immorality and –(Member timed out.)

6.05
MS JOSEPHINE BEBONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and my colleagues’ contributions. 

The experience from Bundibugyo is bad. When night falls, the age bracket for boys and girls disappears. We have a problem of camps and centres, which came up during the insurgency in 1996. This made the situation worse because now people are living in congested communities.

We also have the grasshopper season in our place, where parents send their children at night to pick grasshoppers. We also have the season of musicians. I do not know whether they think there is a lot of money down in Bundibugyo. I think musicians’ activities should be regulated. During the festive season, they come down there and you find a mix of all ages, from children to parents, and they go to those night festivals to watch the musicians. That is why in Bundibugyo District, we still have high numbers of teenage pregnancies and school dropouts. 

I urge my honourable colleagues that as leaders, we should not get tired of continuing to sensitise the community. I also urge parents to ensure they bring up their children with good morals. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.07
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the movers of the motion and to thank my colleagues for their contributions as well as support for the motion. 

Madam Speaker, it has been said that integrity is grown at home, from families and parents. In my opinion, the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity should come up with a sensitisation strategy on how we, including the social support systems, the religious bodies and the cultural institutions, shall all be enrolled to sensitise our people to ensure that we grow integrity right from the home. 

Secondly, we also need to change the school curriculum. The schools need to supplement what the parents have taught. We need to teach civic education so that people get know their roles, duties and responsibilities right from childhood - the fact that you need to respect yourself, others and the law. 

Respect for the law - Some of us think that somehow we are too big to follow the law. I think Government needs to come out here to help us. They should be strict. The law is the law and no one should be above it. These corrupt officials are known but somehow the law goes for the “small man”. How is it that we do not see big people who are known to be corrupt being held responsible and accountable? 

Madam Speaker, the issue of the moral breakdown in this country is a big concern – (Member timed out.) 

6.08
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to thank hon. Nsaba Buturo and his team for moving this motion. I would also like to thank my colleagues who have really spoken to this motion.

Once upon a time, Uganda used to be praised for having ubuntu, which is a well-known word loosely translated as moral consciousness, discipline and positive ideology. It includes all those things. Madam Speaker, you have noted with concern in this House the lack of national guidance, and it is a big concern to all of us. See what is aired on our televisions, for example. By 10 o’clock in the morning, you will see naked girls dancing. Listen to what radio stations are airing; it is immorality yet there is nobody to call them to order. Therefore, I think we should make regulations and laws that actually control what these radio and television stations air because they air poison to our society and children. 

Madam Speaker, today we spend little time with our children because most of the time they are at school. Therefore, what is taught in schools is important, and I agree with hon. Kamateeka that we should look at civic education. What are our children taught? It is important because they complement –(Member timed out.)

6.11
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank Members for moving this motion. 

I would like to add my voice to the issue of immorality in the society. I would also like to implore the Ministry of Education and Sports and all stakeholders to come up with a curriculum on teaching basic values. This can be an amalgamation of our traditional and religious values that teach people to respect others and other people’s property. Perhaps that will address the issue of corruption. 

About morality being a fabric of the family, when I look at people in my constituency, who are the heads of families? The majority of them are victims of a failed system and the failed economics and politics in the country. They are school dropouts and some are poverty victims. How can you expect them to hold up to these moral standards? 

When we were children, our parents commanded economic and moral power; they were able to guide us. These days, we have a problem of enforcement in the countryside. The local councils, the Gombolola Internal Security Officers (GISOs) and the headmasters are all drunkards. Perhaps we have to take on more hard questions, including changing the Constitution, to remove politics from public service delivery. Let the local politicians deal with political parties and let issues of administration be issues of the state. (Member timed out.) 

6.12
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that even God demands everybody to be fair - not to defraud others or your neighbour. Leviticus 19:13 reads, “Do not defraud or rob your neighbour. Do not hold back the wages of a hired worker overnight.” That is the Bible. What is happening in Uganda? People are robbing, looting and a lot of money is being lost both in the private and public sectors. That is where the big problem is. Even when they know that it is not good, they are seriously doing the same. 

Proverbs 11:1 reads, “The Lord detests dishonest scales but accurate weights find favour with God.” Incidentally, even today with the scales that are used in the markets, this is what is happening, though God is against it. That is why the Bible says that we must restore and think about ethics. 

Madam Speaker, there is a simple saying that a man without ethics is a wild beast loosed upon this world. This means that if you do not have ethics, you are like a beast that has been released to cause chaos and – (Member timed out.) 

6.15
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the mover of this motion. 

I think the Minister of Ethics and Integrity must do something - although he is not around - because it is a shame. When you go to places like Ankole, you realise that some villages and markets are even named in a vulgar way. There is a village called “Kwatakintu”, which is found in Kitabi, literally meaning one should touch on something. Some of the names of these villages here would tantamount to unparliamentary language. (Laughter) Some village in Bushenyi District is called Kabagarame, which literally means that when someone goes there, they are supposed to lie down facing up. Some villages have some funny names such as Kabanshwere, which literally means “let them sleep with me”. These are names of villages in western Uganda. There is even a village called Kacwampare, meaning that some men wake up very early to sit in the bars till some patches develop on their trousers around the buttocks. 

I think we have not done a good service to our generation.  We have found these places but we cannot think about renaming them. Therefore, I call upon the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity - One time, as I shared information with hon. Silvia Akello from Otuke, she told me that they also have – (Member timed out.) 

6.17
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (Independent, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The discussion of morals and integrity in our society is something, which is overdue; it should have been worked on long ago. 

The situation in our country has moved from being immoral to madness. I would like to agree with the previous speakers that this has been rooted in the elders. Those days, parents had time for their children but nowadays, it is not the case. Elders would sit with the children but now, that is not happening. That is why I am saying the situation has moved from immoral behaviour to madness, and we have to get solutions to that. 

It is good that the Rt Hon. Speaker has always organised prayer breakfasts; actually, the country needs prayers each and every week. There is total madness everywhere. We must get a solution to this. We have to begin with ourselves. I know that can be solved because when leaders are upright, the followers will just agree with them. That is how things will change. Thank you so much.

6.19
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the mover of the motion. 

My concern with this motion, however, is that it touches so many aspects that are covered by our laws; for example, we have the Anti-Corruption Act, the Inspectorate of Government Act, the Penal Code Act and the traditional leaders Act. In the justification, the mover cites some of the aspects of moral decadence, which ordinarily would be addressed by those legislations. 

The bigger issue is; are we admitting that even with the presence of such laws that we have made as Parliament, the issue of moral decadence remains a very big problem? If that is the issue, we need to re-examine the effectiveness of the laws that we make. If the issue is legislative in nature, then perhaps we need to come back here and reconsider the legislations that we made. 

Otherwise, broadly speaking, as hon. Francis Zaake has said, if we want to improve the morals of our country, morals are improved through exemplary character. If we are exemplary as leaders, the led will be exemplary. If we are not, then expect the people we lead not to be exemplary. So, I think fundamentally – (Member timed out.)

6.21
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When we talk about moral decadence, what must ring a bell in our minds is this question: As fathers and mothers, what is our responsibility to our children? This is important because one cannot expect a just society when the core foundation, which is the family, is neglected. 

As parents, we are suffering from a terrible disease called “too busy”. We are too busy to attend to our children and we leave our children to acquire knowledge from each and every angle. Like we used to say, we know that some of us were grown but others just grew. There is a very great difference between someone who was grown and someone who just grew without any guidance.

Unless we cement our family values, unless we spare time for our children, especially the fathers - at least, some of the mothers have done their work - on visitation days at schools – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Sometimes I am surprised when you go to schools for Parents Teachers Association (PTA) meetings and you find women there; the men will not be there.

6.23
MR FRANCIS GONAHASA (FDC, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the movers of the motion, just like all of us have done. I should have seconded this motion but I missed out. 

I just want to remind all of us that on the 50th anniversary of the independence of our country, the President of this country said a prayer and he repented on behalf of this country because he appreciated the challenge of corruption and the challenge of sin. He said a wonderful prayer and I wish that prayer would be replayed to us. It was translated into all the languages of this country so that we can see what his commitment was to changing the morals of this country. The trouble is that after the prayer, that was the end of the story. 

The challenge we have in this country is that we also have some of the best laws against graft, corruption, traffic mismanagement- that is all part of the decay of this country. Every morning, I come through a traffic jam with boda bodas and I ask myself, “Where is the law and where are the law enforcers?” What happens is that the police look the other way, the boda bodas and cars do whatever they want and everybody survives. It is like the law of the jungle - the fittest survives.

I would like to thank my friends who have mentioned the idea of going back to the civics that we studied when we were young children. Let us get back to civic education –(Member timed out.)

6.25
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA MUZANIRA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. Allow me to add my voice to Members in thanking the mover of the motion. 

I would like to remind honourable members that as Ugandans, we write things and keep them in the books but the neighbouring countries get them, use them and benefit from our knowledge. I would like to remind all Ugandans that we have 10 national values, which I request that if possible, from today we should tell all primary and secondary schools as well as institutions to include in their curricula. In whatever we do in the country, if we follow these national values, we shall all be very smart.

The first value is respect for humanity and environment. We carry things in kaveras when we are going to Kigali, Rwanda and when we reach the border between Uganda and Rwanda, we throw the kaveras away and leave them in our country. We buy other materials that we use to carry the stuff we are going with to Kigali, Rwanda. 

The second value is to be honest, uphold and defend the truth at all times. If you ask Members of Parliament who among them speaks the truth – Those present in this House can tell Ugandans whether we speak the truth or we are lying to the people who sent us here.

Value three is justice and fairness in dealing with others –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I think I will allow the honourable member to list them for us.

MS BAMUKWATSA: There is hard work for self-reliance; integrity, moral uprightness and sound character; creativity and innovativeness; social responsibility; social harmony; national unity; and the tenth is national consciousness and patriotism.

If we followed these, Madam Speaker, Uganda would be the best country to live in and I am proud to be a Ugandan. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Muzanira.

6.29
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the mover of the motion. I also thank my sister for talking about the ethical values of education because that is what I was going to talk about. 

Ethical values of education are derived from both informal and formal education. Informal education is the one that is got from home when children are between the ages of one and four. They are taught how to behave in the community. They are told not to fight or steal, to clean up, brush their teeth, go to church, go to the garden and so on. 

Once a child has got that, he or she is promoted to study in the classroom, which is formal education. Thank you so much, my sister. Both informal and formal education have got ethical values, which include, among others, honesty, respect, forgiveness, reconciliation, peace, hard work, harmony, co-existence, speaking the truth and so forth.

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, we are hosting refugees in West Nile. During the day, these girls and boys stay in the camps but at night they become urban refugees. The girls move up and down with the boys and this has brought about immorality and other vices – loose and reckless lifestyles characterized by drug addiction, watching pornographic materials –(Member timed out.)

6.31
MR ALLI OGAMA (NRM, Lower Madi County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In appreciating the mover of the motion, I would like to add a few things that could have an impact on what we are discussing here tonight.

Madam Speaker, around the 7th of February last year, you delegated a team of seven Members of Parliament to represent the institution in Malaysia at the World Urban Forum Conference. I would like to share an experience about what I saw informally. While we moved with colleagues from West African countries along one of the streets, one MP from West Africa opened a mineral water bottle and dropped its cover on the ground. 

There was a young boy moving with his father, following this MP - I believe they were Malaysian nationals – and this boy was very concerned that he had to tap the father. He said, “Daddy, see”. Indeed, that is the kind of sense of responsibility they have indoctrinated in their children. This Member felt very ashamed that he had to go back and pick the cover he had dropped on the – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, close your contribution.

MR OGAMA: That is what is happening in those societies. Today in Africa, and Uganda in particular, we lack a sense of collective responsibility. When we talk about cross-generational sex, look at what is happening in the society. A man at the age of 80 years is moving around with a girl of 21 years and he is comfortable. Nobody is condemning that because they see this girl as somebody else’s daughter and not their own. It is happening! Many people are victims of this. Unless we start correcting this from our own backyards, it will be difficult for us to manage the situation we are in.

There is also the issue of unregulated social media. Today, the young can access any information they wish to on social media platforms, like pornography. People have become very informed to the extent that they know things that would not be right for them to know in the ancient days. What can we do as a country? I think we need to be careful about the actions we take as individuals –

THE SPEAKER: Please, close.

MR OGAMA: Madam Speaker, my contribution, in the same vein, is particularly related to the sense of individual responsibility before collective responsibility - how your actions can reflect on the behaviour of society as a whole. I thank you very much.

6.35
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to add my voice to others in thanking the mover of the motion, especially now that we are addressing the moral fabric of our country.

I have been listening attentively but trying to think aloud about what went wrong. I tend to believe that at times we borrow and inherit practices, systems and cultures wholesomely from foreign countries, without digesting, before incorporating them into our good cultures and practices which we had before. I do not think there is any tribe in this country where you can abuse somebody in a vulgar way. However, it is so easy to tell somebody “stupid” or “foolish” in English yet one cannot do it in our local languages. 

I was trying to see where we went wrong. I would like to believe that in our homes, one can ably express themselves and even tune the morals of their child using their local language, which is difficult for one to do using English because the English language has got very few words. English expressions are too narrow. Therefore, I believe that our curriculum needs to be anchored on those good cultural practices even when we are introducing –(Member timed out.)

6.37
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by the honourable Dr Nsaba Buturo for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to promote national moral consciousness and social, ethical normalcy.

Many people have spoken in regard to the laws that we have and the moral decadence in this country. I concur with all of them. In supporting this motion, I think that much as we may urge Government to bring back normalcy and morals to our country, we the parents should be the first persons to point fingers at ourselves. 

This motion takes me back to the memories of our time. When we were growing up, I remember my parents used to tell me that it was immoral and unethical not to treat human beings with dignity and not to respect elders; anybody in your mother’s age bracket was your mother and anybody in your father’s age bracket was your father. My parents taught me to be accountable. If you got anything from someone, let your parents know. Whenever someone would give me even Shs 100, I was under moral obligation to report to my parents that so and so gave me this Shs 100 and my parents would appreciate the person in turn.

However, when we look at the levels of corruption today, if somebody bribed me, for example, will I really be in position to go and tell my children that their uncle gave me money? – (Member timed out.)

6.39
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County South, Bukomansimbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the movers of the motion on moral decadence. I have two issues to raise.

I attach the moral decadence in the country to social media and poverty levels. Today, there is a new development, and I do not know whether it is in my area only or all over the country. I grew up fearing dead people. When going to school, we would even abandon using a path that went near a place where somebody had just been buried. However, when you go to attend a burial these days, you find people displaying commodities for sale at a burial place. They happily trade while others are mourning. This is also something to do with moral decadence. 

In Buganda, we have a proverb that says, when a tree is germinating and it bends, by the time it grows, it is very hard for one to straighten it; the moment one tries to straighten it, it will just break. Moral decadence has something to do with parents. What is happening these days? You find parents sharing the same bedroom with children; children will copy what happens at night and at the end of – (Member timed out.)

6.41
MS JANE NABULINDO (Independent, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the mover of this motion and I support it. 

Sincerely speaking, charity begins at home. As parents, children must learn from us. A child sees the way we talk, dress, eat and walk. We have borrowed the foreign culture too much. The way those people dress is the way we also struggle to dress here and the children see us. We have left all our responsibilities to the matrons and teachers. When one takes their two-year-old child to boarding school, don’t they expect the matron and teachers to teach their child morals? Is that how it is supposed to be? 

In the early 1980’s, we used to have prayers at school before class. We used to have Scripture Union clubs and senior women teachers. All those things have ceased. The senior woman teacher would teach us about how to dress, how to respect elders, how to talk and how we should behave. Nowadays, all those things do not exist.

Therefore, I call upon the Ministry of Education and Sports to at least include Scripture Union clubs and bible study, maybe on Wednesdays in the evening or during lunch hour, for our children to at least learn some good morals. I speak as a born-again Christian and I think it is too much. Even in churches, you find choir members – (Interjection) – Not pastors, I mean members of the choir –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 27 Members have contributed, so I would like to put the question that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, of course this is an important issue, but the Minister of Ethics and Integrity and the Minister of Education and Sports are not here. I would like to direct the Clerk to Parliament to extract this Hansard and send it to the Minister of Ethics and Integrity and also the Minister of Education and Sports and ask them to respond to that debate because we need to see how we are going to move.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, first of all, thank you for acknowledging that this is a critical subject. Can I propose, with your permission, that a committee of Parliament on ethics and integrity be considered to drive a number of unique areas or proposals we have made that Government should undertake.

I agree with you, and I wish the ministers were here, but they are not. I wish this debate was broadcast live. I wish the –

THE SPEAKER: Hasn’t it been broadcast?

MR BUTURO: I wish that is the case. However, what I clearly draw from this debate is the choice we are making either to rise or sink together as a nation. The evidence available indicates a degree of lawlessness in every aspect in our lives, in the system of governance, production and relationships. I pray you consider having a committee on ethics and morality in Parliament to urge Government to continue with its task.

THE SPEAKER: That will require amendment of the rules. We do not have a committee on integrity but it is handled under the Office of the President. Therefore, it will go to the Committee on Presidential Affairs for the start. You could give a copy to the Committee on Presidential Affairs as well. 

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Thank you. I listened to the deliberations by Members and I see that the issues are cross-cutting. It has elements of education, since Members talked about the curriculum. It also has elements of ethics, which can go to the President’s office. 

There is also national guidance and elements of gender - the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is represented. It has issues for the Ministry of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance because some Members spoke about social media.

I do not know whether, if we were to have a specific committee of ethics and integrity specifically emanating from this motion, we would be doing injustice to this sensitive matter. I am of the view, possibly like you have guided, that for the meantime, it rests with the Office of the President. 

However, we need to see how to pick out bits of it that fall under the education sector for the curriculum redesign. There are issues that come under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development such as the reawakening of the cultural leaders to let them understand that their mandate is to guide people in terms of traditions and values. There is also the social media issue which falls under the ICT ministry.

THE SPEAKER: We shall ask the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to examine those proposals. It requires amending the rules to create another committee. 

MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I listened to the debate from the beginning up to the end. However, the national values that were read out by the Woman Member of Parliament for Rukungiri touch each and every segment of the state. 

To me, it would be the responsibility of the nation to articulate these values wherever we go, like it is done for other organisations. Each organisation has values and they are mainstreamed in everything that is done by that organisation. So, as a country, we need to refocus those values and see how we apply them daily in all that we do. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: It is very important. I think we now need the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance to tell us about that part of his docket; it is asleep. You hear about ICT but you never hear about national guidance. That is why we are struggling with all these issues. 

I think we should ask the minister to bring a statement this week so that we know where to take these issues. There must be a mover and it should be the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance. The minister should come and update us on that docket.

MR BENARD ATIKU: Thank you. I thank the honourable Dr Nsaba Buturo for the motion and Members for deliberating. 

The point of the national values needs to be resolved here as we conclude the debate on this motion. I believe if we pass it as a resolution, we will then task the minister to find modalities on how we can cascade those values to our children. Like every school sings the national anthem in the morning when they are holding assemblies, why not compel them to recite the national values together with the national anthem. That is the most effective way to begin to imprint these national values so that as children ascend in the academic ladder, they keep emphasising and practising the values they have been reciting as children. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know where hon. Muzanira got those values from, but I think we need to adopt them first. I think we may need a debate here to adopt them formally before we give them to the country. 

MS KAMATEEKA: They are there in the Constitution.

THE SPEAKER: They are in the Constitution? Where in the Constitution? Show us where they are so that we just move.

MS KAMATEEKA: I think that is why it is important that the minister comes here and reports because then they will be able to tell us where these national values are. I know, for example, that they do appear in the Ministry of Education and Sports’ framework and maybe elsewhere. They should be able to come and tell us. Also, they need to tell us what plan they have to ensure the national values are known and practised.

I also would like to propose that Government departments, when they come to report on their policy statements, should indicate how they have provided for the promotion of the national values. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is an important issue. I think we need to get the right information. If they have not been adopted, we should adopt them so that they come into use. They are sleeping somewhere and I do not know who can wake them up from wherever they are.  Can someone do the research for us? 

MS WINFRED KIIZA: I am of the view that it is the responsibility of the Prime Minister and possibly, the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance to guide this Parliament and the country on the values of the nation. Really, nobody should be tasked with that responsibility other than the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance or the Prime Minister himself so that they can list these values before the House and we adopt them.

THE SPEAKER: Are you proposing that the Prime Minister should come and tell us the national values?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion and Members of Parliament. 

I think all is not lost for us. What has happened today is the best thing that has happened to us as a country. By the way, you have to realise there is quite a lot that has been happening. The Bible says that there is time for everything. Maybe, we have been preoccupied by so many other things. Now, we have come to realise that this is very crucial to our country and we are going to do our best. We will do it with unity and make sure that we destroy these bad habits and things that have been happening in our country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I thought you were giving us a way forward. How do we move? Do we task the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance?

MS KABATSI: Actually, I had wanted to say that the national guidance aspect has been completely dead; no one talks about it. Now that this has come up, it is the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance to come and address this and guide us. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, we instruct the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance to come and give us the national values for debate here and adoption. It is also urgent.

Honourable members, tomorrow there is a motion we have agreed to have on the Order Paper, relating to the United Nations’ base. You know we never see the Minister of Foreign Affairs here, but we need him tomorrow for that debate. 

I would also like to remind the Government that they are the ones who brought the Bills which are here, but they are not interested. I do not know who to task now – will it be hon. Florence Kiyingi or hon. Joy Kabatsi? Even the Government Whip has gone away. I want those ministers here so that we can do this work. Parliament has invested time and energy to write the reports, which are ready, but the ministers are not ready. 

House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00.p.m.

(The House rose at 6.55.p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 23 January 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 

