

Thursday, 23 January 2020

Parliament met at 2.28 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I will be amending the Order Paper to permit the minister in charge of sports to lay the trophies that the Parliament of Uganda won in the Inter-Parliamentary Games. We reported the victory but we did not lay the trophies on Table. Therefore, the minister will be performing his first activity as a minister in charge of sports a little bit later.

I do not see the Attorney-General. Maybe, let us take a few matters of national importance. Hon. Ouma, you have two minutes.

2.31
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a person from the islands, I read the New Vision Wednesday and today, Thursday. The newspaper has reported a study that was conducted by the people from the United States and Makerere University, indicating that Lake Victoria is on the verge of dying. Geologically, we have been told that Lake Victoria has ever dried three times. We are being told that the water is contaminated with lead and other dangerous chemicals, which threaten the lives of human beings and fish.

Lake Victoria has about 400 species of fish. Now that the lake is under threat – that it is going to dry up any time – yet over 40 million people depend on the lake, it worries me, Madam Speaker.

It is my humble appeal to the Government to come up and tell us what measures they are putting in place to make sure that Lake Victoria does not dry up and that pollution is checked.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue raised by hon. Ouma is a very grave national issue and I would like the minister in charge of the sector to come and update us urgently about how we are going to handle the death of our lake. It is not a joking matter. Lake Chad disappeared. Therefore, I ask the minister to come and address us on the issue of Lake Victoria on Wednesday next week.

2.33
MR GORDON ARINDA (NRM, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding some people along the Ishaka-Kagamba Road. Around 2013, some of the residents of that area who were affected by the road project had their land titles taken for subdivision, especially those who were to be compensated. UNRA took those titles but up to-date many of the residents have not yet got their land titles back. These are original land titles. 

Some of the residents are Ignatius Ihoora, Jackson Taterahansi, Edward Barugahare, George William Mugisha and many others. Their land titles have been with UNRA for the last eight years and they are wondering why they cannot get their land titles back. I am told it is actually –(Interruption)

MR TUMURAMYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I am giving hon. Gordon Arinda is that during the construction of Kaguta Road, many land titles were removed from the owners and up to now, those people have never been given back their titles. Therefore, that is a matter that must be taken into consideration by UNRA and the Ministry of Works and Transport.

MR ARINDA: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, the matter is very important and we request that the Minister of Works and Transport expedites the process and ensures that UNRA subdivides the land titles so that people can have their titles back. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately, the Minister of Works and Transport is here. Would you want to say something about the way forward?

2.35
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. That is a matter that has come to our notice. I am going to get to the UNRA land unit. If we could get details of each of those people who are affected, we would be able to follow them up and ensure that the titles are released. I request the Members who have that challenge to get in touch with us with the details for us to follow them up.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those who have issues on land titles under UNRA, please, pass them on to the Minister of Works and Transport.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, many times the Members of the Opposition have queried the attendance of our Cabinet in this House. Many times, they have blamed Government for not talking about issues that have been directed by his House. 

Today, as I look at the side of the Opposition, I do not see anybody because I would have talked of hon. Fred Turyamuhweza but he is in an Opposition group that has run away from the original Opposition group. I, therefore, do not know whether we are proceeding well by not having any Shadow Minister.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is clear that there are very few Members from the Opposition side. However, I do not know any division or who has gone where or not. For me, they are all Members of the Opposition.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, for the record, I am here. I am here sitting in for the Leader of the Opposition. I am also the whip and this number is not bad on our side. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is important to inform the Speaker officially that you are the one sitting in for the Leader of the Opposition before coming here.

2.38
MR FRED TURYAMUHWEZA (FDC, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the dairy cooperative societies, mainly in western Uganda. It affects the district of Rukungiri, Kanungu, Ntungamo, Kiruhura, Lyantonde and Isingiro. A letter was received from the office of the President ordering the dairy cooperative societies to release the coolers, which had been installed in their districts way back in 1968; that they should be taken over by Brookside.

This has caused a lot of anxiety. The dairy farmers do not know what is happening. They do not know what alternative the Government is providing for them and where they can collect their milk from. Besides they had already established premises where the coolers had been installed yet no guidance has been given on what those premises should be doing. 

The dairy farmers are crying to this House for protection; the prayer is that this House halts this exercise of Brookside claiming these coolers until an understanding has been reached between Government and the dairy farmers. They are crying to us for protection for them to continue with their business. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the minister for agriculture; minister of trade, can you say something about it?

2.39
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, on the issue of Lato Milk, on the 15th January we lodged a protest note with the Minister of Foreign Affairs to the Ambassador of Kenya. In that note we requested that they release the products that were attached, that they open the warehouses that had been closed and we gave them a condition that we would expect to get a response from them within two weeks.

THE SPEAKER: It is not about the exports to Kenya but about –(Interruption)

MR TURYAMUHWEZA: It is about the dairy cooperative societies who received coolers way back during President Milton Obote’s first Government. 

Brookside that took over the operations of Sameer, which had been privatised from Dairy Cooperation of Uganda, is claiming the coolers, which had been installed way back and the Office of the President directed that the dairy cooperatives societies release those coolers.

The farmers are stranded and do not know what alternatives Government is giving. They also do not know why the coolers are being taken away and so, they want protection so that there is a clear understanding. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to lay the letter from the Office of the President at the time, on the Table so that it can be taken over by this Parliament and used to make a decision to protect the farmers. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of trade, do you want to talk about the coolers? 

MS KYAMBADDE: I would like to ask that I inform the minister of agriculture to come here with a paper.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, this is heart-breaking. You remember we sold our dairy cooperation to Sameer at $1, which is Shs 3,700 but now they are claiming all the coolers that were installed in the 1960s yet the money for buying them was from the tax payers; we need to be serious.

We cannot handover things that were given to our people to a company that only paid $1. We need to protest strongly because this is unbelievable.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that Brookside bought a factory at $1 but they did not buy the entire milk chain in the country. 

MR TURYAMUHWEZA: It was Sameer, another company from Kenya that bought dairy cooperation. We do not know where Brookside is coming from because it was not even part of the privatisation process yet they are taking over. I think there is someone interested in handing over this property to Sameer again.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, whatever it is, I think no one has a right to just donate the property of the farmers of Uganda casually. Can I have a look at that letter?

2.44
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Madam Speaker, on the same issue of the dairy, the minister is not clear on when the minister of agriculture is going to report. It is a very serious problem to our farmers. Four of us members of Parliament met these farmers in Rukungiri; they have a lot of challenges. They have tried to meet the minister in charge but failed. Now that the issue has been brought here, let the minister tell us the day the minister of agriculture is going to report about it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter is more serious than we think. I would like to read what this letter says. The letter was written to the RDCs of Rukungiri, Kanungu, Ntungamo, Kiruhura, Lyantonde and Isingiro and it reads:  

“Recovery of milk coolers by Brookside Ltd: I am writing to inform you that the honourable minister in charge of the Presidency is in receipt of a letter from her colleague responsible for Finance, Planning and Economic Development in respect of the above subject. The issues at hand are paraphrased below: 

    1. During the 1990s, while Dairy Cooperation Ltd was still operational, Government established a number of dairy cooperative societies and allowed dairy farmers to use the coolers to sell milk to dairy cooperation and thereafter, to Brookside…” We need to find out whether that is true but the letter continues thus: 

    2. “2... Brookside currently leasing dairy cooperation assets intends to withdraw the said coolers considering that the dairy cooperative societies have abandoned the equipment leaving most of them in a state of disrepair.

3. 	The company also indicated that dairy farmers continue to use some of the coolers of collect milk which they instead sell to Brookside competitors in violation of the objectives for which the coolers were availed to the farmers.

4. 	So far the company has recovered coolers from Sheema, Bushenyi and Mbarara on account of the fore mentioned grounds.
However, effort to recover coolers in your respective districts has been futile. 

The purpose of this letter is to urge you to render all necessary support to Brookside in securing the return of the coolers without any delay. 

Hajji Yunus Kakande,
Secretary, Office of the President.”

Honourable members, are these the coolers which Babiiha left?

2.47
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I do not know where we are going in the East African Region. After farmers complained about the harassment by this company - it has influence in Kenya where Ugandan farmers were exporting milk and milk worth $3 million has been rejected by the Kenyan Government on a very false ground that our milk does not fit international standards.

Moreover everybody knows in the East African Region that it is only Uganda where cows feed on natural grass. The Kenyan cows are feeding on food like “watu.” 

Therefore, I see revenge and a plan to destroy the people who are producing milk and to destroy the milk industry in this country Uganda.


MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I think we need to be a bit more serious with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Uganda has also recently been exporting eggs to Kenya. Farmers in Uganda were exporting more than 20 trailers per day because Ugandans in Kisenyi are good at mixing food for layers.

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries left these people to come, study and buy food from here and take it to Kenya. The Kenyans then stopped buying our eggs because they learnt how to mix the food. 

Currently, Kenyans – I am sorry I am not attacking the East African Community – have over 1000 companies in Uganda while Uganda has less than 20 companies of private people operating in Kenya. That is not the spirit of the East African Community.
Madam Speaker, I will soon bring a petition about exporters of horticulture. They have failed but they are raising over $ 800 million per year to this country yet products are not going. Where are we heading? 

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, according to what some of us at the border who are strategists in cross border trade see; remember this is a company, which was supplying milk to all the Kenyan schools. It has now taken over all the dairy corporations in Kenya. It is the company that caused a problem during scarcity of milk. It has now entered the Uganda market and is buying our farmers’ milk at the lowest rate because it has a monopoly. This must stop.

Therefore, even before the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries comes, let the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives who is here tell us about the fate of the Ugandan business people, who have been ordered to remove their milk from Kenya and bring it back; yet they signed contracts. 

The communique that was signed between President Uhuru Kenyatta and President Yoweri Museveni includes some of those contracts on the milk. Why are they bringing back our milk? If that is the case, let them bring back everything of ours, including the Ugandan women whom they have married in Kenya. Thank you. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what is more serious for me is that the Government of Uganda is helping a private company to fight the farmers. This is what they are doing. Before we close the day, I want the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development  to come and explain this issue of Brookside; whether when these people bought that factory at $1, they also bought everything in Uganda that deals with milk and all the cooperative societies, yet the farmers have been complaining about excess milk.

MR TURYAMUHWEZA: Madam Speaker, that letter is copied to the Attorney-General and he has arrived. He can shed some light.

THE SPEAKER: I will give it to him to read it. You can read it.

2.51
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There are very many concerns from the traders of this country. The environment favours foreigners and not the indigenous people. This has been ongoing for a very long time.

We do not have a policy that protects the interests of Ugandan traders, even when they are outside the borders. That is why we had a very big challenge in South Sudan. When we are sending our people to Somalia, I always ask myself what our trade interests are because we are into the world of competition. We cannot begin donating peace in other countries minus trade.

Therefore, I see a very serious mismatch and that is why I think the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives has to wake up to this reality. We are impoverishing and making life very hard for Ugandan traders but when it comes to the foreign traders, they are facilitated against our interests as Ugandans.
I think we must wake up to this reality. There is much more importance of Parliament asserting ourselves to know because the traders have written very many petitions to this country, especially to Parliament. How can we –(Interruption)

MR KANGWAGYE: Thank you, my colleague. The information I would like to give my neighbour here is that the whole thing originated from the low prices of milk. The only person who brings us produce is the trader, who has become a dangerous person in the whole exercise. How does he do this?

When we tried to meet His Excellency as farmers from western Uganda, we agreed to sit and work out a real solution to this matter. We told him that farmers have a problem because they have a lot of milk, they have the capacity to process it  because the moment he gives them the real capacity, powers and authority; they can even be in position to process milk and get something out of it.

However, traders cannot allow that to happen. They connive with people in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries so that farmers do not have the real potential and capacity to control their own entity. That is where the problem is.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we close business today, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Urban Development should come and explain to us the gist of the agreement between Brookside and the Uganda Government, in particular whether buying Sameer meant the whole country now belongs to Brookside. They can collect all the coolers in the country, whether the coolers were actually part of the agreement. We want those answers today before we close the House.

Honourable members, I would like you to join me in welcoming the honourable Senator Gabriela Cuevas Barron. (Applause) She is the President of the Inter-Parliamentary Union. She has come to visit us and attend the 130th anniversary celebrations of the founding of the IPU, which was founded in 1889. She will also be attending the NRM celebrations at Ibanda. We are happy that she is here.

In the past, the Presidents of IPU did not come to Africa but she has made a difference and we are happy that she is here. (Applause) She has come at a time when we are fulfilling what we agreed in the 126th Assembly here in Uganda, where we said we are going to bridge the gap between the people and Parliament. 

She has come in the Parliament Week when we are actually engaged in networking with the population. So, we are really happy, Senator Cuevas. Welcome and have a good stay in Uganda. (Applause)

Can I now invite the Minister of State for Sports? Are you ready?

PERSONAL STATEMENT BY HON. WILLIAM BYARUHANGA

2.56
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, today, I am making a personal statement to this Parliament, concerning allegations that have been made here about the impropriety in the acquisition of land in Kampala by Messrs. Pine Investment Company Limited, a company in which I was stated to have an interest.

I am making this testament to clear the air regarding those false allegations, which, in my view, were false. The allegations were made by the Member of Parliament, hon. Abdulatif Sebaggala before this august House about a month ago.

Madam Speaker, you will recall that on 18 December 2019, hon. Sebaggala claimed that lands comprised in Plot 5B Mackinnon Road and Plot 32 Kyadondo Road owned by Pine Investments Limited, a company in which I hold an interest, was part of Nakasero Primary School land and that it was taken under unclear circumstances and that they – Pine Investments – are selling it back to the Government.

Following the making of these allegations, you requested the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to get the matter and tender a report to this House. However, I appeared here on 19 December, a day after and came to the Floor and confirmed that the company had withdrawn its participation in the bid, never mind that there was nothing wrong with the bid, whereupon hon. Okupa asked that I clarify on the allegation that the land belonged to Nakasero Primary School. 

I am aware that the investigations have now been carried out and a report has been issued. The report completely exonerates Pine Investments Limited of hon. Sebaggala’s allegation as all the records were always available. If hon. Sebaggala cared to look for them before making the allegations, he would see that the land in question has never had anything to do with Nakasero Primary School.

I intend to lay the whole report on this Floor with your permission and I would hope that this puts the matter to rest and that hon. Sebaggala would, at an appropriate time, tender an apology to the House and to me.  I request to lay the whole report on Table. 

THE SPEAKER: What is the source of this report?

MR BYARUHANGA: The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. You had asked the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business and he wrote to the lands ministry. The ministry wrote to their technical officers who have responded. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Attorney-General. However, my procedural matter is – since you are the Attorney-General of this country, I would like to put it on record that the school land is under threat and there is a transaction that took place. It is not only that school but –

THE SPEAKER: honourable member, you are now going to something different. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Wouldn’t it be procedurally okay for the Attorney-General to also take interest –

THE SPEAKER: Please, can you allow him to finish his explanation?

MR BYARUHANGA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Of course, if the honourable member intends to make any other complaint, I am available just across the road. If he intends to make it here, then he can go ahead. However, my role here is to just reply to the clarification that was sought by hon. Okupa. 

THE SPEAKER: Read the title of the document and the heading as you lay. 

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, the inquiry was by the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business following your instruction. He wrote to the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development saying:

Re: Plot Number 5B, Mackinnon Road and Plot Number 32 Kyadondo Road

Please, provide my office with information regarding the proprietorship of the above land and who the current registered proprietor purchased it from and whether it was ever a property of Nakasero Primary School…”

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development wrote back on 20 January 2020 referring to both pieces of land. The letter says:

“Reference is made to your letter dated 23 December 2019 in which you asked for information regarding the proprietorship of the above land and who the current registered proprietor purchased it from and whether it was a property of Nakasero Primary School. Please, find below the required information:  

LRV2575 Folio 4, Plot 05B Mackinnon Road; this property was leased by Uganda Land Commission to one Peter Kabatsi on 01 October 1994 for a period of 49 years, effective 08 October 1994. The lease was registered and on 13 June 2007, Peter Kabatsi transferred the property to Ali Reza who was registered as the proprietor on 13 June 2007. On 25 September 2008, Ali Reza transferred the property to the current registered proprietor, Pine Investments Company Limited.

Secondly, LRV3408 Folio 14, Plot 32 Kyadondo Road; the property was leased –“

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think there is a small problem. You are not the addressee of those letters. I think the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business should have come to report to the House. 

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, that is correct and I did consult. The issue was, you did inform the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to come and make this report on 18 December 2019. 

I appeared here on 19 December 2019 and you gave me permission to address the House on that matter. First, it was the matter of whether we participated in the bid. You gave me permission to address that matter, which I did and I laid on Table the documents that pertained to the withdrawal of Pine Investments Company Limited. 

It was on that day, while I was on the Floor, that hon. Okupa requested that I clarify whether the land belonged or was connected to Nakasero Primary School. Because I had come on the Floor myself and had responded to the initial allegation, you gave me permission to go ahead and respond to whether this land had anything to do with Nakasero Primary School. 

THE SPEAKER: The difficulty I have is that the letters were addressed to the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business. They were not addressed to you. Were they? 

MR BYARUHANGA: No, they were not. 

THE SPEAKER: Therefore, these letters are the properties of the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business. That is the difficulty I have. We will ask the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to come and present them. We have heard your side. Let us wait, therefore, for the addressee to present them.

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, because I was asked yesterday and I had appeared on 19 December 2019 with your permission, -(Interruption)– can I finish?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it is just that the letters you are using were written by the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to the Prime Minister on that subject. As a result, the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business should come and present them himself. 

MR BYARUHANGA: Much obliged. 

TEHS SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, my name has come up on this issue. It is true that on 19 December 2019, because the previous day, hon. Sebaggala had raised the issue, the Attorney General responded and said he did not have any interest in the land.  I asked him to tell us where he got the land from and demanded he provides all the documentation for us to be sure this land did not belong to Nakasero Primary School. 

It is from that, I think, why he is bringing these documents. I also received a copy of what he read. 

What he would have done was to read his statement only. The Prime Minister’s letters would have been attachments. Like you have guided, the right procedure would be for the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to come with the report here. I asked the Attorney-General because I wanted him to clarify whom he bought the land from. We are seeing here that he bought it from Jagwe Zapha.

That is what I wanted to clarify because he had left it hanging. I think the Prime Minister can come here and make a statement. 

THE SPEAKER: Do you have copies of the title deeds? Can you lay them on Table? The letters from the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development will be presented by the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business. 

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have listened to what has been termed as a personal statement by the minister. I am aware that according to the Rules of Procedure, a personal statement is not debated. When you listen to the statement, however, the minister while making a reply, made a defence against a very serious allegation on him. It cannot, therefore, be taken to be a mere personal statement. It was a defence that would be debatable. 

I would like to know, therefore, whether we are proceeding well without debating this defence by the minister. 

THE SPEAKER: I am satisfied that this is a personal explanation. Honourable minister, just lay a copy of the title deed and the Prime Minister will come and speak on the other issue. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter. I am a member of the Committee on Education and Sports and the issue concerning school land in Kampala is growing day by day. I am on record three times in this House asking the Prime Minister, during Prime Minister’s Question Time who owns Mbuya Army Primary School land. The Prime Minister failed to answer on those three occasions.

The procedural matter I am raising is, would it be procedurally okay for the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to come to this House and provide us with information of land titles of schools in Kampala District? I know the issue of Nakasero very well and at the right time, we shall rebut whatever is being stated here about the ownership of that land and how the transaction took place.

We need to get the record because, Madam Speaker, you directed that these schools should have their titles in their ownership but Government has refused. The head teachers are so weak and intimidated as transactions take place to steal this precious land. Nakasero Primary School land is adjacent to the Court of Appeal and a transaction took place long ago -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, which item on the agenda are you discussing?

MR SSEWUNGU: A procedural matter, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Please, take your seat.

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, happy New Year. In December 2019, Parliament of Uganda and Government of the Republic of Uganda hosted the 10th edition of the East African Community inter parliamentary games.

Team Parliament of Uganda participated, with your support and facilitation, and our team was able to bring home six different trophies. I beg, for purposes of ensuring that they are properties of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, to present and lay them one by one.

I beg to present and lay: 

    1. The football trophy won by the Parliamentary Football Club;
    2. The trophy won by Team Golf, Parliament of Uganda; 
    3.  A trophy won by team Parliament of Uganda basketball, the team of the women;
    4. A trophy by the basketball team Parliament of Uganda where men were the winners;
    5. A trophy won by our athletics team where Uganda emerged the overall winner;

Madam Speaker, in individual disciplines, individual members were awarded with medals in the categories of gold, silver and bronze. And that one –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister, who I would like to congratulate upon the achievement. However, I participated in the games and I know that we won the netball trophy but unfortunately, I have not seen it being laid before this Parliament.

I would like to seek clarification on who has it because it belongs to the Parliament of Uganda. Thank you.

MS ALUM: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am the captain of the netball team and we won the netball trophy. I suspect that one of those trophies - because one of them was not labelled. If there is any label that is hand written, that must be the one for netball because we were given the trophy and I was the one who received it on behalf of the netballers. The Hansard should capture that because it is not easy to win and not only once but many times.

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, I regret but if we were listening attentively, I indicated that they were six trophies. I think this could have occurred due to - I indicated that they were six trophies but the ones I have laid are five. That means -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we shall give you time to bring the final trophy but for now, we would like to acknowledge the great work done by the Uganda Parliament and to thank Parliament for the parliamentary diplomacy; at least that one is alive in the East African Community. Thank you very much. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO JOIN THE REST OF THE WORLD TO TAKE COGNISANCE OF THE EXISTENCE OF THE INTER PARLIAMENTARY UNION (IPU) FOR 130 YEARS

3.16
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The motion is for a resolution of Parliament to join the rest of the world to take cognisance of the existence of the Inter Parliamentary Union for 130 years moved under rules 55 and 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda.

“WHEREAS the Inter Parliamentary Union is a global organisation of national Parliaments, founded on 30 June 1889 as the first political multilateral organisation in the world encouraging cooperation and dialogue between all nations;

AND WHEREAS since the inception of the Inter Parliamentary Union, it has played a number of roles including;

(a) 	advancing the key role that parliaments play in international affairs
 (b) 	Promoting parliamentary capacity building and bolstered democratic norms and institutions;
 (c) 	Encouraging sustainable development and economic growth through aid effectiveness and global trade and;
 (d) 	Supporting inward parliamentary visits to promote best practice in parliamentary processes and a better understanding of Uganda's interests.

NOTING THAT Uganda joined the Inter-Parliamentary Union in 1981 and since then has actively participated in its meetings and activities including the successful hosting of the 126th Parliamentary Assembly from 31st March to 5th April 2012;

FURTHER NOTING THAT Uganda's membership to the IPU has benefited the country in several ways namely;

(a) 	Engagement on implementation of Strategic Development Goals (SDGs).
(b) 	Support to Women Members of Parliament.
(c) 	Spearheading parliamentary engagement in and oversight of the work of the United Nations. 
(d) 	Support in fulfilling the role of Parliament in the practical implementation of international human rights norms.
(e) 	The Inter parliamentary Union offers a privileged space for parliamentary diplomacy.
(f) 	Improves the format, functioning and outcomes of Assemblies, standing committees and other bodies.
(g) 	Boosts youth participation to foster efficiency in parliamentary work by promoting young people's involvement in policymaking. 
(h) 	Spearheads the advancement of Uganda's bilateral interests with international counterparts.
(i) 	Provides several opportunities for leadership of members of the delegation of the Parliament of Uganda within the organs of the Inter parliamentary Union.

COGNISANT THAT the Inter parliamentary Union marked its 130th Anniversary on Sunday 30 June, 2019 and the day was celebrated as the International Day of Parliamentarianism; the Speakers of the Inter parliamentary Union Assemblies met with the Inter parliamentary Union leadership to discuss the ongoing relevance of the founding values and principles of the Inter parliamentary Union 130 years on results achieved at the previous assemblies and actions ahead;

FURTHER COGNISANT that the 130th Anniversary celebration was under the umbrella slogan of “130 years of empowering parliamentarians” and it was agreed that the IPU and its members’ action of celebrating the 130 years of parliamentary diplomacy takes place from June 2019 to June 2020;

RECOGNISING THAT the Inter parliamentary Union’s 179 member Parliaments are celebrating the milestone in a number of different events around the world and, therefore, Uganda as a member also joins the rest of the world to celebrate the milestone of the existence of Inter parliamentary Union for 130 years and recognises the important role that the Inter parliamentary Union plays in fostering diplomacy;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by the Parliament of Uganda that;

(a) 	Uganda joins the rest of the world to take cognisance of the existence of the Inter-Parliamentary Union for 13O years;
(b) 	Uganda continues its membership with the Inter parliamentary Union and endeavours to play her part in the decisions that are taken at the Inter parliamentary Union.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

The speaker: Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) The motion is seconded. What is the justification?

Ms anyakun: Madam Speaker, I wish to first of all thank you and the Parliament of Uganda and its leadership for the considerable progress of joining the rest of the world to celebrate the 130th anniversary of the IPU.

The Parliament of Uganda has been privileged to collaborate with the IPU for over 39 years. I confirm that Uganda is committed to pursuing this cooperation.

This Parliament has well-designed programmes that are fulfilled with promising discussions on policies, framework and recommendations to improve Uganda’s contribution to democracy and the importance of women and youth on our economies.

Both women and youth participation in decision making and gender equality in politics is essential to achieve sustainable development and to reach gender equality in other areas of life.

The IPU welcomes the increase of women participation in Uganda’s Parliament while only 34.5 per cent – I know that this has increased – of the Ugandan Parliamentarians are women. 

Today, we must all continue to thank the leadership of this Parliament for the effort to achieve the parity and movement of the youth. 

The motto of the youth is; “No decision about us, without us.” For that matter, inclusion is a cornerstone of this Parliament.

The IPU provides several opportunities for leaders of members of Uganda’s delegation since 1981. Our own great leader and mother, the woman of substance, the lady with integrity; that is none other than the Speaker –(Applause)– was the President of the Assembly during 126th Parliamentary Assembly hosted by Uganda from 31 March to the 5 April 2012. Again in 2016/2017, she was the President of the African Geopolitical Group.

We would like to also recognise hon. Mourine Osoru who was the President of the Young Parliamentarians globally in 2018/2019. 

Hon. Paul Akamba is an executive member of the United Nations Bureau and finally, I Esther Anyakun Davinia, all the way from Karamoja – a warrior – was elected in October 2019 as an executive member of the Inter-Parliamentary Union, which is a 12-member body group in the entire globe. (Applause)

I would like to let you know that I am also an ex-officio member of the Bureau of Women Parliamentarians.

Madam Speaker, we thank you for this. We would like to welcome the President for being here. I beg to lay.

3.26
Mr paul akamba (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion for the resolution of Parliament to join the rest of the world to mark the 130th anniversary of the existence of the IPU.

Allow me to first of all congratulate the IPU President upon this occasion and the delegation of the Parliament of Uganda to the IPU, which is led by none other than you, the Rt Hon. Speaker.

There are a number of reasons for this august House – and indeed, the whole country – to join the entire world in celebrating this anniversary.

The 130 years of the existence of IPU have resulted into a number of resolutions most of which have impacted on the IPU national parliaments. The IPU has done great work towards making concrete measures to promote gender equality, the protection of the rights of children, encouraging gender responsive budgeting and the provision of adequate funding for human rights components in United Nations (UN) peacekeeping operations.

The IPU has partnered with the civil society more regularly in order to build trust among the public including the marginalised section of society to ensure inclusiveness and representation of a variety of needs and enabled more effective access to decision-making process according to national legislations.

Madam Speaker, the Parliament Week is as a result of an IPU resolution in trying to encourage national parliaments to bridge the gap between parliamentarians and the people they represent. I congratulate the august House upon the successful organisation of the Parliament Week.

The IPU has adapted enabling legislations including key budget laws in order to advance both the SDGs and the sustaining peace agendas including measures that promote increased financial support from national stakeholders, notably the private sector.

It has collaborated with the UN Peacekeeping Commission in their conflict prevention efforts and recommended that national governments seek inclusion of their country’s situation on the Commission Agenda, where appropriate.

It is a fact that there was a gap between the UN and national parliaments. However, through the IPU, this gap has been bridged using its Committee on UN Affairs.  I am proud to be a member of that committee and its bureau.

The IPU has mitigated and resolved conflicts through the monitoring of human rights protection, inclusive dialogue process and mediation to peacefully address the needs for all segments of society.

Madam Speaker, mentioning all the achievements of the IPU could take a whole month. I beg to end by congratulating Uganda and this august House for joining the rest of the world. However, in a very special way, I congratulate the Ugandan delegation to the IPU consisting of hon. Roland Mugume, the member on the Standing Committee on Democracy and Human Rights, hon. Rose Kabagenyi, a member on the Women’s Forum, hon. Mourine Osoru and hon. Latif Sebaggala who are members of the Committee on Peace and Democracy. 

Madam Speaker, with those few remarks, I would like to support the motion and to urge the august House to support it. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.33
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Through the 130 years of its existence, IPU has enabled Parliaments to engage with Governments, international organisations and civil society, to promote gender equality.

The IPU has also continuously protected the rights of parliamentarians though we still have some challenges especial when it comes to the affairs of the Opposition. We still have some challenges. For example, the situation that the hon. Theodore Ssekikubo went through.

Anyhow, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you. You have actually tried - even when in international fora, to defend the Members of Parliament and I would like to thank you.

I would like to inform my colleagues that this is the only forum, which has tried to support the rights of Members internationally. And so, I would like to call upon Members of this House to support all activities of IPU. I would like to also take this opportunity to congratulate Uganda for supporting IPU activities for the last 130. 

3.35
MR INNOCENT KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate you for being a role model and for taking such an important lead at an international level.

I wholesomely support this motion and I believe that once, as Parliament, we support IPU, definitely we shall not only promote social economic transformation of our people but also the region and the world at large. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.35
MS MOURINE OSORU (NRM, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we commemorate the 130th anniversary for the IPU, there are certain things that I am proud of, which came to my realisation, while I served as the President for the Young Parliamentarians.

Madam Speaker, as you are aware, majority of national parliaments do not have the young parliamentarians fora within their Parliaments. However, because of the efforts the IPU has been making, we now have young Members of Parliaments in other national parliaments. For instance, in France, we did not have young parliamentarians but IPU made an effort to ensure that parliaments without young Members get to have them.  That there was need for people in a certain age to be in parliaments in order to bridge the gap. We came up with the age of 45 years and I am glad that Uganda has many young Members of Parliament at the global level. 

The IPU also made an effort that in every delegation that goes for IPU assemblies, they should have a delegation of young people and it is a must and forever, I am grateful to IPU for that.

Not only did IPU make an effort of including young people in those national fora or in their conferences, but we fought for the book we have in our Parliament, when I was still in the EXCO committee. The developing countries, such as ourselves, realised that we have issues with technology. The internet data we buy today is expensive; you cannot download a huge document on the data you buy for Shs 500. 

That is why, together with the President of IPU, in the Executive Committee, we made sure that every National Parliament has the books. Once they get to the National Parliaments, they will be able to make copies of these books for whoever feels like they want to make references or wants to know more about IPU. 

For that, Madam Speaker, IPU also went ahead - we have an app whereby everybody who wants to know about IPU gets it. 

The young people felt left out in political decision making but during IPU’s oversight role of monitoring brought it to us that, indeed, it is true. For the young people to be inclusive in political making, we should bridge the gap between the Parliament and the people. 

Madam Speaker, I support the motion and I am forever grateful to you because it is your effort to make sure that we, the young people and the women, are in the IPU. Thank you. 

3.39
MR JACK WAMANGA WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and also to congratulate the Parliament of Uganda led by the Rt Hon. Speaker, for the role you have played at IPU. 

The IPU, as we have been told, was established in 1889 by Frederick Parsley and William Randell, as an international organisation. After Uganda getting its independence in 1962, it joined the UN and subscribed to a number of international organisations.

However, when we look at the role of IPU, it is very important. One of those major roles of IPU is democracy. It is important to all members of the IPU. When we come back to our country, we look at how democracy is practised. 

Peace and respect for human rights is one of those issues that is taken at IPU. When we look at Uganda, how do we look at peace and development? One of the major issues is development in the country. These are all looked at in IPU. 
At times, I feel so embarrassed when I attend some of these international organisations. When they are talking about human rights, we try to defend that, that issue is alright in Uganda but forget that we are talking to international people, who know what is happening around the whole world. 

We, in Uganda, should, therefore, look at these issues so as not to embarrass ourselves at international foras. Otherwise, I would like to congratulate our team for the great work they have done at IPU. They have put Uganda up there, being led by the Speaker of Parliament. I thank you. 

3.41
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion and particularly commend the members of Parliament from Uganda, as delegates in IPU, for their creativity. It is known that members from the Parliament of Uganda have been outspoken, as far as bringing about matters of debates is concerned. 

I would like to dwell on the IPU Assembly in Uganda in 2012, where a resolution was passed that mortality rates; both for women and children, should be reduced by two thirds by the end of 2015. That resolution came as a result of Ugandan members of Parliament initiating a debate on that matter. I would like to commend the creativity of members of Parliament, who were in that assembly. 

However, I would like to bring this to the notice of this House and the nation at large; that up to now, women and children are dying. It would be our mandate, as Parliament, to make sure that it does not happen. I would like to call upon the Government of Uganda to take IPU seriously. These are the people who make resolutions for the whole world and make sure that the whole world is at the same level. 

At the moment, our hospitals are facing it “hot.” Some of the hospitals do not have enough equipment to make sure women and children survive. Our health centres are badly off. It is known that most of the health centres at the level of Health Centre III do not have power. 

I would want to call upon the Government, as we celebrate 130 years of IPU, to remember that resolution that was made in 2012 here in Uganda, which was initiated by the members of Parliament from this august House. This is in order for Uganda to benefit from IPU and be at the same level with Africa and the rest of the world at large. 

3.44
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join you to warmly welcome our President of the IPU all the way from Mexico. You are most welcome.

I was there in St Petersburg when we elected you the President and you got all the votes from the Ugandan Parliament. It is good that you are here and we feel very proud to have you in our midst.

I would like also to congratulate our colleague, hon. Esther Anyakun. She is one of the 12 members of the Executive of the IPU - I am told the beauty of Karamoja. However, in Africa, we only have two members on the Executive and she is one of the two; so she represents the whole of Africa. This is not a small achievement for Uganda. 
I would like to highlight two key values of the IPU, having been a member of the delegation from here, attending some of the IPU congresses. One is human rights. I was happy to serve on the Committee on Human Rights in the IPU. It is not just about the defence of the rights of the members of Parliament but the debate extends to our role as members of Parliament in defending the human rights of our people.

For me, this is an occasion to reflect on this role. 130 years down the road, people should learn something about you. This is something that we should take home; that Parliament has a cardinal role and responsibility. That is why we are in the House to defend the human rights of our people against abuse, torture, inhumane and degrading treatment. At whatever cost, this is a cardinal role that we should never run away from. 

As we pass the national plan, budget, the Bills and motions in this House, it is something we should reflect on. We, Rotarians, have that test; the four way test. In everything we say, think or do, is it the truth? Is it fair to everybody concerned? Therefore, in the laws we pass, are we making sure that this is fair to every Ugandan? 

The second value is empowerment of gender. We are proud and happy as the Ugandan Parliament to have one of our own who has raised the flag of Uganda at the highest international level, our Speaker. (Applause)

Those of us who move with her out of the country, when she stands in those fora and you see the way she is respected, you hear the way she articulates issues; that lady is very powerful, I tell you. (Applause) She is able to draft and write her own speeches at the shortest notice. She is a challenge to all of us Ugandans. 

Uganda has achieved a lot in terms of women empowerment and gender but I would like to believe that we still have a long way to go. This is another cardinal role Parliament has. If we are going to respect the IPU, we must ensure that empowerment of women in Uganda is something we cherish. Thank you Madam Speaker. 

3.48
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Celebrating the 130th anniversary of IPU is such a great landmark. 

When we remember IPU after being established in 1889 and then in Uganda in 1981, as we celebrate 130 years of existence, what must ring a bell in our minds is the cardinal objective of its establishment and that is democracy and also opening up Parliament to the public. Madam Speaker, you have done this. 

Right now, we are in the Parliament Week and our constituents are coming in to see how we operate. This is one of the cardinal objectives of IPU.

Secondly, we are extremely honoured that the President of IPU is here with us. Madam Speaker, I remember your input. 

President Gabriella, you remember when you came to our various geopolitical groups seeking for our support. Our Speaker put to you that we as Africans elect you, we are with you when you are campaigning but when you are executing your duties, you are not with Africans. 

Madam Gabriella, you are with Africans and we are happy that you are in Africa and you have visited various countries in Africa. You have not done as others did, they come to Africa Region, solicit for votes and when they are executing their duties, they leave Africa. Thank you for that.

Finally, as IPU Uganda Chapter, words are inadequate to express our innermost gratitude to you, Madam Speaker, you have made us what we are. You have raised our country to the highest level.

When I heard what hon. Magyezi said, I fully agreed with him that Madam Speaker is known in all international organisations and whenever there is anything they want the African vote on, if you do not look for Madam Rebecca Kadaga, you cannot move well. Thank you for being a committed and serious lady as far as executing your duties on international levels is concerned. 

We agreed as IPU Uganda chapter that when we go for IPU meetings, we leave our political differences at home. We work in the best interest of our country and we speak with one voice as Ugandans. 

I would like to thank all Members, we have done our country proud. It is disappointing to go for an international meeting, representing a country and you get into the nitty-gritty of your differences at home. When we go for IPU, we are there as Ugandans regardless of our political affiliations. Thank you very much. May the almighty God bless our Speaker and bless IPU.

3.53
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate ourselves upon the 130 year celebration and anniversary.

I have served as a member of the delegation of the IPU and I would like to thank the delegation members for the spirit when we are in those meetings and secondly, in the promotion of peace, democracy and sustainable development. 

Looking at the current president of the IPU – even when she was campaigning she had two qualities and I think she won because of those two; one is promoting the women and the youth. She was supported by the younger Members of Parliament but also wanted to raise the flag of the women.

I am happy that she has come to Uganda where we put women empowerment at the centre in whatever we do not just as Parliament but as a country.

Two, it was a testing moment when we were discussing homosexuality. We said we would like to see you as the President – it almost broke us as IPU. We were saying that we as Africans, as Christians and our brothers from Islamic countries, we were saying that we want to test IPU. I would like to thank her for the decision we took not to support homosexuality in the IPU. (Applause)

Finally, I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for the role you have played in the promotion of peace but also the rights of Members of Parliament and not just the Members of Parliament of Uganda but also the Members of Parliaments of the world. 

It is not about having representation in the IPU, it is about implementing the resolutions of IPU. Some countries just have delegations that go sit, discuss and take resolutions. When we go back home, we must be seen to implement these resolutions. Thank you very much.

3.56
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to welcome our guest and thank hon. Anyakun and your members. 

We have WhatsApp groups and a number of issues come up; some are terrifying. Among the delegations we have outside Uganda from Parliament, the IPU members communicate to us and inform us about what is happening. That is commendable. 

The reason we are interested in IPU and why IPU was brought here and is growing through the guidance of the Speaker is for Government to tap resources out of this kind of organisation.

When I saw the guests coming, you look for ministers related to that particular area and you do not see them anywhere. That is unfair. Let us use these opportunities that come from the IPU. For example, the honourable member has just talked about the health of mothers giving birth. Kawempe Referral Hospital is the one in charge of mothers giving birth. Kawempe delivers between 60 to 80 mothers per day. However, for the last month, they have stock-outs of essential medicines such as magnesium, sulfate and hydralazine, which is very essential in management of pregnant women with high blood pressure. What comes after that? These women will give birth and die. Is that the spirit of the IPU?

Honourable members, as we enjoy the IPU with all its intentions, let us tap those resources. Once we have ministers who do not want to tap into those interests and opportunities brought by IPU, we are not getting anything out of IPU.

I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, because you have done your role as the Speaker of Parliament. You have opened up chances and the onus is on the Cabinet. I rest my case.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. I hear no objection to the motion. I would like to put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do recognise the tremendous contribution of the IPU over 130 years.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE TRAFFIC AND ROAD SAFETY ACT, 1998 (AMENDMENT)  BILL, 2019

THE SPEAKER: I think hon. Anyakun is the first Karamojong to be a member of the ExCo. (Laughter) Honourable members, yesterday we received the report on The Traffic and Road Safety Act 1998 (Amendment) Bill, 2019 and we invited members to read during the night. We are now ready to debate. The report was signed by the necessary one-third of members of the committee.

3.59
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for having done a very good job in analysing and coming up with very key recommendations.

There are a few additions that I would like to add to those in the report. As the Chairperson of the Road Safety Committee, we have been analysing, for years, the impact of accidents on the economy. It is appalling that the statistics show that we lose over Shs 4 trillion every year through road carnage. That is the cost that the country incurs when you factor in the loss of human lives, goods as well as damage on the infrastructure. Therefore, this law is going to save this country a lot of money if it is well implemented. 

The committee has also acknowledged new technology. I would like them to take note of the cameras, which have been introduced. In other countries, these cameras do traffic regulation. Therefore, instead of limiting these cameras to targeting thieves, we should also improve them to regulate traffic.

I support the issue of ownership and formalisation of the transport sector. Many of the cases of kidnaps have been as a result of these taxis, which do not belong to companies and are not known. They hoodwink innocent clients and at the end of the day, people are robbed and left for the dead. We need to focus on the regulation and formalisation of public transport.

As I read through the report, I noted that boda-bodas are still left at individual level. We should force these boda-bodas to work through SACCOs. They should work through their groups so that they can be monitored. They should also do self-monitoring to help on the issue of security.

Madam Speaker, we have observed that the biggest challenge in the traffic sector is lack of financing. Funding for the traffic section is inadequate yet the section handles a very big and active population on our roads. We are now saying we are creating no more authorities and that means traffic will be just a department. However, if we do not make traffic and road safety to stand out prominently, it will be denied resources and it will remain a major problem. I hope we really address this matter.  

Finally, I am very happy with the issue of licensing garages. We have had many dignitaries, including professors, dying on our roads because they send their cars to these garages with the drivers and they do not do professional jobs in the garages and at the end of the day, we lose very important lives. Licensing these garages will improve on the safety measures, especially when it comes to the conditions of cars.

Madam Speaker, today I did a simple research. I walked around downtown Kampala but when I was trying to use the zebra crossing, it was a nightmare. These boda-bodas have no respect whatsoever for these zebra crossings. I tried to man it myself because I had to get people to cross – I am a scout and a patriot. I started stopping them and complaining but they were just insulting me. They said, “Mind your business, leave us to go.” We have a long way to go in educating our population to respect traffic rules across the board. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.05
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the good work seen from the report they presented to us yesterday. I have just a few things to talk about.

I agree with the committee’s observations and recommendations regarding discretionary powers to the minister to provide for the period of driving licences. I also support the committee that we should not allow the minister to do this because we will find a situation where someone has a licence of 15 years regardless of how this person is behaving on the road. Let us have a fixed period, as recommended by the committee, so that everybody is guided by that.

My second point is on the issue of alcohol limit. The Bill is talking about differences between private and public drivers. The committee pointed it out very well and I agree with them that if you are talking about alcohol limit in the blood, it should be the same whether you are driving your private car or a government vehicle because we are talking about road safety for all Ugandans.

Accidents are not discriminatory – that this is public or private – so it should be uniform. The other issue is of the demerit point system. I like this because I have seen in other countries where they use it. 

What is short in our Bill is that it is devoid of mentioning the minimum because you begin with the maximum points. Once you are involved in an accident and after the assessment, they find out whether the accident was caused by your recklessness and then points are deducted but we should go ahead to put a limit beyond which this licence is revoked or cancelled.

Then we mention how long you should take before you are allowed to get another licence. This will go a long way in instilling discipline in drivers on our roads.

If you drive recklessly, you are losing points and if you are remaining with a few points, most likely you are going to have your license cancelled and you may take another two or three years before you are allowed to drive again on our roads.

Lastly, the issue of speed governors is completely missing. Most of the causes of accidents on our roads are as a result of over speeding. Our drivers drive on our roads as if there is no tomorrow.

In terms of implementation of this law, you will not find traffic officers everywhere on the road. There are points where the drivers know that there are no traffic officers and they begin driving at 160 or 180 kilometres per hour.

Once there is a slight mistake on the side of a pedestrian or rider, then there is an accident and the impact is huge. At one point, we had Government bring the issue of speed governors, especially for public vehicles, but within a year, it disappeared. 

It is something that we should embed in this law – that for any public vehicle, the buses, commuter taxis, we should bring back these speed governors to control the speed at which our drivers drive. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Baba Diri, honourable minister, a Member raised a question about the absence of lights on the Entebbe Expressway. I hope you will be able to answer that.

4.11
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the elaborate report they have given us. This is a very important Bill. Right from when the Traffic and Road Safety Bill was initiated in 1998, I was part of it.

We had included a number of issues concerning the safety of people with disability. We said that the roads should have pathways for the pedestrians and persons with disability. We said that on the traffic lights, there should be bends for blind people to pass and some ridges when there is a crossroad and a zebra crossing.

All these are in the law but are not implemented at all. Especially the zebra crossing; I do not know why it is not included in this one. People do not respect the zebra crossing at all.

Recently, a certain Reverend Father was crushed on Entebbe Road because he was crossing the zebra line. It is important that we put laws in place but without practice, they do not benefit us.

Since this law was put in place, the number of accidents has been increasing and even up to now, 10 people or more die in a day.

I am happy with the amendments because they have improved the Act greatly; especially the issue of driving schools. Driving schools are non-formal and nobody regulates them. They bring out products that are substandard. They are just taught for one hour in a day; you just drive around and the theory is only one day on Saturdays and in a month’s time, you think that you have got a driver? 

We need to formalise these driving schools so that they are registered, licensed and have the syllabus for it so that they follow a uniform duration rather than just teaching anything at anytime.

I am happy that the boda-bodas today are included; they are supposed to be licensed. The largest number of accidents is caused by the boda-bodas. Those who have just learnt get on the road and carry pedestrians very dangerously.

Most of the accidents happen because of the drivers who are not properly trained. It is good that they must be licensed and they must learn how to follow traffic rules.

I wish we could include that the boda bodas should stay at least one kilometre away from the city centre – like in Nairobi. You do not see them in the city centre.

They can stop somewhere like Wandegeya or Bwaise and then we use other means rather than having them crisscrossing everywhere.

The issue of keeping left; in Uganda we keep left but in Congo and Sudan and other countries, they keep right. This is causing a lot of havoc in Koboko and bordering countries. You will find a person coming from Sudan keeping right but by the time they reach Uganda, they are supposed to keep left and accidents happen.

Why don’t we change to keep right so that it is internationally recognised and we avoid these accidents? (Interjections)– Yes, it is very possible. You are saying so because it has not happened to you but I have seen the issue of keeping right and left. 

I am happy that the licensing of mechanics is very important. Some mechanics just do not know anything; they just clean a vehicle and say that they have repaired it. By the time you travel for about one kilometre, your vehicle is broken down. I am happy that these amendments are put in place and we pray that they are implemented. Thank you very much.

4.15
MS MOURINE OSORU (NRM, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I listened to the chairperson of the committee yesterday when he was presenting to the House on the amendments they were proposing.

I have a key interest; the chairperson talked of licensing. I would like to ask the chairperson of the Committee on Road Safety that you talked of licensing yesterday but now, we have the tricycles and in our old law, we know that they are goods carriers.

Now that they are passenger carriers, are we going to have licences for them or we are not going to consider them? Secondly, I would like to know from the chairperson; he talked of having theory tests. Some of us did not do our driving lessons here and I would like to share my experience. In the countries where we did our driving lessons, we had theory classes but they were computerised. In those theory classes, we purchased books and read all the road signs in the beginning. When you went for the test, you were supposed to do it alone. You had to ensure that you score 98 per cent because without that, you would not be issued with a driving licence.

Secondly, I have realised that in most of our driving schools in Uganda, we only have a flat ground for anybody to do driving tests. However, in other countries, they have the steep descent and ascent, which we do not have. Some of us even failed three to four times when we were doing the steep descent and ascent driving tests. In Uganda, people only do parking. In some cases a person drives for a few minutes and they are granted a driving license. In other countries, one has to drive for 16 hours on the road.

Also important to note is the fact that in other countries, before they take a learner driver for the practical tests, after the 16 hours of driving, they are supposed to sit for medical tests. They have to test whether the learner driver is capable of driving on the road or not, which we do not do here. 
Therefore, I would like to know from the chairperson how we are going to address this as the committee recommended.

Thirdly, where I come from, we have zebra crossings. People do not know what those things mean and that is the reason we sometimes get accidents happening there. When people see the zebra crossing, it is a must for them to simply cross the road without looking. How are you prepared to sensitise the citizens of Uganda about these?

Lastly, you talked of alcoholism yesterday. In Dubai, the police have abrupt roadblocks, whereby it is not a blood test but alcohol tests using a tester. How I wish the Government of Uganda would pick interest in financing the road sector to procuring those testers.

They are simply put on the driver’s mouth at that point, not kawunyemu, which is a Luganda word to mean blow before the police can smell to know whether the driver is driving under the influence of alcohol or not; it is not that. It is a tester, which the driver puts on the mouth and it detects whether they are drunk or not. I think the committee should also pick interest in this. 

Government of Uganda should think of financing this road sector. We are tired of accidents happening left, right and centre and losing our people. I thank you, Madam Speaker. [Mr Byandala: Point of information]

THE SPEAKER: There is no one on the Floor.

MR BYANDALA: I would like to give information on what was discussed by hon. Alex Ruhunda, hon. Baba Diri and hon. Osoru in regard to zebra crossings. The information that there is a difference between zebra and pedestrian crossings; the two are different things.

A pedestrian crossing has a right of way. With zebra crossings, you always find signposts showing where it is at a certain distance. The one outside Development House cannot be a zebra crossing; it is a pedestrian crossing.

A pedestrian crossing is simply a facility where they try to collect all pedestrians. Instead of crossing everywhere, people cross at one place.

Like hon. Baba Diri said that someone knocked her on Entebbe Road. All those on Entebbe Road are pedestrian crossings; they are not zebra crossings. Therefore, we should distinguish the two.

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Byandala, you are really mixing us up. How should we conduct ourselves on a pedestrian crossing and how does it differ from how you conduct yourself on the zebra crossing? 

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, zebra crossings are even in the law, stating that the pedestrian has a right of way. However, pedestrian crossings are simply a management facility to stop pedestrians from crossing everywhere. We are saying, please, come and cross at one point so that it becomes easy to manage. That is the reality, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to hon. Lubogo; he is on the Floor and after him will be hon. Khainza. I have got my list of yesterday.

4.22
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to also appreciate the chairperson and members of the committee for the report they presented yesterday; it is a very detailed report. I would like to say that it was a unique report because the committee went on to analyse every clause and give their opinion on each. That said though, I would like to depart from the committee’s position in some areas in this Bill. 

On page 19, the committee considered clause 37 on how public transport should be organised and that the requirements should be in form of associations, cooperatives, and companies and so on. I am wondering, considering the nature of our society, how we are going to compel our people to compulsorily associate with other people whose background they do not know. This is because we are saying that someone who wants to join the transport sector must associate with others in order to carry out that kind of trade.

I would like to remind this House of some intervention that was made some years back by UMEME, which led to the collapse of many businesses in this country, especially the millers. UMEME compulsorily required millers to form associations such that they are billed together. 

Members were forced to join such associations and UMEME billed them together yet everybody was supposed to bring in money. These people, being of different characters, failed to effect payments in those bills and their businesses collapsed.

I am wondering why we are trying to impose almost a similar thing to the transport business community. I am also wondering whether we are not actually trying to limit the rights of the people to carry out their businesses, as provided for under Article 40 (2), where every Ugandan –(Interjection)– my time is very little, my senior colleague –(Interruption)–

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the law that we are making is not about forcing people who do not know each other to come together. By the time you want to do some work or form an association, you really have to go and associate with those people who you know. You will not simply jump up and say you want to associate with Mutonyi, when you do not even know her.

The issue of Saccos here started with people who knew each other. You do not come from Gulu; I do not know you and I associate with you in Mbale but we start because we know each other. That is the spirit in this law. Therefore, start with those that you know before you can combine forces to get funds. Thank you.

MR LUBOGO: I thank you very much. I have given you an example already of what happened when there was compulsory association in the milling industry. Madam Speaker, the other limitation I am seeing with the proposal is that when people carry out this kind of business, somebody needs to access the money.

If you have your one taxi - when it does its work, you expect the operators to bring the money daily because it is usually a day-to-day income. However, when it is operated by an association, it means somebody is constrained and limited on accessing the money as and when somebody wants it. Personally, I would like to say that I disagree with this kind of proposal. 

The other point is on clause 38 where there is a proposal that the minister should specify conditions for people to participate in this kind of industries. Among the specification is the financial capacity. Madam Speaker, the minister should consider the financial capacity for somebody to participate or invest in transport business. How much is this going to be? 

You see, if somebody is just going to operate a taxi and you are saying it should be the minister to set a threshold for that person to participate in the taxi business, what if somebody has received a gift of a taxi or a transport vehicle or vehicle for goods that does not meet the financial threshold that is set by the minister? I am seeing some of these conditions are hard and they will limit our people.

Finally, on the age of the vehicle, I would like to state that in many countries and even the developed countries where many of us have travelled, you find very old vehicles including those of 1970s and 1980s. However, they are well serviced and their emission is highly controlled. That is the problem we have here in Uganda. Even if somebody says we only allow vehicles, which are 10 or 15 years old, as long as the carbon emission is not controlled, we are not solving the problem. You will find vehicles of 1980s driving in the street of Japan and other countries. 

I think what is important is the inspection of the quality of the vehicle and its fitness for the road such that the carbon emissions are controlled for purposes of environmental system controls. 

I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I invite hon. Khainza, I would like to welcome a delegation from the 16 sub-counties of Kamuli District. They have come for Parliament Week. They are represented by the Speaker of Parliament, hon. Maurice Kibalya, hon. Moses Kizige, hon. Isaac Musumba and hon. Rema Watongola. You are welcome. (Applause)

4.29
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for reviewing the Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1998. We note that over 85 per cent of road accidents are manmade. These accidents are caused by human behaviours and 10 per cent is attributed to the motor vehicles; while 5 per cent is due to the motorway. The Speaker asked about the lighting on Entebbe Express Highway. These are some of the causes of road accident when we talk about the motorway, which should be addressed.
 
The amendment of this law is timely especially as we go global, as we digitalise, we also need to move in line with the growing trend of the world. In particular, I would like to talk about the installation of CCTV cameras. We need these cameras to help us capture the dates, time and the direction of the offending vehicles. In the end, this will assist us in security cycles. We have heard of the hit and run and murder incidences. 

I believe if we embrace technology in the road safety and transport sector, it will help us monitor the security situation of the country especially in the urban centres. 

Madam Speaker, Uganda imports about 15,000 vehicles annually. In the committee report, they talked about imposing taxes on vehicles beyond certain years to stop their importation into the country. However, we note that among the vehicles, which are imported into this country, about 10 per cent are brand new and they are procured by Government and NGOs. Most Ugandans cannot afford – Actually, 40 per cent of the old vehicles are above eight years. 

We have not considered that many people who are earning monthly salaries cannot afford new vehicles. As my colleague spoke, we could scale up the routine inspections of vehicles to help us reduce on the carbon emission on the road. It will help us in ensuring that the environment is not polluted. The Sustainable Development Goal Target 06 aims to have the death on the road by 2020 –

As a nation, if we adopted the amendments in this law, it will help us move a long way in ensuring that we reduce the statistics of the deaths on the roads by half. It will also enable us attain SDG 11.2 to provide access to safe, affordable, accessible and sustainable transport system for all by 2030.

I pray that the amendments proposed here are taken seriously by the committee to ensure that as a country, safety of our people is paramount. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Muyanja, hon. Okot Ogong and Ssengo. I will start with my list of yesterday. (Laughter)

4.33
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work well done, more so when they captured the issues of boda-boda, tuk tuk and taxis.

My concern is that the committee is going to register all those but you have not mentioned the old breakdowns. Unless the breakdowns are registered, the ones we have are too old and many of them belong to traffic police officers. What happens is that they pull vehicles from one station but before they reach even Jinja Road, the breakdown also breaks down. (Laughter) When you are considering road safety, the breakdowns should also be registered. The committee should note that. 

There is an issue about right of way. My concern was about the right of way and it was clearly defined. As we speak now, you can wonder – If it happens that the Speaker is going to Kamuli and she passes via Bweyogerere, you may think she has a motorcade of 50 vehicles whereas she has only four. 

Some of us, when we hear sirens coming, we just wait along the road and join the convoy because it has become a habit and yet, it is a bad practice that the committee should consider in their recommendations. 

Secondly, the Ministry of Works and Transport should tell us more about the zebra crossings, which have been merely mentioned here. Many zebra crossings are done by individual NGOS without considering even the distance. What forces people to create their own crossing points is that you put a zebra crossing in a distant place where there are no people; I remember when I was still a mayor, they used to consult where to put a zebra crossing. However, these days, you see people coming up when they want to advertise for their NGO, company or business, they decide to put a zebra crossing. However, that was not the way. They are supposed to request permission from the authority and that local authority would get permission from the Ministry of Works and Transport.

If that can be considered, I am sure that zebra crossings will be of genuine use. I thank you, honourable members and I rest my case.

THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Sengo, he has reminded me about the pedestrian crossing. Sometimes you see that the distance a person has to walk to reach that crossing is almost a mile. Like on Entebbe road, you really have to walk a long distance in order to get that particular place where you can cross from. That is when you see them jumping over the barrier.

4.37
MR KALULE SSENGO (NRM, Gomba County East, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleagues to thank the committee for a good report. However, before I go any farther, I would like to add something to this question of right of way.

I live along Entebbe road but you can be embarrassed along that road because even a police pickup that is going to deliver a bag of charcoal needs to make a siren to make sure that you move out of the way.

Almost every other minute, you have to stop because a police vehicle is passing, delivering some posho to some people somewhere; we need to be assisted. Let us have a clear situation. Not all Ugandans are VIPs.

You find a man who is rushing to Entebbe to catch a plane, he hires a police vehicle and the siren goes ahead of him and this is what is happening in this country. The whole scenario has been abused and we have to be assisted.

Madam Speaker, this issue of assisting accident victims is also a problem because if you assist a man who has had an accident, when you get to Mulago, you have a hard time. They ask you how it happened. Can you make a statement? Can you stay there for five hours? Therefore, Madam Speaker, we need to find a way of helping this Good Samaritan who comes to assist an accident victim and he is disturbed at the hospital when he delivers the patient.

I also would like to talk about the humps. I would like to thank the Government for the many roads that they have constructed and upgraded to tarmac. However, there are very many humps along these roads. You drive a short distance and hit a hump.

I would request that these humps be painted so that someone can know, especially at night. If they are painted in the right colours, someone will be able to tell that there is a hump somewhere. 

However, you find that many of these accidents are happening to people who do not know those roads. For example, this road from Mpigi to Kanoni and Sembabule has many humps. If a person is driving there for the first time, he is bound to get an accident because there are very many humps that are not marked and you can bump into one of them and the car overturns. Therefore, I would request that the honourable Minister of Works and Transport does something about painting these humps. 

Otherwise, Madam Speaker, I also agree with the committee that we should have a proper inspection of vehicles. However, if I remember very well, there is Bill they had brought here about the inspection of vehicle and it was thrown out. The structures are there along Entebbe road, Bombo road and Masaka road and they are not used. They are being wasted.

Therefore, this Parliament has a duty to reconsider that Bill because - actually these people are talking about inspection of vehicles. However, unless we pass that Bill, the vehicles will never be inspected.

With those few remarks, I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

4.41
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County South, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, this current law was enacted in 1998. It is about 20 years now and there exists some gaps and some of the provisions are out-dated. It is the right time for us to amend those provisions and some other provisions should be deleted.

I agree that this Bill is very important provided we put in certain amendments that would make this law effective. I agree with the committee that the powers that have been given or proposed in the Bill for the Chief Licencing Officer are too much and that will lead to a number of problems for those who are operators.

Therefore, I suggest that the powers that have been proposed to be given to the Chief Licencing Officer be reduced and when we come to analysing the Bill, I will propose certain amendments in regard to the powers given to the Licensing officer.

Madam Speaker, even in this Bill, they have given too much powers to the minister. And as you know, some ministers may be interested parties in transport. Therefore, we want also that the power of the minister be reduced. At the right time, we will make proposals for amendments to the powers of the minister. However, I suggest that powers of the minister should also be reduced.

Madam Speaker, I want to support the committee that they have proposed the extension of the driving licence period of five years. I support that but I would also want to propose that the renewal should be automatic. Once you have driven for five years, when you go for renewal, it should be automatic and it should not be very expensive.

Madam Speaker, I get confused; as you know -(Member timed out.)

4.45
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the members of the committee for coming up with this Bill. I would like to say that looking at the dangers that we get in driving, I would like to request that we maintain the powers that have been given to the minister.

We have a lot of indisciplined drivers in Uganda. At one time, I was traveling to my village before I became a Member of Parliament, only to see a vehicle stopping behind me to give me a lift and it was an ambulance. When I sat in that car, behind it were sacks of charcoal and I tried to ask the driver why he was doing that and he told me in vernacular that “tulina okweyiya” meaning that they have to find another way of surviving.

Looking at that, I would like to encourage Members that we maintain the powers that have been given to the minister because we are really indisciplined drivers in Uganda.

Secondly, I would like us to also pick interest in these private vehicles that have their own in-built sirens. Who has given authority to private people to put sirens in their cars? Ugandans think that whoever comes with a vehicle that has a siren must be given right of way but I do not think that this is right.

I have also got an opportunity to travel to other countries, especially Kenya. When you look at the way their roads are built, they are far different from Uganda. They have four lanes; one leads into the city and others let vehicles out. How are we going to manage this law, if enacted, when we have these types of roads?

Lastly, I normally see traffic police officers confiscating number plates from vehicles due to bad driving. Is it always done in the right way? It is one of the things that cause accidents on the road because people are stopped arbitrarily. I do not think that these traffic officers have also gone through the requisite training.

I would like to thank the committee for coming up with the Bill and I support it.  Thank you.

4.47
Ms jovah kamateeka (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the report and to agree with my colleague that we need to maintain the powers of the minister for effective monitoring and supervision of the transport industry.

One wonders why we have the problems that we have now when the minister has the powers. We need a provision that will make the minister exercise these powers so that we have a smooth running transport industry.

I support proposals on the registration of boda-bodas and vehicles but I do not agree with tuk tuks. When you go to neighbouring countries, you do not find the number of boda-bodas that are in Kampala and other towns in Uganda. In those countries, these boda-bodas are regulated amd they are few. All the boda-bodas from Kenya, Tanzania and elsewhere must be here in Uganda. I am sorry if it is offensive to mention these nations but it is true. In Rwanda, there are very few boda-bodas and they are regulated. 

Therefore, this law can help us to regulate the boda- bodas and their numbers. It should not be that everybody who wants to ride wakes up in the morning, gets a boda-boda and puts it on the street.

In addition, we do not have lanes for boda-bodas and the way they intermingle with vehicles is disturbing. We must have a mechanism for regulating these boda- bodas and giving them clear instructions on how they should operate. Most of our people have had accidents because these boda-bodas just ride haphazardly.

We also need strict penalties for those who are not licensed. I have seen the recommendation that people whose driving licences expire for two years are supposed to go for written examinations. We all know that once you are a driver, you are a driver and when you are on the road, you do not forget these things. Why would you subject a person to other tests?

The practical test and a penalty should be enough. Let people pay penalties without doing written examinations. 

Indeed, we need to create a specialised department for road transport but it must link with the ministry, which must exercise its powers to ensure that the transport industry runs smoothly. Thank you.

4.51
Mr james acidri (NRM, Maracha County East, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker and complements of the season. I support this Bill but I also have issues to raise.

We lost a lot regarding road safety because we were mainly focusing on revenue and political populism. These are the reasons we have not been able to enforce previous laws. We hope that this new Bill will not suffer the same fate.

I have looked critically at this report and it emphasises the need to achieve the SDG on road safety and yet, at the same time, our infrastructure is not necessarily resilient. The quality of road designs and construction is still lacking in terms of placing us at the right position to achieve our SDGs. 

I would like to make some specific observations here. The first one is about reverting powers to the Chief Licensing Officer. I entirely agree and request the Minister of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) to fast-track digitisation so that we can get rid of corruption and save our President from talking against it.

The idea of merging the National Road Safety Council with other entities into an authority may increase costs of administration. I have seen that in this report, it has been clarified that we will maintain the staffing. However, my understanding is that an authority requires more resources than some of these current institutions.

Finally –(Interruption)

Mr waluswaka: Thank you, hon. Acidri. The information I would like to give is that even in the committee, we came out and said that we do not need a separate authority like Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA). Let the authority be in name only but there should not be additional recruitment apart from the people who are already in the Ministry of Works and Transport. That is considered and I would like to thank my senior colleague for giving me way.

Mr acidri: Thank you, my colleague. My last two points are as follows –(Member timed out.)

The Speaker: You are generous, conclude.

Mr acidri: Thank you. On the question of driving licences, we are almost a middle income economy; we were told that we would be a middle income country in 2020. Middle income countries do not issue driving licences after two, three or five years. They issue lifetime driving licences and only revoke them when you make a mistake. Why don’t we do that?

If the argument is revenue collection, find better ways of collecting revenue rather than frustrating Ugandans by moving to seek renewal all the time.

Finally, as we consolidate the transport sector, let the minister be given the space to do his or her work without unnecessary political interference and populism. Thank you.

4.56
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the committee for coming up with this good report. However, I would like to disagree with the committee recommendation on page 14. They are not in tandem with the Bill. It says that clause 22, which seeks to empower the minister to make regulations and prescribe procedures and conditions for persons to go for private driving instruction is not right.

Madam Speaker, I would like to disagree because there are some instructions which cannot be got from these other driving schools. For example, some specialised vehicles whose instructors might not be easily found in ordinary driving schools. 

I think it would be good to give the minister powers to regulate and make sure that such people who want to drive specialised vehicles – for example, long vehicles – are given the opportunity to get instructions from private professions.

Madam Speaker, if this is not agreeable by the Bill, we shall find some of our people going all the way to Mombasa to get this training. I would like to give an example of private schools versus public schools. They are regulated and we are getting very good services from them vis-a-vis the public schools.

Madam Speaker, the committee is also proposing that it should be compulsory for health units and hospitals to provide services to accident victims. I would like to agree with this but my fear is, if we put it that all the hospitals and clinics at any time should be able to give necessary health services to the victim without the Government putting in something, yet some of these clinics are privately owned. If we make a law like this and we do not support with adequate resources, some of our people will reach this medical facility and will be given something, which is just similar to what they are supposed to get because somebody fears to treat somebody and make losses.

Thirdly, I would also like to commend the committee –(Member timed out.)

4.59
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee for doing a great job. I am in total support and agreement with the committee report when they recommend that a driving licence should move from three to five years. 

I know my colleague hon. Acidri said it should be for a lifetime but as a growing country, let us move step by step. We have had three years. Let us move to five and see how it goes and maybe move on from there.
Secondly, I would like to talk about the issue that hon. Baba Diri talked about. We are in East Africa and the other time we were talking about deepening, widening and consolidating the East Africa arrangement. However, when you go to Rwanda, they have a different system. South Sudan, which neighbours us in Amuru is a different system and these are some of the causes of accidents.

My question is: How do we harmonise this, as East Africa? When people drive from South Sudan into Uganda, they are oriented with a different system; it takes them a bit of time to get used to the Ugandan system and the reverse is true. To me, this is a big concern.

Secondly, about consolidating public service providers, I think this is something that can work for us. The other time, we saw an accident where a public taxi was being used to brutally arrest a Ugandan in broad daylight. If we knew or if these were in a Sacco, it would be very easy to identify who the culprit is. Therefore, these kinds of things that are happening would be solved by this.

The committee also rejected the first time to go through another test. If I already have a permit and I go for first renewal, this is something good because if I have gone through a licensed driving school and I have gone through the test, why should I go through another test? This is something critical.

Finally, on the issue of the camera, I would also like to agree with some of the colleagues who raised this issue. It would save Ugandans a lot of money -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what the Member contributed has reminded me – when I was growing up, there were road signs like “Keep Left”. I do not see those signs these days – They cut them?

5.03
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would seek your indulgence for more time. When I want a trading licence in Kampala, I pay Shs 100,000 and I will be allowed to trade and trading in commodities, which are in billions of shillings. When somebody wants to go and drive or ride a motorcycle or whatever, to get a driving licence, he is going to pay above Shs 500,000 for only a driving permit which is a licence to drive or to ride; isn’t this criminal? 

An ordinary passport is Shs 250,000 for 10 years. Why should a driving permit, which is a licence to authorise me to be on the road be more expensive?

Moreover, the person who is looking for it is somebody struggling to find a job as a taxi driver or boda-boda rider. Why is the ministry very insensitive to the people of Uganda as far as the issue of driving permits is concerned?

In fact, I would like to make a suggestion that if a passport is ten years, the driving permit should be may be cost Shs 20,000 and also 10 years because those who most need it are those who want to use it to get jobs. If you take hon. Mawanda here, he will get a permit and it will even expire without him even using it because he is not using it for a job. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I would like to make a proposal as Parliament that the price should be attached in this law maybe in currency points for a licence to avoid the Ministry of Works and Transport with its people –Face Technologies – coming up with arbitrary prices at any time anyhow -(Interjections) I am well informed, do not worry. (Laughter) Okay, since he is a young man, let me allow the information. (Interruption)

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, hon. Nandala, for giving way. I was actually agreeing with my senior colleague, who is well informed, that the cost resulting from processing a driving licence – for instance, an ordinary person in Kasese will travel to Fort Portal to be tested by the Inspectorate of Vehicles and he will pay money there in addition to the fees that he has paid to the driving school. 
He will then go to Face Technologies to get a Learner’s Permit, then they ask him to come back after three months, before he goes to Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) to make payment. The transport and accommodation costs and even the time they take processing a driving license – Government needs to review this process and streamline it.

I remember previously, you would walk into a URA office if you were applying for a permit. The process was easier when the police was handling it locally and payment was being made at URA offices than it is now.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, having said that, the amendment in clause 24 states that the license shall be for 20 years at a stage and the currency point will be one to avoid the Ministry of Works and Transport from putting figures that would make people unhappy. 

The police was involved in vehicle inspection. The reason it was removed was that when one took their car for inspection and at that time, they did not pay Shs 100,000, the inspectors would say their car had not passed the test. Those cars that passed the test were not necessarily cars that had gone through the test. There was a man called Bagonza – I do not know whether he is alive or dead – who would stamp and pass the car whether it was there or not, as long as he had seen an envelope with Shs 100,000. 

In our wisdom, we decided to read the law. We discovered that the policeman was not supposed to be the licensing officer. Instead, the person who gives a license was the one supposed to inspect the vehicle. Of course, I was one of those – at the time in Government – who led the process to show that this man was doing a criminal act. 

Inspecting vehicles is very important. Even the people who inspect vehicles are supposed to be gazetted. You can gazette a garage, even a private garage. 

In the UK, people take their vehicles for inspection every year. They check their brakes, the general system and it is people in the garage to tell you that your car has passed the test. Otherwise, this business of saying that we open up places – for example, we have seen buildings here where they inspect vehicles but which is criminal. That is monopoly and theft. 
Therefore, I would think that at an appropriate stage, we should move an amendment in this law and state that the garages should be licensed to inspect vehicles and determine whether they are roadworthy or not. 

I have two more small issues and drinking is one of them. The people who drink alcohol have money and cars. If you try to regulate drinking by saying you do not drive, the tax on beers and Waragi is going to drop; I promise you. You try it out and see. The man who drinks alcohol – even hon. Mawanda can agree with me that alcohol drunk in his house is not as sweet as – (Interruption) 

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is hon. Nandala in order to impute that I agree with him when he is emphasising a point of people that drink and drive? Is he in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No, he is not in order. (Laughter) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you for your ruling. Many people say alcohol in the house is not sweet. The sweet alcohol is either in the club or in hotels. 
Take an example of football. People leave their television sets at home and go to public places to watch football matches. Even those policemen who test for drunk drivers on the road are drunk and you may find the officer placing the breathalyser to test a drunkard driver when he is himself drunk. What he or she does in most cases, if they want to malice you, is to open their mouth and breathe in first before they bring it to yours; yet the alcohol being measured is theirs. 

Madam Speaker, this testing of alcohol is a serious matter. When the policeman tests alcohol content using a breathalyser and they happen to arrest somebody, they should probably take them to a hospital. They should not be the last persons to determine - and in that regard, I would like to ask Government to get a chip to put –(Interruption) 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Madam Speaker, one time, we were coming from hon. Jacob Oulanyah, the Deputy Speaker’s wedding in Munyonyo. When we arrived at Jinja Road, we found a road block. I do not drink. I have never tasted alcohol and I do not know how it tastes. I stopped and the police officer came and told me I was drunk and his machine showed him that I was drunk. 

I kept wondering why that was so. Maybe, it is the reason that hon. Nandala-Mafabi has stated. I have never tasted alcohol but this police officer insisted that I was drunk, until I asked him if his machine had been tested by UNBS. I told him that I wanted him to show me that his machine had been tested by UNBS. That is how he pulled back but I kept wondering why I was being taken as a drunkard. Maybe that could be the reason. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, that is why I said I have a lot of evidence. At one point, I had travelled with one of my Muslim brothers from Kampala going upcountry. A policeman stopped a Muslim – there may be Muslims who drink but this one does not. The policeman came up to us and when I saw him talking, I had to hide a bit to hear what he would say. He claimed my brother was drunk and nearly arrested him. We got out and asked him if he was serious because he was drunk. 

Finally, the boda-bodas; the biggest numbers of accident victims we have in hospitals is due to boda-bodas and it is not only the riders. They even injure those who are walking and those they carry. For example, go to the roundabout where there are traffic lights. A man will see traffic lights stopping but will ride across them. 

Madam Speaker, we should make a law that says that nobody should ride a motorcycle without a permit because we are reducing the price. The reason they do not get them is because the cost for the permits is high. 

Two – (Interruption) 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, it appears as if the minute measurements of our debate is also drunk. I have checked my watch and the member holding the Floor has talked for more than 10 minutes yet others were being limited to two minutes. I am wondering whether our machines are not drunk. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Let me check whether there is a brewery downstairs. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I asked for your indulgence but it is okay because the machine is not drunk. 

5.14
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I have very few comments to make on this Bill but I think it is just a matter of formality that we are discussing this. May be, we need to also strengthen some areas where the Bill has not spelt out the measures to curb fatalities on our roads. 

I have taken serious note of the 2016 Traffic Road Safety Report, which recorded that 10 people are dying on our roads every day and it is the highest in East Africa, according to the report. 

The second report, which also records the seriousness of the accidents on our roads was released by the police in the annual crime report of 2018. 

My concern is, it is recorded that 40 per cent of the people who die in accidents are pedestrians. The next group are the passengers of vehicles. These two categories of people are highly vulnerable people who cannot afford to own vehicles. They are either travelling as passengers or walking along the road and they are hit. 

I have read this report and the Bill. I thank God that you gave us more time yesterday. I have not seen anywhere where this Bill is helping us to protect the rights of the victims. It talks about assistance but does not tell us what nature of assistance. And should there be failure of extending assistance to the victim, what happens? What penalties are in place? These are absent. If we are to make a law that helps Ugandans, something should have come out of it. 

I hope in the process of going through the committee session, maybe we could come up with amendments.

The other thing that I am concerned about is the lack of sensitivity of the Government. The Government has endorsed the UN proclamation on the decade of action (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: The machine is sober. Please, conclude.

MS OGWAL: Thank you. The machine could be half drunk. (Laughter) The UN report is very serious. It has given us 10 years to work on our fatalities and to make sure that within the 10 years, we have reduced them by 50 per cent. 

We are just coming up with this law and yet, we are left with only three years. Can we curb fatalities on our roads by 50 per cent? That I know is not going to be done. 

Madam Speaker, I beg you, when you make this law, take care of the boda-boda riders. Our children go for boda-bodas because we have failed to provide them with jobs. Please, take care of these vulnerable children who have nothing else to do and instead of becoming thieves, they opt to ride boda-bodas. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.18
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work well done. 

In 2019, the road accidents were too much. We witnessed very many people dying on Gulu-Kampala Road. Sometimes, it is due to negligence but some other times, it is due to people responsible relaxing very much. I am talking about the minister concerned and the police. 

Community policing would help a lot. I do not know how we can make it effective. 

The report should also cover how we can bring down the corrupt tendencies. For example, somebody may have a problem with a vehicle and after giving a little tip to the police, they are allowed to go. It is this vehicle that can cause a problem to people who are very innocent. 


When we talk of drunkenness, it is the drunkard who can cause a problem to those who are very sober and very innocent. There are people who died on the road who have never tasted alcohol but because somebody is careless, the innocent are not protected.

I keep cautioning my children, I tell them, “when you drive in the evening, be careful. There are people from the bars who may not follow traffic rules.” If we do not take responsibility on the reads, we will always have problems.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. The information I would to give you is on the number of accidents that we have witnessed on our highway to the North. In my own assessment, it is attributed to laxity on the part of Government by allowing heavy commercial vehicles to travel at night. That is a major cause of accidents on that road especially trailers having head-on collisions with buses and other commuter vehicles. 

If we only went back to the Amin decree of ensuring that heavy commercial vehicles do not travel from 7.00 p.m. till morning, then we would be safe on our roads as far as these heavy vehicles are concerned. 

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you. I would also like to say that tractors cause problems on our roads. Why would tractors drive at night and yet, it looks like they do not have headlamps? Let us take those special cases into consideration. A tractor caused a bus to kill very many people on Gulu – Kampala high way. There should be some provision for tractors. 

For our boda-bodas, our roads are very narrow – the boda-bodas have created jobs for themselves. We need to improve on how they can continue with their business without the risk of them dying on the roads. I see these Safe bodas of Kampala doing well. When you go to the North, you cannot just do away with the boda-bodas. We should allow them to exist but maybe we need some special law for them. Thank you very much.

5.24
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to join colleagues to thank the committee for the elaborate report. 

I would, however, like to raise an objection on the validity period of the five years for the driving licence. I object to this validity period of five years for a driving license or renewal of the driving permits.

Driving should be treated like any other profession. A profession in my understanding would be a type of job that would require special education or training or skill. 

Take the case of other professions like Medicine. A doctor would not be required to renew his transcripts every other time. Even in developed countries, these renewals are not done. One would be required to get a practicing licence. It would be discriminatory that a certain profession – the driving fraternity – is unfairly treated and subjected to exploitation. Whenever renewals are made, huge sums of money are paid –(Interjections)- I have very little time. Let me make my point before I can allow you.

If it were about raising the duration of time for one to learn driving, that would be about changing the curriculum or doing something about the institutions that teach driving but not having this profession discriminated against. (Interruption)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. I would like to inform the House that one of the reasons the licences are renewed is because they do eye testing. Usually, after three or four years, when you go back for eye testing, you realise that your eyes are not in the same condition of health as they were. Eye testing is a perquisite for one to drive and it is tagged on renewal of a license. One of the causes of accidents is poor eyesight.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you for –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You are a very generous man. (Laughter)

5.29
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you for the opportunity, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for their effort in generating this report. I have a few issues to point out. 

The World Bank and International Monetary Fund report of 2019 indicated that Uganda loses over $3 million annually on road and traffic related issues. This is a huge amount of money. This Bill is timely because we need to see how we can address the issues that are the key drivers of these losses.

Madam Speaker, when you visit hospitals, about 70 per cent of road accident victims are either boda-boda or taxi passengers. The main reason for this is that there is limited control in the way they operate. I have not seen anywhere in the Bill where we are dealing with the misconduct of taxi drivers. If you are driving on any highway and a taxi driver overtakes you, in the next two minutes, he will stop to pick a passenger. If you are not careful, you will either ram into him or cause other people behind you to knock.

The biggest challenge is that on all these highways, there are no designated stages for taxis and buses. The stages would limit the unnecessary stoppages on the roads, which cause traffic jam. Maybe this is where we need to do something in the law to make sure that we take punitive actions, especially against these drivers who overtake and immediately park.

Madam Speaker, the other thing is about the proposed clause 24, which is about the renewal of the permit for the first time. I do not know why the committee rejected that idea. In our current situation, there are a lot of forgeries. A lot of driving permits are forged in the streets –(Member timed out.)

5.31
MS PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This Bill is about traffic and road safety. If you look at the police records on road accidents in the country, the major cause is human error due to reckless and careless driving. However, this Bill does not seem to critically address that problem of reckless driving. It also does not go ahead to require the police to audit road accidents.

The Ministry of Health is running audits of maternal deaths. Every time there is maternal death, they require an audit. What happens in road accidents is that an accident happens and as long as a police officer thinks it is human error, the case ends there. We may help this country by requiring audits of road accidents.

We need a specific clause for all these drivers. It is not true that those people without licences are the ones causing accidents – both those with and without licences cause accidents. The problem is reckless driving. We need to come out strongly on reckless driving. When you cross over to Tanzania, drivers observe road rules and regulations.

The other issue that I would like to mention is that of driving schools and the licensing of driving schools and licensing of drivers’ instructors. Who trains these instructors? Do we have a school with a fully-fledged programme to train these instructors in the country? We do not have an institution that can train and we would be sure that an instructor is given training.

Madam Speaker, when you look at the requirements for receiving a driving –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Conclude in half a minute.

MR NSAMBA: To get a driving school licence, you only need Shs 200,000, a plot of land which is in your name and a qualified instructor. However, how do these instructors get licences? One only needs to be 25 years old, must have been driving for five years and possess an Ordinary Level Certificate. 

In this law, we must require the Ministry of Works and Transport to establish an institution to give training to instructors so that it is not about just completing Senior Four, being 25 years old and having driven for five years. We need an institution that has a comprehensive programme for driver-instructors in the country. Thank you.

5.35
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Like my colleagues, I would like to thank the committee for coming up with a very comprehensive report. The report has not attracted a minority report and I think this is very commendable.

Clause 70 of the Bill talks about safety of vehicles through inspection and through quality and age of imported vehicles. The quality of these vehicles is enhanced to promote road safety but not to dispel the need to undertake vehicle inspections on a regular basis. 

I would like to propose that the quality of vehicles on the roads should be harmonised with the current tax regime. The current tax regime on importation of vehicles seems to be very high. For example, import duty is currently at 25 per cent, VAT at 18 per cent, withholding tax at 6 per cent and environmental levy at 50 per cent.

Madam Speaker, vehicles that people import compromise the quality of the vehicles that should be on our roads and partly, the reason is the tax regime. As such, my humble appeal –(Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In addition to inspecting vehicles and making sure that they are in proper mechanical condition - If you were to peep inside a taxi, you would be shocked at the conditions in which those vehicles are; there are no seat belts and the metals are exposed.

I am sure that when people sit in those taxis, they cannot hold on to these metals because either the metals will cut them or they will pick diseases. We need serious inspection to make sure that all public service vehicles are in good condition with safety belts. Thank you.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for the very useful information. If we harmonise these, then we shall be able to bring into our country quality vehicles that can meet the standards that we require.

I am very happy with the committee when they talk about licencing of repair facilities. More often than not –(Member timed out.)

5.38
MS MARGARET LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Madam Speaker, I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for this great job. The report is comprehensive and touches almost everybody.

It is well stated that there were 12,805 accidents in 2018 of which 3,194 were fatal. Of these, 1,425 involved pedestrians. These accidents were caused either by motorcyclists or reckless drivers.

All the roads in Uganda have no specific lanes for motorcycles, bicycles and heavy vehicles. Trailers are struggling with taxis and that is why we are getting many accidents. Worse still is the way boda- bodas want to manoeuvre everywhere. If we do not come out with strict conditions, we shall continue dying. 

I would like to commend the issuing of driving permits after five years. That is acceptable.

Madam Speaker, road usage in Uganda is not specified. Heavy vehicles are free to go to residential places. What do they go to do there? They are only dodging traffic jam. Why can’t the responsible ministry create roads that are specific for heavy vehicles and do proper planning? 

When we looked at our roads and the shops we have, they are almost on the road. Not even five metres away. Why can’t we emulate other countries where buildings are about 20 metres away from the highway? 

I would also like to speak on insurance of our vehicles in Uganda. When any vehicle causes an accident –(Member timed out.)

5.42
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the good and comprehensive report. I just want to address myself on the aspect of bad usage of roads with double lanes. 

There is a lot of abuse on roads with double lanes, say the Entebbe Express Highway and some sections of the Northern Bypass. I have seen drivers passing left, keeping right and zigzagging, which is a cause for many accidents. I have seen such roads in South Africa and they will clearly label, at different intervals, “keep left”, “pass right” and drivers are well disciplined and orderly.

Madam Speaker, some of us who use these roads on a daily basis are inconvenienced. You find some drivers keeping left and others right. Those who are fast drivers have nowhere to pass and they manoeuvre around.
We should put in place a law where driving on the right is punishable by law. The cameras that we have installed on many of these roads should be used to provide information for such bad road users so that they are punished for wrong acts. Thank you.

5.44
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a child in school, we had a traffic code, which would teach you how to obey the rules of road and transport systems.

Unfortunately, these days, we do not see that. We used to find these traffic codes printed at the back of exercise books so that one would understand traffic rules. I hope the Ministries of Works and Transport and the Ministry of Education and Sports can bring this back to educate our children.

The other issue is on sharing a road with these heavy trucks. For us who come from the East, you sometimes find when the trailers are really high and when you want to shift this way, a trailer is almost moving the other side. I am looking at countries where trailers are diverted to different roads.
Why can’t trucks be diverted from the Jinja Nile Bridge and they cross to the other and we meet somewhere in Mukono, before we take the bypass?

Madam Speaker, the other issue I would like to bring out is on first aid when people get accidents; it is very critical. The best the police can do for people who get accidents is to bundle them up and put them under their car seats, which worsens the condition of accident victims.

You realise that when people are taken to hospitals, things like wheelchairs are not available there for first aid. Somebody is being carried and you are disorganising them. The little training I had when I used to be a Red Cross member was to first arrest the accident and see how to help the patient in a better way.

The other thing is on the boda-bodas. Safe Boda is already proving that people can be organised in Uganda. They move with two helmets and show you where to sit. Where there are traffic lights, they stop but these other people who do not put on uniform are really disorganised. 

I would like the minister to take this as an assignment – that if those ones have started, everybody else can follow suit. Give them the stages – maybe that is why we have a lot of people killing others and we do not know which boda-boda it is that participated in the killing. If they are registered, we can track these boda-boda systems.

I pray that the minister takes that up and help the people of Uganda to access safety on the roads. Thank you.

5.47
MR ISMAEL OROT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. They have mentioned the issue of alcohol but that of drugs is silent. We have drivers who chew mairungi, smoke opium and other terrible drugs. Those should also be tested as they move on the roads.

My colleague, hon. Nambeshe, talked about professionalism. They should also look at the age of a driver. At what age should you stop driving? Some of these drivers are very old. (Laughter) 

On the side of Government drivers, we must ensure their safety and welfare. You find that Government drivers are not paid well yet they drive very important persons. Therefore, we should look at that side also because if a driver is disturbed and not well settled in the brain, he can cause a terrible accident.

We should also look at the issue of the roads themselves. Towards last Christmas, a terrible accident happened on Masaka Road because a driver who was moving towards Masaka hit a terrible pothole. He tried to dodge it but found another driver coming from the other side of the road. It was a very bad crash. We, the responsible people, use these roads every day and even see potholes but do not take action.

Madam Speaker, this safety on roads must be looked at. For example, look at this traffic jam on Jinja-Kampala Road. You have been to China and seen how things are. Why can’t they design another road on top of the present road; another Jinja-Kampala road on top of the one, which is already there or an underground tunnel. We have a lot of money in the country but we do not plan for it properly. Otherwise, these accidents would not be there.  

We should also look at the point of –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, we look at ourselves dying but we fail to get a solution not to die. For example, Madam –(Member timed out.)

5.50
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the report. However, I also differ with the committee on a certain clause where they sought to limit the powers of the minister to make statutory instruments. The transport sector is very dynamic with many needs and challenges, so it requires constant interventions. 

I also take issue with page 16, where the report states the designation of representation of the regulation of the Department of Transport to a competent authority. I think you should clarify on this. What is this authority? Is it going to be a self-accounting authority or a directorate within the ministry?

I thought we had departed from the issue of creating more authorities to create uniform, pay and save funds for priority areas like service delivery. This also proves that we should try much more to align our legislation with the National Development Plan objectives and priorities.

I would also like to interest the minister to re-engage Government to contribute more to public transport. As it stands now, Government seems to have divested itself from public transport, which is not good. 

In developed countries, Governments highly subsidises public transport to create order and safety. We will not get order and safety if we leave public transport in private hands only. If it is in private hands, it has to be highly regulated. Regulation is for efficiency and safety.

Looking at our city today, Government has not come here to clearly tell us the master plan of transport system in the city and the country at large. We simply see piecemeal implementation. The other day, we saw on television that somebody wants to bring the buses but that is not enough. More should have been done before announcing that the buses will be brought.

5.53
MR GERSHOM SIZOMU (FDC, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to join my friends and colleagues in thanking the committee for the report. When we make laws, we want to cure situations. In this particular situation, we are looking at road safety.

oad safety should not be focused only on drivers. There are many factors and one of the major factors is the road itself. Many of our roads were constructed when the population of vehicles was still low. We have very many vehicles now; we need to widen our roads.

Slow vehicles, especially on highways, are the major cause of impatience of drivers that results into accidents. Government should consider that as a safety precaution to widen our roads. 
Madam Speaker, the signs are inadequate. One time I was stopped by a traffic officer for overtaking. There was no sign preventing me from overtaking. They use Sadolin paint or weather guard for the dots on the roads. 

Road signs should be painted with long lasting paint that can inform drivers or they should be renewed so that drivers can know when to overtake or not. These signs should not only be restricted to cities and main roads that lead to cities. We have roads that go into the villages. Some of our drivers come from the villages where there are no signs whatsoever. They are used to this kind of driving where you pass trading centres without stopping or reducing speed. 

The road signs should be placed in all trading centres around the country. There should be sensitisation campaigns. There should be days where drivers are all called to learn. I was in Rwanda and there are days where the whole public –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Gonahasa, hon. Mukitale, hon. Akena and hon. Wamanga Wamai. I have written all your names down. So, do not worry because you are all going to contribute. 

5.56
MR FRANCIS GONAHASA (FDC, Kabweri County, Kibuku): It turns out to be very difficult to speak at the end of a very long debate but I think everything here depends on discipline. We have had these rules for a very long time. When we were young, we were taught this rule, “Keep Left.” I do not know what we keep now; is it still keep left, keep right or keep middle? It is all about discipline.

I want to suggest that while we talk about increasing the road safety, let us start with the children because honestly, I have been talking about this game and they say, “Your generation is beyond repair.” Honestly, it is sad but it is true. I do not know how many of us have valid driving licences in this House yet we drive. I would like to thank those who have them and I am not surprised that some of us do not have valid driving permits.  

I would like to suggest we concentrate on children. This idea of the Highway Code, which we learned when we were in P.2, many years ago, should be brought back and it should be enforced so that while the old people are trying to survive on the road, the young ones know how to do it. 

When I was in Holland, I asked a woman, “How did you get to this?” She said, “It takes generation to get good road behaviours.” We are talking about the quality of vehicles we have. I do not know whether you noticed that some people have truck horns on their motorcycles. You would be driving in front of a motorcycle and the cyclist bangs a horn, which is for a truck and you are utterly shocked yet there is no enforcement against that. The fellow passes you and will have a great day because he is happy he shocked you; it is a whole lot of things. Also inspection of the quality of vehicles we drive must be done. 

Madam Speaker, people have said everything. I cannot say anything new. We owe it to our people to keep them safe. The size of roads we have - I was in Ivory Coast not long ago. They have a road, which is 280 kilometres long and it has two lanes on both sides and they have an island in the middle. When you think about how we do things here, if Government says it wants to construct another lane, compensation becomes a big deal. Do we love this country if we –(Member timed out.) 

5.58
MR STEPHEN BIRAAHWA MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for really delving into the many issues; driving permits, road signage, road markings, reflectors and humps even when we know some of these roads are regional customs tariffs whereby those humps are non-tariff barriers.

Yesterday, I was under maximum restraint to move on procedural point for preliminary objection. Whereas the committee has done a lot of work, we are trapped in managing the crisis of traffic jam. The boda-boda and taxis we are discussing, for me coming from the freight forwarding, shipping and logistics, these are actually victims. We are discussing victims because everybody is a victim. 

I would like to request Government and Parliament not to be stuck in the current quagmire because boda-boda and the current indiscipline are not where we want to be in the Vision 2040. 

Aware that the same committee and the ministry have done a very good job in the last one year, we just looked – Ministry of Local Government has just introduced cities here. We are talking of expressways and bypasses. The other day, we were talking of 50 to 80 metres road reserves. 

I can see we have put a lot of regulations in the law because if you take a look at the National Physical Development Plan, the cities and the new road reserves you provided for - a lot of the regulations have ended up in the law. I think the experts should help us before we process this law. 

A lot of solutions are not in the behaviour of the drivers. Members have already said that the design of the roads and zoning matters. The transport master plan would have actually been in the lead because the Uganda we want is not the boda-boda type. I have had occasions in the US and Europe when I was asked because I come from Kampala, Uganda: “How is boda-boda?” Boda-boda has become our identity. We cannot really get stuck in this crisis management. 

My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that we separate the questions of road infrastructure, the transport master plan and how we intend to zone the central business as the new cities come on board. Just cross to – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, recently, President Obama said the word “boda-boda” has become part of the English Language. (Laughter)

MR BIRAAHWA: Madam Speaker, the word, “boda-boda” is in the dictionary. 

The last point I would like to make, which is very important is: when I cautioned the Eight Parliament on the removal of the regulation on the certificate of fitness and the inspection of vehicles because we wanted tax - we said we would impose a tax on fuel and avoid the certificate of fitness and those licences. I cautioned the House during the debate that it was a mistake to do so. We were foregoing a regulation because we wanted to get revenue in return. Now that we have a standoff with SGS, can I request that we immediately do everything possible to put back the mandate of Ministry of Works and Transport of certificate of fitness which I personally did –(Member timed out).

6.03
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the work done and to emphasise on the aspect of road safety. I also thank the committee for alluding to best international practices and use of technology.

We have touched on the issue of boda-boda which is the second highest cause of road carnage in this country. However, the international best practice on using a motorcycle on the road, the No.1 safety element is helmet. It must be enforced that -(Interjection)- yes I am a serious rider and I have done a lot of road safety. Two years ago, we did road safety across East Africa. However, the No.1 element is a helmet. 

We have seen the company Safe Boda have made their riders to put on a helmet and to carry an extra helmet for a passenger and at the same time you find them obeying traffic rules. They do not cross red lights and do not do all these funny manoeuvres. 

Therefore, it is possible that it is done and No.1 should be enforcing the wearing of helmets to reduce on the carnage because on the motor cycle you are not protected. The slightest knock on the head can be fatal. This is something which is within our power and something that should be put in the forefront to deal with that particular aspect.

The next aspect I want to deal with is the question of technology. When we have the technology available today where you can truck a vehicle and its speed, it must be emphasised that these buses which are ploughing our upcountry routes must be put on this issue. 

Every time I am on the road especially at night, you find these buses moving at terrific speed. Despite the issue of police putting their checks, everybody knows where the checks are and in between they are speeding. Every now and then we get a terrible accident and we all get shocked. There is a lot of activity for a period of time but it disappears.

However, this is something which with the use of technology, you can actually help one another. You can know the companies that are over speeding or not regulating their drivers thereby causing a risk to the citizens of Uganda.

Lastly, it is a matter which my senior comrade here, hon. Gonahasa raised because the highest carnage according to this report is composed of pedestrians. I do not know whether it is a question of the zebra crossing -(Member timed out)

6.06
MR JACK WAMANGA WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and it is very sad that every time you tune in on a television, you will hear of accidents on our roads like Masaka road, Jinja road and Gulu road.

Every day we are losing people in this country. But why should we lose people! It is because of bad drivers who are not trained properly. They have not gone to school but they get these licences and get vehicles and kill our people.

Secondly, the roads; by the time the British left, 1962, we were eight million and they had made very narrow roads. The population has grown and we are now 40 million and the roads have remained very narrow. Therefore, it becomes very difficult to overtake. Therefore, the roads are also a danger and cause of the major accidents.

The vehicles are in dangerous mechanical condition. They are not inspected; therefore, we want the vehicles to go back to be inspected and put a sticker and everybody should know that on the 23rd of next month, your vehicle must go and be inspected. Then we are going to have proper vehicles running on the roads.

Thirdly, the Government should reduce taxes on vehicles so that people should buy better and new vehicles. However, when we go in for this junk, we are causing a lot of carnage on our roads. The taxi drivers are a menace. They are driving vehicles which are in terrible conditions and they do not care stopping anywhere and they cause accidents. Therefore, honourable minister, put strict regulations on taxi drivers.

Drinking and driving; you cannot drink and drive. It causes accidents. Therefore, put strict conditions and fines on people who drink and drive.

Madam Speaker, I got my licence in Sweden and I was given 40 years. When you are found drunk, your licence is taken away and they take you back to school and the licence is taken for 3-5 years according to how much alcohol you have. You go to school and it is not easy to pass. You do theory and practicals. In Sweden, there are three vehicles per home and have got about six accidents a year. Very light accidents but in this country, it is terrible.

Boda-bodas; honourable minister I know it is very expensive to work on and expand roads. However, our Kenyan neighbours have expanded the roads and the boda-bodas are not on the main roads. Therefore, we should do something to put boda-bodas away to reduce on the accidents. These are a menace to our people, our roads and have caused a lot of problems in this country.

Therefore, we must put strict rules. Let people go to driving schools properly -(Member timed out)

6.09
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): I would like to start from where hon. Wamai stopped. And I would like to advise that the minister should consider having those boda-boda people organised in a way that they should have designated stages where they operate from. And their reflector jackets or helmets should clearly be marked with their names so that if somebody uses a boda-boda from a particular stage, then they know in case of any accident or loss of property they know how to trace them.

Secondly, I am glad that the committee has finally considered the issue of people who have spent more than two years without renewing their driving licences losing the classes that they had in their driving licences. Initially, for any reason, if you did not renew your licence within two years, if you had graduated to a class let us say CM then you would lose everything and start afresh.

However, I would like to recommend that many people perhaps do not renew their driving licences maybe for failure to raise the funds to renew or because they have been sick for a long time. I would like to suggest that instead of including- that is on page 27- where it says that they should insert on section 4 “an applicant under section 4 shall pay the prescribed fee and fine before his or her driving licence can be renewed” I would propose that we delete “fines” and maintain fees. So that they pay the fees and we delete fines because sometimes they do not renew their licences because they are not able to renew either because of illness or failure to raise the resources -(Interruption)

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, colleague for giving way. The information I would like to give on boda-boda- a study was made with all the entities; Ministry of Works and Transport, the Licencing Board, Police, Kampala City Council then and recommendations were made up to the stage of implementation; that is when it was frustrated.

I, therefore, wish to request this House that this information that was already adopted be retreated for implementation. There is more to add. Thank you very much.

MR CENTENARY: As I conclude, if you look at all us Members of Parliament here, most of us have scratches on our vehicles resulting from the reckless riding of boda-boda riders. They keep left, right and centre. 

Even when you are driving on the road, you become confused. I do not know whether they use regulations different from other motorists. I request the minister to help us and give instructions to his officers to help us regulate the activities of these people on the roads.

Otherwise, you find yourself failing to even overtake because as you try to move, there is a boda-boda crossing from somewhere you do not even –(Member timed out.)

6.13
Mr joseph Ssewungu (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am happy that hon. Gen. Katumba Wamala is aware of this story. At one time, when he was the army commander, he sent some senior officers for military courses and among them was Gen. Kasirye Gwanga.

Where they went, they were supposed to drive themselves. Different countries took Generals to that country and they subjected them to a driving test.

When they got to the Ugandan Gen. Kasirye Gwanga, they said to him, “We shall not test you. Given the kavuyo of driving in Uganda, you cannot fail a driving test in this country. You have passed the interview.”

On the issue of right of way, I do not know what is going to happen. Gen. Katumba Wamala, we know you on record that you are among those senior officers who keep in the traffic. 

The traffic Act is very clear on people who have a right of way. We need very serious penalties in this law we are going to amend on people who misuse the right of way. If we do not do that, I do not know how we are going to achieve that.

Ministers sit on the front row not because Ssewungu does not want to sit there. There is that special status we give you. However, when you get it, there is somebody ahead of you and then another. Nowadays, everybody has fixed sirens in their vehicles, including people who are not known. The General knows this.

What soldiers used to do is to put jackets in the front seat of their vehicles. People now call themselves “Rt Honourables” when they are secretary generals of parties. These things must stop –(Interruption)

Ms Opendi:  Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. It is a little embarrassing. It is not only the right of way but even at traffic lights, people just cross. We have even had accidents caused at traffic lights because of people who, because they believe they have the right of way, do not obey traffic lights.

Since we are now working on this law, we had better make it very strong so that we can avert this.

Mr Ssewungu: Members, let me go on because an honourable minister is trying to communicate to the Speaker. On the issue of zebra crossing, what are the penalties we should put in place? In Uganda, we no longer have them because people do not respect them.

Honourable minister, regarding this line 4, which talks about licensing of repair facilities; manufacturers and dealers in reconditioned motor vehicles, garages used to retain number plates on cars. When my car is in the garage, it is supposed to have a number plate on as they repair it. All that no longer happens –(Interruption)

Ms Cecilia ogwal:  Thank you for giving way. I wonder how the law has handled the big weights who interfere in the traffic management particularly, where a General confronts a traffic officer. I do not see how the law will handle that anywhere. (Laughter)

Mr sSewungu: Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.) 

The speaker: You are very generous. You gave away your time. We are somewhere in Amudat.

6.19
Ms rosemary nauwat (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and the committee for their report. 

According to the committee and the Bill, clauses 28, 50 and 53 seek to increase the penalties for causing bodily injury or death through reckless driving or driving under the influence of alcohol and drugs.

You are aware that many Ugandans use public transport. Unlike the case of those within towns who have the courage to tell the reckless drivers to reduce the speed, people upcountry cannot do that because the transport is very scarce there. People fill one vehicle and there is no way they can complain to the driver to reduce because that is the only means of transport they have.

I believe that when these stringent penalties are put in place, it will go a long way to change the behaviour of the drivers while on the steering.

On the issue of cameras, I think that beside helping us to trace the thugs that are terrorising Ugandans, it can also help in tracing reckless drivers. 

NTV television used to show us reckless drivers. They would show a vehicle, which has made a U-turn in the middle of town. They would even show a vehicle, which overtakes in a very narrow space. I would ask myself, “Who would take action after this?” I think the traffic officers should work hand in hand with other Ugandans who take the trouble to help them to bring out such elements.

Clause 70 intends to set standards for environmentally compliant motor vehicles. Members will agree with me that there are many irresponsible drivers who do not service their cars. The cars produce a lot of noise and smoke. These affect other road users. If they are ahead of you, believe me, the smoke can cause tearing and you begin sneezing.

Therefore, I think that this is a good law. It will help us –(Member timed out.)

6.23
Ms sarah WEKOMBA (Independent, Woman Representative, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the committee for the report. 

However, I have some reservations mostly on the licensing of repair facilities, manufacturers and dealers in reconditioned motor vehicles.

This is very good for this country because these garages where vehicles are repaired have been at the helm of robbing Ugandans of their vehicles. 

I have about three colleagues who lost vehicles to date. One of them lost it in 2010; another in 2018 and they stole another car in 2019 from around Ntinda. They failed to track all these cars because they were taken to various garages.

What happened is that when these people went to police, it was worse that police kept asking for money. On several occasions, they would say, “We have got this car so we would like to check if it is yours.” At last, they all lost their vehicles. Therefore, I think this will be good because the law will help us trace lost vehicles. The spare parts are sold to businessmen in the markets so I think this will be a very good law.

Madam Speaker, the committee is proposing to issue driving licenses within 72 hours. Because we are living in a world of changing technology, the validity of a driving permit can be checked using payway or even our phones like we do for Umeme and water. This should be done such that people are not inconvenienced as a result of not having their permits on them.

Madam Speaker, I would suggest the same for the issue of logbooks or registrations books. This can also be done digitally so that all inconveniences are avoided.

Lastly, on the issue of cameras, we who travel from Mbale to Kampala and vice versa face a lot of traffic. I have not seen any cameras around –(Member timed out.)

6.26
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you are rightly aware, I was the presiding officer or judge for the Traffic Court in Kampala and neighbouring places for about six years.

The current Act is still a good law but we have a problem in the Uganda Police Force, particularly when it comes to traffic officers. The majority of these traffic officers are not properly grounded in matters of traffic laws. I will give you an example of where you have about 30 traffic officers in Kampala who do not understand or know how to drive cars but they are manning traffic in Kampala. That is challenge number one.

The other challenge is, simply joining the traffic department when you have acquired basic police training is a problem. You must bribe those who are supposed to enrol you to become a traffic officer.

I would like to inform the country that one of the lucrative jobs in police is traffic and therefore, those that are supposed to manage traffic in this country are answerable to the deploying authority in the Uganda Police Force.

I would like to tell you, Madam Speaker, that the traffic department in the Uganda Police Force is pathetic and sick and must be overhauled. Why am I saying this? Those young men and women you see on the roads are supposed to file returns weekly in pecuniary form. They are supposed to take money to their bosses -(Interruption)- Before you give me information, I am stating the practical reality of what happens. This is real, it is not a concoction -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR MUGOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we talk about coming up with proper legislation, we must look for all possible ways of circumventing the inactions and omissions of the Traffic Department. That is why DMCs are so many on our roads yet when you buy a new car, they have the guts to stop you and leave the DMCs to move.

With those few observations, let me rest my case. Possibly, I have properly rubbed into the ears of the General here.

6.30
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to add my voice to those thanking the committee for this very resourceful report.

Madam Speaker, while debating the State of the Nation Address, at the time when we were talking about a middle-income economy, I said that if we have our records right, it might be debatable that we are going to a middle-income economy without proper data in place. My worry at the time was that Uganda could reach a middle-income economy without Agago having a tarmac road, among other things.

Madam Speaker, Agago is one of those districts that do not have a tarmac road and it is a very big problem for some of us who spend eight hours driving to our constituencies.

Madam Speaker, I lived in Canada and drove for over 15 years without a single accident. When I came to this Parliament, I got two accidents and the car overturned. This brings me to the question of safety on our roads.

Madam Speaker, I have driven in big cities abroad and there are bike lanes and emergency lanes for ambulances. We do not have that here but bike lanes for boda-bodas, among other things, would be a very good provision for us.

In addition, there are carpooling parks in most of these big cities where people gather to avoid traffic. If they are coming from one area, they will all go in one car.

Recently, when I visited Toronto, I realised that there are Uber cars. You can pool where you work and it has become cheaper than what I used to think was the best trend of transport. I used to think subways and public means like buses were the cheapest means but I have realised otherwise and I think there is need to do research with respect to the advent of new technologies on what could be the best option moving forward.

Madam Speaker, the issue of speed limit has been mentioned. When I used to drive, it was clear in my mind that I had to drive at 50km per hour in a place where there is no sign, 15km where there are schools, in centres and all that. This is not very clear, in many cases, when you are driving; this signage is not there.

We drive in the countryside without traffic lights and these are all factors that contribute to road safety issues.

Humps and the –(Member timed out.)

6.33
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to begin by saying that ministers and commissioners normally change but when you go to traffic, some people have been at the top for many years and I do not know whether that can help us.

Secondly, we have issues of non-enforcement of some laws. We have issues of seatbelts, speed governors, carrying school children on trucks - we all know that this is not allowed - talking while driving - All these have never been enforced and these are some of the problems that we face.

Madam Speaker, because of time, I would just like to say a few things. When you talk about the inspection of somebody’s motor vehicles, I have never seen a DMC being outlawed in Uganda and yet every day, there is a lot of inspection of vehicles. Unfortunately, every car in Uganda is good. Some of them are not written off and that is where the problem is. 

There is the issue of road signs. Some of the drivers, for example, did not go to any training school so they do not know some of these road signs. That is why we have a problem. When they go to the traffic lights and they are showing red, you find them crossing the road. You ask yourself why that is so in the world of common sense. That is why sometimes common sense is no longer common.

I have one serious objection on the authority they are talking about because I remember when the Prime Minister came to this House, he talked about these issues here – that Government is in the process of restructuring all of them but now we are introducing this one. I do not know how special it is. In my opinion, we should actually throw it away. 

Madam Speaker, when you talk about licensing motor vehicle facilities – these are garages – I wonder how all the garage owners in this country have to move and go to the chief licensing officer – (Member timed out.) 

6.36
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I looked at the background of the Bill from the committee’s report, I realised that it is talking about having a law; the 1998 Act, which is outdated. 

However, I would like to believe that only a few sections of the Act are outdated, for example, requiring one to be allowed by a traffic officer to produce their driver’s permit after some hours, yet it would really be necessary that all drivers have their valid driver’s license on them. I think those are issues that I believe we need to amend. 

When the committee proposed to remove the powers of the minister in handling regulation, I think that one would almost be pushing Government away from its responsibility. I would think, as Parliament, we allow the minister to have powers on bringing in regulations from time to time because these are things that keep changing. 

I think the committee was concerned because even when the minister still has the powers, nothing much has been done. A lot of accidents are on the road but we think we only need to reinforce these, Madam Speaker.

We are talking about 10 people dying on our roads every day and I think today is the right time; that if there is anything we need to do to improve on the law, we must do so. However, the main question is how do we implement these laws and regulations that we put in place? I think this is where the problem is. 

In my opinion, we needed to have had two sets of traffic laws in this country; traffic issues in both the villages and cities. This is because I do not see them fitting in trying to control accidents, traffic confusion and disorder in the city and death. 

Therefore, I would put this to the minister that even when we pass this law, we would want you to have regulations that walk the talk – that deals with the real situation. 

Otherwise, when we make laws for you and then you go and sit and relax – boda-bodas are the new entrants in the transport sector. We used to have motorcycles that were used by their private owners but now motorcycles have become a public means of transport that need very clear regulations and laws to guide them. This is possible, Madam Speaker. 

When you look at Safe Boda and these other groups, they are operating under a very organised and controlled system by the owners of the business. We would think if this is put across to all the traffic operators within the city and country, then, we should be able to control them.  

A member was talking about –(Member timed out.)

6.39
MR COSMAS ELOTU (NRM, Dakabela County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity as well to add my voice to support the committee for their job well done.

I have one or two specific issues I would like to raise. On the issue of driving licensing, when you speak at our current law or the processes provided for, I feel we are so much focused on raising revenue, as opposed to qualifying who actually is a right driver. 

In Europe, these people use what they call a “point system”. That means once you are on the road, first of all, you should have a driving licence. When you make any mistake or any incident occurs, your points are taken away. That particular system has created discipline among the road users. At the moment, whether you have a driving licence or not, so long as the people responsible do not really take good care or cannot take care of managing the processes, you can get your way out of it. 

The point system by itself automatically gives people discipline; whether you are coming from the right or left hand side of the road, as my colleague said. Once a point is taken off your licence, you will automatically be taken off the road for the next three or four years. Leave alone the revenue part of it, that alone will create utmost discipline on the road. 

The second point I would like to raise – and probably the minister can immediately enforce it – is the issue of heavy trucks in the middle of town, at rush hour. 

In many cities, I have seen that from six o’clock in the morning up to about 10 o’clock in the morning, a bar is put across the road that any truck beyond a certain height will not enter that specific area. For us here, any time or any hour, you will find a big commercial truck on the road and that also creates indiscipline. 

Once we have such restrictions, automatically, drivers know that from six o’clock, you have to be at your point of either dispatch or offloading. In that way, you leave room for the business of the day, Madam Speaker. 

I know a lot of colleagues have talked about many other issues; so allow me to comment on only those two, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much. 

6.42
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have about three issues to raise: We have talked about alcohol abuse but we are not talking about phone-use abuse. Many people have caused accidents while talking on their phones. I think that one should also be captured in our laws because it is very important. 

I lost a very close lawyer-friend of mine because of nothing but a phone. He was talking on a phone and the bus was cruising all the way from Kabale to Ntungamo and it crushed him – just because of a phone! A phone tends to take away your mind and that kind of focus and attention.

Alcohol abuse, phone-use abuse, drugs and narcotics all should be met with very punitive sanctions. It is one thing making the law but it is another to have very punitive sanctions so that you are scared to even make the slightest of the mistakes. Colleagues have talked about it in great detail. 

For goodness sake, you can bear me witness but look at our roads. For instance, the Entebbe-Kampala Expressway; how many accidents have we had from there? They are very few since it opened. You will not get many accidents. People who have been here and visited other places say Ugandan drivers are very good. The roads are simply very narrow and very difficult to negotiate, especially for big vehicles. Most of our roads are very bad. 

Yesterday, as I was going home, the driver took leave of me and I drove myself on Ggaba Road. There is a portion that has so many potholes that I almost caused an accident. It is madness if you are seen driving straight because you have to keep dodging potholes here and there. 

Therefore, Minister of Works and Transport, kindly take note of these potholes; take note of the narrow roads; they are so bad.

Weak sanctions: In America, I was amazed that there are huge signposts along the road that are clear-cut, “Drink. Drive. Go to jail.” No compromise! Those are the things we should see being put in place in our laws. 

Finally we have got a question of junk –(Member timed out.)

6.45
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Without repeating what has been said, I would like to thank hon. Gonahasa for summarising these traffic challenges into one word, “indiscipline”. If we can handle indiscipline amongst drivers on our roads, we will have covered all these challenges that we are encountered with right now. 

I really do not know whether we can come up with very strict sanctions for road drivers, especially taxi drivers on the roads. Withdrawing their permits would be very good, but for how long? And the enforcement of whether all people who are driving taxis – to start with – have permits. 

If we withdraw these permits, the enforcement of crosschecking whether they all have permits as they drive, will help us very much. Without checking indiscipline, we shall be moving in circles.

I really want to request the minister – we have installed cameras on most of our roads here, let these cameras not only be for criminals who are being pursued by police for kidnapping or for killing people. Can these cameras be also used to assess us the road users? Can we be brought to book?

Let us take advantage of the opportunities we get to travel out of the country. For example, when you are in Dubai, any car that drives for a second after the traffic light has turned red, you hear the driver being signalled that they have been given a ticket. There is a light that flashes and even you, seated behind will know that that person has been penalised. Let these cameras help us with that as well. Then we shall be able to check the problems that we have on the roads.

The quality of spares that we have is a problem. Remember that the cost of cars here in our country is very high because of taxes, among others. So, if we are to go for good cars, like everyone would desire to, the cost of these cars must be brought down. I do not know how Government can harmonise this. Look at the cost of our lives and the cost of cars. We should be able to bring the cost of cars down to enable everyone to drive a good car. The used cars that we have in the bonds are not bad but the spares that we have on our market are very bad. That one has – (Member timed out.)

6.48
MR ROBERT SEBUNYA (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hope the minister will extract the Hansard and get all these views. Those answers that might not be found in this law can be given to us some time later. 

My point is on the streamlining of the inspection function. This function is very key and I think that is why we had a problem with SGR. 

I think part of the problem was the many institutions in charge of inspection. We have the police, we hear of the IOV, the licencing board and there was the national safety council. 

I hope this law shall harmonise the inspection department which will include even the spare parts that he is complaining about. Things like where we buy the spare parts, who imports the spare parts and who certifies them when they arrive here. 

I think the Ministry of Works and Transport should be centrally given this role to the extent that we streamline all the problems that we get. 

Road rage is another problem. Some of us drive ourselves or use taxis but you should hear the comments of the people in taxis. Politicians here want to overtake with loud sirens. 

We have earned our place as politicians. They hate us for hooting and overtaking. I do not know if there is a provision in the roads in cities for overtaking. We are not supposed to overtake. The roads are so small and somebody – I do not know why you are so worried about your life – nobody wants your life. Please save the rest of the road users. In this process you cause accidents with boda-bodas and pedestrians. Please save us that embarrassment. 

Madam Speaker, the third point is about the Lorries entering the city at all times and in all places. They are collecting merchandise from shops. They park in a way that makes it seem like the city has only their business.

We want the regulations to cater for cars entering the city. Let them park these cars and take the merchandise at night when the roads are not as busy as during the day.

Last is on road repairs. Who tells you that when you are repairing a road you must close it? There is no –(Member timed out.)

6.51
MS SARAH BABIRYE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the voices of those members that thanked the committee for the good report presented. 

I would like to talk about the infants. There are so many children of nursery schools that have died in traffic accidents. You find that they have crammed 50 of them in a taxi that is meant for only 14 people. 

I would, therefore, request the ministries of education and of transport to look into that. 

Last year in November, we had an accident on Masaka Road and four children died. The car was licenced to carry 14 people but because they are tiny, they had put almost 50 in that car. I request that such cases are considered.

Secondly, I would like to talk about the issue of the boda-bodas. Most jobs that are in our Government structures require work experience. By the time one graduates from the university, they have no experience yet the job requires them to have at least three years of experience and some jobs ask for five years. That is why most young people, though they are graduates, end up being boda-boda cyclists. 

I, therefore, request that we do not just condemn them but we find a way of guiding them and talking to them. 

There is also a big challenge between the drivers and the cyclists because they are competing for the narrow roads. Can we come up with a way or a policy or system of bridging that gap between the drivers and the cyclists? We have seen many instances where those with big cars that have big guards knowingly push them off the roads. 

I would request that as the Government is giving licenses to the companies that sell boda-bodas, they should ensure that the boda-boda comes with two helmets. We have seen some people in Mulago with broken legs and their helmets were broken but the heads are safe. If we come up with a policy that every boda-boda should come with two helmets, we shall save many lives. Thank you.

6.54
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we thank the minister and Government together with the committee for the Bill and the report respectively, I wish to make observations on the pace at which we are addressing road safety. The UN Action Plan for Road Safety is soon expiring and it had anticipated that by 2020 we should have addressed the high rate at which fatalities are occurring on our roads. However, for the case of Uganda, the fatalities are instead increasing. 

When you look at the road safety review of 2018, there were three areas that were noted to have inadequacies and one of them was the law, which we are trying to address. There were other fundamental issues which we have been talking about, including the licensing of drivers and instruction schools. There is no proper criterion for licensing schools and there is supposed to be the instruction curriculum or manual which was drafted some time back. 

However, to date this report says that this has never been put into action. The training schools are doing their own things which are not understood. We need to look into this fact so that regulation is put in place, specifically to ensure that the schools are operated by people who are properly instructed. 

The other issue from the report is that the highest victims of road fatalities are pedestrians. We have talked about drivers’ indiscipline but I would like to add that perhaps there is ignorance on the side of the road users. For that matter, the law needs to see how to address the issue of the pedestrians who the report says account for more than 40 per cent of the road accidents victims. Why should somebody walking get to the road and be killed? There is a problem here that needs to be addressed – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 46 members have contributed to this debate and we have been able to hear the views of many people. I would like to put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that The Traffic and Road Safety Act 1998 (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we resume, we shall go straight to the Committee Stage. Thank you for the staying power. House adjourned to Tuesday next week at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 6.58 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 30 January 2020 at 2.00 p.m.) 
  
 
  
 




