Tuesday, 14 January 2014

Parliament met at 11.04 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this special sitting. First, I would like you to join me in welcoming Ms Franklin Tanya and Ms Olivia Nalubwama, Political Assistant at the US Embassy here in Kampala. They have come to observe the proceedings. You are welcome. (Applause)

Secondly, honourable members, 13 of you are in breach of the Leadership Code. The Inspector-General of Government has written to you with copies to me requiring that those 13 Members who have not declared their wealth do so by the 31st of January. So, Members, check your mail. If you have not complied, please, do the needful. I do not want to name them but they have received letters from the IGG.

Thirdly, honourable members, I recalled you from recess to discuss an important matter concerning the deployment of the UPDF to the Republic of South Sudan. Whereas I had originally recalled Parliament under the provisions of Section 39(3) of the UPDF Act, there appears to be a lacuna in the law, which may now necessitate that the motion be moved under Section 40 of the UPDF Act. The mover of the motion will speak to the same and clarify that position. So, please, note that the title of the motion has now been amended. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA TO DEPLOY UGANDA PEOPLES’ DEFENCE FORCES TO THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTHERN SUDAN IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 210 OF THE CONSTITUTION AND SECTION 40 OF UGANDA PEOPLES’ DEFENCE FORCES ACT, 2005

THE SPEAKER: Just for the record, it is “South Sudan”. They do not like to be called “Southern Sudan”. Let me invite the minister to move the motion.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking your procedural guidance on whether the amendment is actually coming from the mover of the motion or whether the mover of the motion has requested the Speaker to communicate the amendment. 

In which case, Section 40 of the UPDF Act is actually at variance with the motion that has already been circulated. So, I seek your guidance on whether we are going to receive another copy of the motion, which is consistent with Section 40 of the UPDF Act that is about an agreement relating to troops outside Uganda. Section 39 is about deployment of troops outside Uganda. I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is exactly what I have communicated; whereas I had recalled you under Section 39, there is a lacuna in the law, which now requires that it comes under Section 40. That is why I am inviting the minister to move the motion.

11.07
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me, at the outset, wish you a Happy New Year since we had not met since the year started. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker, for having accorded the government this opportunity to move this motion. I move a motion under rule 47 for a resolution of Parliament, which is moved in accordance with Article 210 (d) of the Constitution and Section 40 of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces Act, 2005 for support of the deployment of troops to the Republic of South Sudan:

“WHEREAS on the 15 December 2013 there was an attempted coup against the democratically elected Government of South Sudan, which had negative security implications for Uganda and the region;

AND WHEREAS on the 16 December 2013, His Excellency Salva Kiir Mayardit, the democratically elected President of the Republic of South Sudan, requested His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of the Republic of Uganda, to assist in stabilising the situation;

COGNISANT of the fact that the coups d’état and other unconstitutional changes of Government are condemned and rejected under Article 4(p) of the African Union Charter to which South Sudan and Uganda subscribe;

CONCERNED that there was and still is a need to evacuate Ugandan citizens trapped in South Sudan;

RECOGNISING that a stable and prosperous South Sudan is vital for regional peace, security and stability;

FURTHER RECOGNISING that there was and still is a need to prevent potential genocide and other atrocities against humanity;

AWARE that Article 210(d) of the Constitution mandates Parliament to make laws regulating the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces and in particular the deployment of troops outside Uganda;

FURTHER AWARE that Section 40 of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces Act, 2005 provides for deployment of troops outside Uganda under a bilateral arrangement;

NOTING that the President has, in accordance with Article 98(1) of the Constitution and Sections 8(1) and 40 of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces Act, deployed the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces to the Republic of South Sudan;

FURTHER NOTING that in accordance with Section 40 of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces Act, 2005, the Republic of Uganda entered into a Status of Forces Agreement with the Republic of South Sudan;

APPRECIATING that the deployment of Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces in South Sudan has enabled and continues to enable the evacuation of citizens of Uganda back to Uganda and the stabilisation of the security situation in Juba;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that Parliament strongly supports the deployment of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces to the Republic of South Sudan by the President.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded?

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, we have a different document.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please; the new motion is available. Can you distribute the copies. The motion has been seconded, now justify.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members of this House are clearly aware of the crisis that has taken place in the neighbouring fraternal state of South Sudan. On the 15 December 2013, an attempt was made to overthrow the democratically elected Government of the Republic of South Sudan. This tragic event has seriously divided the army and the body politic in the Republic of South Sudan. As we speak now, estimated thousands of people have been killed in cold blood and hundreds of thousands of other people have been displaced from their homes. 

The reading by the President, who is the Commander-in-Chief, His Excellency Museveni, was that if the situation was allowed to get even worse, there would be serious negative developments relating particularly to the lives of Ugandans living in the Republic of South Sudan. It was also his reading that national security would be seriously and negatively affected. In addition, the security of the region would also get worse. It was also becoming clear that genocide was likely to occur in the neighbourhood and a democratically elected Government was in danger of being overthrown unconstitutionally.

Therefore, following a request from H.E Salva Kiir, the democratically elected leader of the Republic of South Sudan, the Commander-in-Chief took a decision to deploy UPDF troops in the Republic of South Sudan. This action on the part of the President was guided by Section 30 of the UPDF Act. Consequently, the Status of Forces Agreement has been executed and it is my pleasure to lay on the Table a copy of this agreement.

The reasons for the response, as I already outlined, on the part of the Commander-in-Chief were, in summary: 
    1. To save Ugandans and assist to prevent genocide.
    2. Avert negative developments in national and regional security.
    3. Protect constitutionalism.
    4. Respond to dangers to a fraternal neighbour.

Alongside deployment of the troops, other actions have been taken by the President. He has been part of the consultative process within the IGAD Member countries; to that extent, an extraordinary summit was held in Nairobi on the 27 December 2013. (Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the minister is giving very useful information, which some of us do not have. I think it would be proper if we could have a copy of the paper he is reading right now to substantiate the motion. It would be very important. I have found it very useful. I am asking for it in good faith and I think it would be very good to equip all of us with the information you are reading. When you are debating, you do not read; it means you have a paper, which you are presenting. So, can we benefit from the very useful and fundamental information?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he is simply justifying the motion, so you can just listen.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. These are just my notes as I justify the motion. As I said, besides the deployment of the troops, the President has been involved in the consultation within the IGAD member states and the summit was held in Nairobi on the 27 December 2013. He has also had consultations with other stakeholders and other world leaders in trying to find a solution to the situation in the Republic of South Sudan, and the President himself travelled to Juba on 30 December 2013.

There has been a positive outcome following the response of Uganda to the crisis in the Republic of South Sudan. Nearly 4,000 Ugandans and many other nationals have been safely and directly evacuated from the risky situation in South Sudan. Other nationals have also been evacuated by Kenya and other countries taking advantage of the positive environment that the UPDF has created particularly in Juba. 

The evacuation of the Ugandans has been done by both air and land. In regard to air, we have evacuated a total of 1,888 people. These were mainly from Juba but also some were evacuated from further north in a town called Hegilig and another town called Malakal. 

A further 1,925 were evacuated by land using buses protected by the UPDF, and this has happened without any negative incident. I have no doubt that all members of the august House are grateful and proud of the national defence forces for this heroic and timely action ordered by the Command-in-Chief. 

At this stage, I must thank the Rt Hon. Speaker and colleagues, particularly the owners of the buses, because once we approached them, they did not hesitate, even knowing the risk, and offered buses. We agreed on the price and they moved into Juba and Bor and brought out our fellow Ugandans. I also want to thank one of our colleagues here, hon. Otada Amooti, MP Kibanda, who connected me to the chairperson of the Bus Owners’ Association and also facilitated the action that I have described. 

In our assessment, Uganda has certainly played a critical role in ensuring that people are evacuated, not only Ugandans but also other nationals. Uganda has played a critical role in ensuring that the political crisis in South Sudan is handled politically because we have been part of the process to ensure that peace talks are initiated and ongoing in Addis Ababa. 

Let me again point out that this attempted coup took different dimensions; we now have a situation where one ethnic group in South Sudan is turning against another ethnic group, either killing each other or even taking to physical fights. 

Nearly 20,000 refugees have already entered the country through the North and as required by procedure, they have been taken to appropriate camps. Initially, when they arrived, we handled them as our sisters and brothers from South Sudan and we did not separate them into ethnic groups. However, no sooner had they reached the camps than they started fighting along ethnic groups. So, we had no option but to separate them and put different ethnic groups in different areas of the camp. That goes to emphasise the fact, which I alluded to before, that the crisis in South Sudan had the potential of turning into genocide.

Madam Speaker, why do we think that national and regional security would be affected by the destabilisation in Juba and the Republic of South Sudan as a whole? I want colleagues to recall the long struggle that the people of South Sudan went through to reach nationhood. Throughout the many years of struggle led by the SPLM, the people of Uganda, particularly through the NRM, stood side by side with them. We gave them political and diplomatic support and in some situations we gave them military support.

I have just been corrected by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that the number of refugees who have entered Uganda now stands at 48,787. Those are the ones who have been officially recorded and put in the official camps.

As a reaction to our support for SPLM, the Government in Khartoum decided to support our enemies. They gave support to the LRA and the ADF and as you know, these two enemies of the people of Uganda are still alive. So, if a situation was created for them to get nearer, for them to take advantage of the situation, there is no doubt that our security situation would worsen. We would have a repeat of what the LRA did, particularly, to the people of Northern Uganda. Right now, the ADF in the east of DRC is being pursued by the DRC army and the UN and is scattering left and right. They would definitely take advantage of any disturbed situation in the neighbourhood. So, that reading was definitely appropriate. 

The operations against the LRA are now being done in conjunction with the Republic of South Sudan, the Government of DRC and with the Central African Republic but in that equation, the Republic of South Sudan is central. So, any disturbance in South Sudan would definitely disturb that operation and, therefore, affect not only the security situation in Uganda but also in the neighbourhood and the region at large.

Therefore, it is clear to the Government and to all of us that we had to act on a timely basis not only to evacuate fellow Ugandans but also to avert a possible worsening of the security situation in our country and also in the neighbourhood.

Let me also briefly allude to two other factors; my colleagues who seconded this motion will give more details. I would like to talk about the issue of the economy. I think almost every part of Uganda or maybe every village of Uganda has someone who has directly benefitted from the stability that has been prevailing in the Republic of South Sudan by either trading from there or working there. There are many people, for example, from my constituency who have been working in Juba and other towns of South Sudan as builders. Our traders have been moving massively into South Sudan, delivering goods there. In fact, on the day of the attempted coup, we had a traffic jam - a convoy of trucks which span more than 30 kilometres on the road to the border with South Sudan. Therefore, it is very clear from those simple examples that disturbances in South Sudan would definitely affect Uganda’s economy very negatively, and employment and our export volumes in terms of foreign currency. That is not something that we desire.

The other point I want to refer to, as I conclude is the justification of my motion, is that as Africans, we must learn to defend ourselves. Africa must learn to depend on itself. We all saw what happened in Rwanda where nearly one million people were butchered in the face of the UN. We all looked on helplessly. I do not think we want a repeat of such a situation next door in South Sudan.

In summary, Madam Speaker, the actions taken by the President were timely and have made a positive difference in handling the crisis in the Republic of South Sudan. Our nationals have been rescued and the dialogue to resolve the conflict is ongoing under the auspices of IGAD. Therefore, I move to request you, honourable members, to support the action that the President has taken. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us hear from the seconder of the motion. Honourable members, I apologise; I have directed that all the doors and windows be opened. 

11.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I would like to begin by thanking you for having called Parliament to have this special session to discuss a very important matter touching not only the security of the country but also that of the region and the entire continent.

Secondly, I would like to thank hon. Dr Kiyonga, the mover of this historic motion, for what he has done. In a special way, I congratulate the Commander-In-Chief of the armed forces of Uganda, who is also the President of this country, for his decisive intervention in response to the numerous calls from both Ugandans and non-Ugandans who were engulfed by the December 2013 conflict in South Sudan. 

Colleagues will agree with me that the situation would have been different if he had not intervened. Probably, we would have been here in a special session to pay tribute to the victims of the conflict; it would have been different. Some of us had an opportunity to liaise with those people who were engulfed in the conflict; they kept calling us from 14th December in the evening. Everybody was crying for that intervention to make sure lives were saved.

Let me, in the same breath, congratulate the UPDF for a very smart rescue mission done with no casualties. (Applause) The numbers have been given by my colleague – (Interjections) - I meant minimal casualties. Some who were rescued are here in the gallery. Some of them called me because they wanted to come here and see Parliament deliberate on this very important motion. So, I thank the UPDF and the Commander-In-Chief and everybody who made sure that Ugandans and not only Ugandans but also the entire group of people who were stranded in South Sudan were helped.  

I stand here to second the motion as moved by Dr Kiyonga for the following reasons, and I will just mention a few: Madam Speaker, Uganda did not choose her neighbours. We just found ourselves surrounded by South Sudan in the north, by DRC in the west, by the Pokot of Kenya in the east, and by Rwanda, Tanzania and Burundi in the south. These are not in transit but are here to stay and neither are we in transit. We are here to stay and, therefore, the stability of our neighbours must be a concern for every Ugandan. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, there was a very comprehensive defence review programme from 1997 to 2005, which started with what we called the Security Threat Assessment done by the UPDF assisted by DFID. They came up with recommendations on the possible security threats to this country, and instability in our neighbours and geographical position of Uganda on the map of Africa came top as a possible security threat to this country. 

You remember, colleagues, that for a very long time, Sudan was a safe haven for the Lord's Resistance Army. We could not access where Joseph Kony was with his troops just because of the red lines put by the Khartoum government. We knew where Joseph Kony was and where he was operating from; he could come from there and attack. I remember, vividly, - the memories are very fresh - when we rushed to Muchuni where Joseph Kony had killed children and smashed their brains on the stones and ran back; we could not enforce ourselves into Khartoum because of the two red lines that were put by the Khartoum Government. 

We started seeing sanity and started smelling stability when we worked with our brothers and sisters in South Sudan as South Sudan became stable. Even during the negotiations, at the end of it when we took a document to Maputo for Joseph Kony to sign - Ndugu Rugunda and I and the rest in Namanga - Joseph Kony duped us that he wanted two trucks of food. We wanted to give him one but the perpetrators of insurgency, who are still present with us and in South Sudan, forced us to give Joseph Kony more than one truck full of food and helped him to escape. We were waiting for him to sign and later on in the evening, he sent us a message and a kid who was suffering from a back problem - his son - to carry back home meanwhile he was being assisted to run miles away and he never signed the Maputo document. He did not, and history repeats itself. 

For anybody to stand here and even begin asking why UPDF went to South Sudan when it is common knowledge that the stability of South Sudan means stability of Uganda - (Applause) - Let us think about how best we can do it but not ask the Commander-in-Chief why he deployed. It is the constitutional mandate of the UPDF to defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity of this country whether you ask them or not. Read Article 209 of the Constitution. 

I therefore take this as an opportunity because the Minister for Defence is going to inform us on what he has done, about the situation in South Sudan and how best we can handle the situation without breaking the law. Of course, I am mindful of the law. Even the Commander-in-Chief, in whom executive authority is vested according to Article 99 of the Constitution, is mindful of the law but the bottom-line is to save the lives of people first.  

Madam Speaker, I feel proud and privileged to second and support the motion to support the intervention of the Commander-in-Chief of sending UPDF troops to South Sudan. I know that legal provision as has been expounded on by the mover of the motion and all necessary arrangements have been put in place.

If I can also mention the need to have a standby army, and this was seen by the African Union, which resolved to have an African standby force, which is not yet in place. It is going to be comprised of five brigades and Uganda falls under the East African Brigade (EABRIG), which is comprised of 13 countries. It is not there but the need to have a standby force, which can be deployed to save lives of people, has been agreed upon by the African Union. In the absence of that, UPDF remains with no alternative but to swing into action and perform their constitutional duty.  

Madam Speaker, as I end, the snake is in the cooking pot. There is a snake in the cooking pot. (Laughter) The snake has to be smartly removed from the cooking pot without breaking the pot because we shall not have food – (Interjections) - So far, Madam Speaker, the Commander-in-Chief -

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

MS NANKABIRWA: The Commander-in-Chief has managed to remove the snake from the pot and the pot is not broken. Now, we need to see how we can wash it to remove the poison and prepare food for the entire Uganda.

I call upon colleagues, and sincerely speaking, this is a touchy matter, remember what we have been through. It is not about politics but security of your country, patriotism and about you and me surviving, Ugandans. I beg for your support. 

11.40
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Maybe before you start, in the gallery we have all those young people seated there; they are attached to this House for internship and they have come from different universities. We normally allow them to come here twice a year. Proceed.

MR MULONGO: Thank you very much. I would also like to stand to support the motion and to thank the Minister for Defence and our colleague, the Minister of State for Fisheries, for speaking in support of the motion. 

The motion seeks to inform this House, involve this House and ensure that the House as the leadership of this country moves together with the Executive on actions related to our forces in South Sudan. I would like to state from the beginning that I have been keenly following the situation and developments in South Sudan and the situation remains critical, tense, sombre and melancholic. It is a situation where you cannot be sure that you will live to see the next day. The conflict in South Sudan is widespread and indeed, unless the action by those who would wish to see South Sudan remain stable and grow come in time like the UPDF has done, we cannot guarantee the future of the people of South Sudan, let alone the state.

Madam Speaker, we all talk about “state collapse” in academics and people do not agree about what that means – whether the state is in a crisis. However, it is critical for us to know that the same is just at our backyard. The state in South Sudan was at the brink of collapse and is, indeed, in a crisis. The population in South Sudan cannot be guaranteed to live to the next day. This kind of situation can only require that the international community respond to solve the problem.

It is on this account that I would like to applaud and thank the Commander-in-Chief and the UPDF for making a rapid response and forestalling a catastrophe that was clearly unfolding in South Sudan. As it has been stated before, we have seen similar developments elsewhere in Africa, where within some countries irregular groups emerge, state authority collapses and then killings that take ethnic tones and therefore genocide takes place and thousands, sometimes millions, of lives are lost. 

What disturbs some of us is that those who see such situations develop want to take either an academic or bureaucratic stance and go for meetings in air-conditioned rooms where cake and coffee are served while people are killing each other. This happens! If you remember, on Darfur the UN took months discussing whether the killings there amounted to genocide or not. The same happened to Rwanda in our neighbourhood, where even a contingent of the UN could not respond because discussions were still going on in New York on whether that amounted to genocide or not.

It is upon this that I would like to support the argument raised by hon. Nankabirwa that the African Union Commission in 2004 decided to establish an African peace and security architecture in which they resolved that never again will Africa sit and watch genocide happen again at our doorsteps while waiting for the UN to send in forces. 

We also know that the forces sent by the UN have stringent limitations; some are imposed by the nature of the contingents that have been sent in while some are so foreign to the local conditions that they can never be effective. We know the performance of the UN peacekeepers in various parts of Africa; most of them have been failed missions. They did not succeed in Angola, Chad and West Africa and yet we have seen that with our regional mechanisms and responses, we have had significant achievements. Actually, Uganda’s quick response in South Sudan must be hailed because this is a military-humanitarian response.

It is humanitarian in that it is not only forestalling the catastrophe that was unfolding in South Sudan but it has also enabled access in and out of Juba. It has also afforded the safe corridors for movement of people and goods and services. This is fundamental because other countries are still watching and weighing to see if they can go in or not. By the time they decide to act, it could have been too late for us to save the situation. So, I support the point that this action was justified and ask Parliament to support this motion so that we chart the way forward in a manner that will see stability in South Sudan.

I would like to hail this Pan-African spirit exhibited by our Government. We hope that with the signing of various agreements between Uganda and South Sudan, we shall come to find the solution and broaden the mission to include other players as they make a decision to come in.

Madam Speaker, I wish to conclude by saying that the fundamentals of the law have been fulfilled - the constitutional provision regarding the need to guarantee and protect not only the sovereignty and security of Uganda but also forestall incidents that could happen to injure us. This is fundamental because, as hon. Nankabirwa put it, the intricate security interests of our neighbours affect us as a country and we cannot just sit here and watch. This is because the problem in South Sudan can overflow to the neighbourhood. History is very clear on how threats have emanated from that country to Uganda.

In the same vein, the government has fulfilled the UPDF Act requirements; the High Command was convened and indeed, the President was advised on the course of action. Following section 40 of the UPDF Act, bilateral arrangements have been entered into and we know who will foot the bill and who will take which obligation. So, we are on the right track on that account -

THE SPEAKER: Please, honourable members, he is seconding the motion.

MR MULONGO: Madam Speaker, we hope that the government will move on to transform this initiative into a broader multilateral arrangement to involve other actors so that we can share the responsibilities and costs thereto. 

I also recommend that in the on-going peace talks in Addis Ababa, it is important that Uganda takes a more active role and participates. This is because we have all the players – the guarantors of the CPA including China, which has very significant interests in Sudan. If distant countries like those can be active in the peace talks, we need Uganda that has taken a huge step in this direction to also be more active in Addis Ababa. 

With this, I thank the Government and mover of the motion. I support the motion. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I now invite the chair of the Committee on Foreign Affairs. We shall finish with the seconders first.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Dr Sam Okuonzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to second the motion. Before we are carried away by emotions, I just want to thank the mover of the motion and to say that, in summary, the issues that made us, as a country to go to South Sudan to help our brothers and sisters are six:

    1. To avert insecurity; 
    2. To protect our economic interests;
    3. For fraternal relations – because we are sister countries and we have a lot of common blood between each other;
    4. For protection of constitutionalism - because as you are aware, the government there was going to be overthrown by the insurgents;
    5. To promote Pan-Africanism so that we work together as Africans and solve our problems; and 
    6. To forestall a humanitarian crisis, which I can assure you has already begun to happen in my region – in the West Nile region - where at least 60 per cent of households are now harbouring refugees.

Madam Speaker, there are certain universal aspirations that we all must have as citizens of this country. These aspirations should not really be different across party affiliations and these include unity, peace, stability and prosperity among others. These are not really contestable and should not divide us even in the House here. 

Some of them have already been alluded to and actually, explained in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy of our Constitution. There is no country that can prosper and be at peace or be stable on its own without the involvement of other countries, especially the neighbouring countries. That is why external relations and foreign policy are as important as internal relations in a modern country. 

As we are aware, our neighbour, South Sudan, has been embroiled in civil war. We are also aware that this is a new, young and fragile nation that requires support. There are, therefore, a number of reasons why the Government of Uganda decided, while Parliament was in recess, to urgently deploy UPDF in South Sudan. 

The first was that it was necessary to deploy the UPDF to restore harmony and peace and to avoid a war situation. Of course, the actions that have taken place have not been sufficient to forestall this would-be crisis. As a good neighbour, Uganda had to come in and help with rapid response. 

Secondly, it was important to try and stop instability and insecurity spreading within the country itself and to stop it from spreading across to our border. Had it been possible, it would have been a great thing to nip the spreading insecurity and lawlessness in the bud, but this was not to happen because the insecurity and the crisis is much wider and deeper than when it started. Refugees entering West Nile came with arms and ammunition hidden in their luggage; that tells you about the creeping insecurity in that region. The UPDF discovered this ammunition and arms in the luggage of the people who were fleeing across the border. I believe the insecurity would have been much worse in the West Nile region had Uganda’s UPDF not intervened.

The deployment was to ensure that the airport remained open and the southern route to Uganda is safe to enable the UPDF rescue Ugandans. The deployment was also essential to try and avert a humanitarian crisis. The outflow of refugees from South Sudan was huge and could have been even worse had the UPDF not intervened to contain the spreading civil war. 

To avert suffering and provide humanitarian services, massive resources for shelter, food, medical services and water and eventually long term services such as schooling, would have to be mobilised. The deployment of UPDF and the early successful containment of this crisis would have averted this long human suffering and saved us a lot of resources that would have been put to work elsewhere. 

The country now deeply depends on South Sudan for our exports and for a good volume of employment and businesses. Many Ugandans own assets and economic interests in South Sudan. It was important to try and protect and secure our economic interest in that country. In fact, according to the Bank of Uganda statistics, the amount of monthly earnings by Uganda from trading with South Sudan dropped from Shs 271 billion per month to currently only Shs 54.2 billion per month and this was last week. This week, it could be different. So, we are losing a lot of money on an annual basis if that was calculated.

Finally, it was relatively easy for Uganda to deploy the UPDF in Juba as we are all aware because we already had a presence in South Sudan from the days of the LRA. This resident contingent was part of an agreement between Uganda and South Sudan and was rapidly deployed and could act swiftly because they were familiar with the terrain of that country. Madam Speaker, with our high potential to help a neighbour in crisis and in need, it would have been irresponsible of us to just look on and fold our arms and allow this new and fragile nation descend into mayhem without doing anything about it. 

I would like to second this motion and request my colleagues to support this motion and to support the decision that was taken to take the UPDF to South Sudan. A stable and peaceful South Sudan is good for a stable, peaceful and prosperous Uganda. I beg to submit. 

11.58
MR TONY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support and second the motion moved by the Minister of Defence. 

When war broke out in South Sudan on 15 December 2013, many people were caught by surprise and could not believe what was going on in South Sudan. Many people could have remained quiet and waited for what would have transpired in South Sudan from their country and from their homes. However, I want to commend the action by the President of Uganda because he did not sit to wait for what would happen but took action. I want to say that the action taken by the President to deploy the UPDF in South Sudan was first of all a tactical move that we should all appreciate. 

We had to move, for the first time as a country, to go and rescue our people and bring them home safely and also provide security for the South Sudanese and other nationals from other countries by securing Juba International Airport for people to move and also provide a safe passageway between Juba and Uganda. Madam Speaker, without this, I think the situation would have been different and we must thank the President for this. 

We are all aware that up to now, the security of Northern Uganda, where I come from, depends on the safety and security of South Sudan. Until then, the soldiers of South Sudan, the SPLA, and the UPDF have been closely monitoring the activities of the LRA from the borders of South Sudan. Immediately the war broke out, some of the soldiers of SPLA broke away and moved with the wild soldiers of the rebels and others concentrated on the safety of their Government. The areas that were under their protection, that would stop the LRA from infiltrating back to Uganda, remained open and very porous. I this action was not taken, maybe today we would have been preparing ourselves to begin fighting the infiltration of the LRA that would affect the whole of West Nile up to Soroti in Teso. 

I believe this action has allowed the international community to come in and to begin to talk as the warring factions talk peace and settle their differences peacefully. I think that was a great move by our country. We should be congratulating ourselves instead of thinking of condemning ourselves. 

Madam Speaker, the UN Secretary-General has already commended Uganda and has applauded our President for the action he took. The African Union has supported our cause; America has also supported the action taken by the Government of Uganda; IGAD and East African Community under the leadership of President Uhuru Kenyatta have supported this. It is only one group of people that does not support it and that is the white army of the rebel group; they condemned the action of UPDF. Of course, that is for reasons we cannot question. It is now time for this Parliament to demonstrate its position; are we going to condemn the action or are we going to support it? 

We are not going to just talk about Pan-Africanism sitting in our courtyards and watching our neighbours killing themselves and after we go and say, “Sorry”. I think it is time for African countries to stop unconstitutional means of taking power and stopping civil wars within Africa by acting the way Government of Uganda has done. 

It would be unfortunate for us to wait for France to act in Mali and Central African Republic and we, Africans, sit back and do not take action. It is against that background, Madam Speaker, that I stand here and ask Members and colleagues to support this motion. Let us support the action of the Government of Uganda. Let us create security and stability in South Sudan through negotiations so that the northern part of Uganda can remain peaceful so that we can embark on development. If things go wrong in South Sudan, the first victims that will run into camps are the people of northern Uganda. 

I wish to thank the mover of the motion. I thank Government of Uganda and call upon Members to support this motion and see how we can ensure that this new nation, which is hardly two years old, is supported to take peaceful means of resolving their problems other than resorting to war. Their immediate neighbour is not South Africa or Zimbabwe but it is Uganda, which shares the same border, the same people and does business together with South Sudan. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Now, we have finished with the seconders. Let us have hon. Fungaroo.

12.05
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I welcome this sitting of Parliament and as we debate this issue, we have two questions: one is a moral question and the other a legal question. The debate is, in my view according –(Interruption)

MR ONYANGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the honourable member for giving way. I must point out that I support the process of making sure that we stabilise –

THE SPEAKER: What are you doing?

MR ONYANGO: I would like to seek guidance from your Chair. According to Article 210 of the Constitution, we are supposed to make laws regarding deployment, and in accordance to that provision, we made the UPDF Act – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you arrived late. Please, proceed hon. Fungaroo. 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. So, we have two things to handle here: the legal and moral question. The moral question is about the substance of the South Sudan problem. The legal question is about our intervention as UPDF and Uganda in the crisis in South Sudan. 

First, on the moral question, what is the problem of South Sudan; is it a tribal problem or a political one? This needs to be answered. Number two, is it a problem of genocide similar to what was in Rwanda or is it different? Rwanda has two tribes, South Sudan has many tribes. 

What is the purpose of our involvement in South Sudan; is it for the purpose of stopping a military coup? There was no military coup. A military coup has parameters which would qualify it as one. Secondly, by the time the UPDF arrived there, the SPLA had already contained the rebels. So, the claim that the UPDF went there to protect the Government of South Sudan led by Gen. Salva Kiir is not correct, because the South Sudan Government had already brought Juba under their control. 

The last question about our involvement in South Sudan is to protect Uganda’s interests, which is valid. What are the interests of Uganda in South Sudan? Having ruled out the question of a coup and the question of protecting the Government of President Salva Kiir being overthrown with a small number of rebels, we are left with one point, and that is protecting the interests of Uganda. This includes denying the enemies of Uganda ground to organise and overthrow the Government of Uganda by military force, including the forces of ADF and LRA. 

So, today –(Dr Omona rose_)– I am more informed on this matter than you. (Laughter) If we approve this motion, then it means Uganda Government is occupying South Sudan to deny enemies of Uganda from using that territory to overthrow the Government of Uganda. 

What is the background to that? The minister started his presentation from the 15th December but I would like to take the honourable members back to two weeks before the 15th December to understand the present situation. Refer to your iPad; there is a newspaper called the Sudan Tribunal, which had a story on the 6th December that senior members of SPLM high executive council, including the current secretary-general who is still in jail, Mama Rebecca Nyadeng the late Dr Garanga’s widow, and others including Riek Machar sat in a meeting in preparation for political elections. 

Like Uganda, South Sudan is preparing for elections, which will take place in 2015. As it is done here in Uganda, elections were supposed to be preceded by primaries within SPLM. So, what happened before the so-called coup were preparations for elections; all the people who were arrested were preparing for elections. Some of them were interested in the position of chair of SPLM in order to become automatic flag-bearers during the elections of 2015 – (Interruption)

DR OMONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not stand to embarrass my colleague, who also carries a great title before his name just like me, but I think it is also important that as this House debates, we inform the public and the public gets it right. 

As you know, and I am sure many of us know, a coup is a violent or unconstitutional forceful change or alteration of Government. What we know is that in South Sudan there was action by the army that were called rebels and we also know now, and very clearly, that Dr Riek Machar has admitted to being the head of this rebellion leading towards the overthrow of the government. 

Do we need skyrocket knowledge to understand that what took place in South Sudan was an act of a coup? Is the honourable colleague therefore in order to say what he has said, as if we have to examine what exactly happened in South Sudan? Is he in order to say that what happened in South Sudan was not a coup by virtue of this? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister’s motion begins from the 15th of December. Let us not introduce extraneous matters. They will be relevant for understanding the dialogue but for now, let us deal with the motion.

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, I would like to call upon the people of this Parliament to look at the future of South Sudan, which should be hinged on a government of national unity, uniting the divided Sudan based on common factors. For me, in its present state, the motion is not morally good and I oppose it in its totality. I oppose the motion for the deployment of the UPDF in South Sudan because it will not solve the problem of South Sudan. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.14
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was in Bor just a few days ago and I have also been to the North. A few weeks ago, I was in the Central African Republic where our troops, the UPDF, are and I know the state of LRA in that region. I have also been associated with Southern Sudan for a long time especially SPLA and SPLM. I know the geography, the ethnicity in Southern Sudan, the mix -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, they do not like to be referred to as “Southern” Sudan. They are “South” Sudan. They get very angry when they hear that.

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I was saying I know the mix in the Equatorial Province, the Bahr el Ghazal, the Bor region, the Malakal and others linked with all those tribal issues, and the tension that has been there for quite some time. I will give a very brief view on this motion but before that, I want to give some facts.

What has taken place in South Sudan, what people have called something that seems like genocide, has been conducted by both people in Government or sympathisers of Government and sympathisers of the militia. So, both sides have committed extreme atrocities.

Secondly, what you call in South Sudan the democratically elected President is actually the democratically elected SPLM. So, when you talk about an alleged coup, it was actually preparation for an election within the SPLM where the Secretary-General, Riek Machar, Rebecca Garang and others had declared intentions of contesting and by virtue of their Constitution, if any of these had taken over as chairman of SPLM, that person would have automatically become the President of Southern Sudan to prepare for the next election. So, that is the fact.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okumu, South Sudan, please.

MR OKUMU: Sorry, South Sudan. The fact remains. 

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, part of the debate that arose in South Sudan and that has contributed to what some people later alleged was a coup was also based on a business deal with some elements in Government concerning the oil deal, and that precipitated the demand to call for the SPLM delegates conference.

My final fact is that the rescue by the Uganda army, which we all applaud, was done and we supported it but it was not only the Ugandan army. The Kenyans sent in their forces, the UN were there, the US were there but they never engaged in a fight despite coming under fire especially the US forces. They were fired at by the rebels but they never engaged in combat.

Now, therefore, Madam Speaker, given all these facts, what would be my view to this motion? I have listened to the debate and people are debating to justify what is not in the motion. People are debating to justify politics, and I think we have a moral obligation as this Parliament and this country to stand on our feet and be objective and be counted by history.

I personally sympathise with our brothers and sisters in South Sudan. They have struggled since 1957 in very difficult situations. They fought for self-determination and with support from the African people, they have been able to achieve that independence. What is left now is the element of good governance within that independent state of South Sudan. Therefore, as neighbours, we should not pretend to organise democracy in other people’s areas when they are trying to reorganise themselves and prepare themselves for good governance. The whole essence here is that the South Sudanese are preparing themselves, after getting independence, to restore good governance amongst themselves.

Therefore, while we want to help, I want to conclude by requesting on this motion - I do not support the content of the motion as it is. I would support the rescue mission of the UPDF and the neutrality of the Ugandan army if ever we are to be there. If we are to go there, we should not engage in battle the way we are doing today. We should go to South Sudan maybe under the mandate of the UN and contribute and offer stability. One of the seconders was suggesting that we should participate in the Addis Ababa peace talks. How can you participate when you are an active combatant –(Member timed out.)

12.21
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the government on your left, I am the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs and I am compelled to raise a number of constitutional issues. However, before that, I want to thank the Government for their role in rescuing our people from South Sudan. Indeed, that is the core mandate of the UPDF under Article 209 of our Constitution. I also want to sympathise with those brothers and sisters who have suffered in this war in South Sudan and I give them my prayers. 

I want to urge the Government of Uganda and all players to stick to the rules as enshrined in our Constitution. Under Article 209 of our Constitution, the functions of the UPDF are clear, elaborate and need no elucidation: 1. “To preserve and defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Uganda.” Mark my words – “of Uganda”, and Uganda has borders. 
2. “To co-operate with the civilian authority in emergency situations and in cases of natural disasters”; civilians in Uganda. 
3. “To foster harmony and understanding between defence forces and civilians” in Uganda. 
4. “To engage in productive activities for the development of Uganda.” 
Those are the boundaries, and you must do everything you do in conformity with the functions and within the four corners of the Constitution. 

It is also true that pursuant to Article 210, we made a law called the UPDF Act and among others, it regulates the deployment of our forces outside the borders. But that deployment must still conform to the four corners. You can only go outside the borders to perform functions connected with Article 209 and no more. It may be a very good moral attribute to assist a neighbour, so you can only go to South Sudan to rescue Ugandans, and that is why I said “Thank you.” 

The motion, as it has been brought, with all these shortcomings, seeks to secure a blank cheque from this Parliament. What is it that they are seeking to resolve? “Parliament strongly supports the deployment of the UPDF in the Republic of South Sudan”; to do what? 

A lot has been talked about, with fantasy, regarding our role in assisting neighbours, the Africanisation, the Pan-Africanism, etcetera, but we have a Constitution that we must not depart from. We cannot and we have not allowed and we have no mandate as Parliament of Uganda to authorise the deployment of our forces beyond rescuing Ugandans. Our duty, and I repeat with support, is to protect Ugandans wherever they are. Get them out, let the South Sudanese people sort their problems by themselves. 

Madam Speaker, I have had occasion to look at the agreement presented by the hon. Crispus Kiyonga and I want to thank him for making an effort rather belatedly. It is an agreement dated 10 January 2014 - long after we had deployed in South Sudan. That is one shortcoming. Two, it does not specify our role in South Sudan. Nowhere in any of the articles does this agreement mention what we are deployed to do apart from the liabilities that we are going to encounter there. 

Thirdly, this is a motion brought under the provisions of Section 40 of the UPDF Act. That is why I said at the beginning, it is at variance with the provision. Section 40 is about the agreement the minister is supposed to enter into when we are deploying. My view is that it should have been brought under the provisions of Section 39, and under 39 we are talking about deployment, but look at the following segments in 39: (1)(a) is on peace keeping; can you be a peacekeeper when you are taking an active role in fighting alongside one group against the other? Subsection (2) is on peace enforcement. What I am talking about are creations of the UPDF Act, which actually offend the provisions of Article 209. 

This is very important: “Peacekeeping shall be done with the approval of Parliament.” They went there with approval –actually, they require approval. However, this new motion, which has been presented here, is not even asking Parliament to ratify. The old motion was asking us to ratify but the new one is not asking us to ratify; they are saying, “give us a blank cheque.”

Madam Speaker, the provisions of subsection (3) of Section 39 are as follows: “Where the President deploys troops under this section when Parliament is on recess...” I want to emphasise that we were not on recess when they deployed, so they should have sought approval first. “...the Speaker shall immediately summon Parliament to an emergency session to sit within 21 days...” Madam Speaker, you did that, following their communication which was belated. 

In all, Madam Speaker, I would suggest first, to give support to the Government and my support is limited to give them one month to rescue all Ugandans. Secondly, give them one month to return our forces. Thirdly, support all regional and international peacekeeping efforts through dialogue as envisaged in the United Nations Charter. 

We have no resolution from any organ authorising us to be there. We were only invited, if at all, by one of the players in the South Sudan conflict. So, while we want to protect Ugandans, we have a solemn and overriding obligation to defend the Constitution that Ugandans made and offered unto themselves. Thank you.

12.29
MR GOEFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The situation in South Sudan is tricky. I would like to call upon Government to reflect on the fact that we are under a multiparty democracy. Worldwide, if President Salva Kiir had appealed to President Museveni, in normal multi-party practice the head of the opposing parties or other parties would have had dialogue even before deployment. 

I remember those days even under the Movement system, before any action would be taken, the President would call the Committee on Defence, and he would call some of us in the Opposition to State House, Nakasero and brief us. What is this new approach? Are we sure that we are too strong that we now do not need to consult this side? This kind of situation should not happen. 

I am one of the people who have worked with the people of South Sudan. I have sent over 300 young people to that country; they have been surviving and we need peace in that country. The economic stability and growth of this country is as a result of trade between Uganda, Sudan, Congo and Kenya and, therefore, we need to be neutral. 

I would have no problem supporting Ugandan deployment under an IGAD framework, AU framework or UN framework. However, the manner in which we are in South Sudan begs a lot of questions. I got intelligence information that the mortuaries in the districts bordering the region are all full. People are asking me about their sons and daughters who are engaged in operation there. They need to be guaranteed. 

Therefore, I urge that this motion be withdrawn and we have dialogue with both sides and come up with a better motion. We do not need to be seen to be against our Government in a situation of conflict but we need to protect the interest of Ugandans in South Sudan, not only lives. We have Ugandans who have invested in South Sudan; it is not only about bringing them here and we leave our assets there. Therefore, we need to sit down and come up with a framework.

MR SSEGGONA: I would like to thank the honourable member for giving way. Just yesterday, somebody called me and said that since our President made remarks to the effect that he would go for Machar if he did not surrender in four days, we have since endangered Ugandans who are living in South Sudan. The people who support Dr Machar are actually up in arms against Ugandans. So, we are endangering the people who are still stuck in South Sudan.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I want to assure the Minister of Defence that we strongly support your initiative because your action was in good faith. You have saved so many lives too. However, your motion does not conform to the Constitution and the UPDF Act, and you also need to talk to the Opposition. So far, you have saved so many lives of Ugandans and Kenyans, but can we have a framework that will not endanger our lives because the conflict in South Sudan – (Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I sat and listened to the interjections from hon. Sseggona, which have remained on record without substantiation, that the President of Uganda gave Dr Machar four days. Where is that formal communication from the President of Uganda to Dr Riek Machar? For that record to remain here, when we cannot get a justification, makes me uncomfortable. That is why I am seeking your guidance on that matter.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sseggona, did you have a conversation with the President on that issue? (Laughter)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have had no conversation with the President of late and I do not intend to. I just read that story pertaining to what I am saying in the Government newspaper, which is the New Vision. If the minister is interested – (Interjections) - I will lay it on the Table. I also want to say that we should be consistent; the minister talked about a number of things and the paper – (Interruption)

MR SEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If the holder of the Floor, who is also my muko, has no information on that matter –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: No, for the record, I am not his muko.

MR SEBUNYA: Okay, whatever you are. Please, if you have no information to support your allegations that the President ordered Dr Machar, can we expunge that record? If he refuses, Madam Speaker, it shall be information that will mix up this whole country and put our members in jeopardy in as far security is concerned. Is it in order for the Member to give information that is not substantiated?

THE SPEAKER: What is the source of your information?

MR SSEGGONA: As for the hon. Sebunya - I think I will not respond to him. My source of information is the New Vision newspaper and I will lay a copy on the Table. The President addressed a press conference and he was on television, and I do not intend to withdraw this statement. As for the hon. Sebunya, that one I do not respond to. I have said there was a press conference addressed by the President. If he is the Government spokesperson, he is free to give me information otherwise. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Sebuliba Mutumba –

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I was still holding the Floor.

THE SPEAKER: No, you have taken more than your allotted time. I understand in the gallery there are representatives of some of those who were rescued from South Sudan. That is the team there. (Applause) You are welcome. 

12.36
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think this is the time, as we start the New Year, to talk in one language. I recall that when we were celebrating the life of Mandela, we had problems. Here, we are talking about peace and the relationship between two countries and we are still divided. This means there is something fundamentally wrong, which we have not tackled well.

When you look at the motion, the first three paragraphs talk about a coup d’état. When you read the fourth and the last paragraphs, they are about peace and the rest are about what is to be done and the law. I think it is high time, like my colleagues suggested, that much as we are in a rush, we should sit together - all of us who are concerned especially the legal brains - and come up with something more tangible. I am saying this because in this motion, I would support only the peacekeeping mission - the evacuation of people. 

If you look at the concerns - that there is still need to evacuate Ugandans and for a stable and prosperous South Sudan – what is the impact of this on our economy? What has not been included here is how much Uganda is going to pay. What departments, ministries and agencies are going to be affected? I am saying this because we have heard that we will even foot the bills of our army’s stay in South Sudan. So, what are the ramifications of this on our economy here?

Madam Speaker, if we take sides in this matter, what if Dr Machar wins that war, do you think we will be better off as Ugandans trading in South Sudan? Will that secure our interests? These are some of the issues we should address. 

Like my colleagues, hon. Ekanya and hon. Okumu, said, there are some fundamental issues we have not really tackled; for example: What led to this problem? How did we get here? Which areas are we going to tackle? How many days are we going to stay there and how much money are we going to spend on this? (Interruption)

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, in civilised countries, motions of this nature are supposed to unite us. We should not be taking sides because we would not like to be seen as Parliament of Uganda to be divided on an issue of national interest. Can’t we provide ways and means to sit together to come up with one voice as Ugandans?

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, as I wind up, I want to thank you for calling this off because things went wrong from the time we started to move to South Sudan. I was reading from the media that even the letter you got from the President arrived very late. We are not even sure of the date of deployment and how we ended up there. Whatever we are going to do here is going to be retrospective to what is happening. 

What about the permanent secretaries of the honourable Dr Kiyonga’s office; are they going to be answerable to this Parliament on how they spent the money of the taxpayers? I am saying this because at the end of the day, when we pass the budget, we are clear on which items the money has been allocated to. The teachers have never got their money but when the honourable Dr Kiyonga and his ministry get money to deploy these people, we want to know all these consequences so that we can inform our people on how we are going to tackle this. Otherwise, we are still walking in darkness.

I only support the last bit of the motion on peace. We need more than this; we need to sit together as a House and come out with one voice regarding South Sudan. I thank you.

12.41
MAJ. GEN. JULIUS OKETTA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. What happened in South Sudan is a collective pre-emptive security responsibility and an emergency of a humanitarian intervention by all nations. 

There were four scenarios: One, what were the immediate threats to South Sudan that would infringe on the security of Uganda? It was headed towards political insecurity. All these other countries going there were going for their citizens and to look at the physical security and to protect the rights of their people in that country, which they have no control over, but under organised organisations. The operation, therefore, involved the three arms of the government of all the nations, using political diplomacy, military diplomacy and humanitarian diplomacy. 

Tow, there was a national and geo-political dimension to the humanitarian emergency in South Sudan. The Uganda Government had to look at the interest of over 200,000 Ugandans spread all over South Sudan. I would like to thank the Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda for giving me some few millimetres of his authority to perform the coordination of the Ugandan response on the border of Sudan with the Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Internal Affairs in South Sudan. In the same vein, I was happy to be on the UN Central Emergency Response Fund. That gave me the opportunity to work with the UN Secretary-General’s representative in South Sudan.

Eleven million South Sudanese lives were at stake besides the 200,000 Ugandans who are spread all over in three groups. The biggest group was the people employed in different business sectors. The second group was Ugandans doing normal business and the third group was Ugandans who are married or decided to own property in South Sudan in different regions. 

The third factor was the LRA factor. As the war began, the South Sudan army went into disarray and our issues and other national issues were not a priority to them. Kony was free to do what he wanted. We were already there before under many protocols, but the sector that was supposed to be manned by the South Sudanese was already empty. The question of the Greater North immediately was: “What is the President doing to make sure that the LRA does not come over since their area is free - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, two minutes to conclude.

MAJ. GEN. OKETTA: We had to go over to explain this. Now, on the rumours about our aircraft shot, I would like to give a brief summary on that. The first army to go into South Sudan was the US Army and Marines and not UPDF. They were reinforced by UPDF, Kenya, Ethiopia and other African Union and United Nations forces. It was a collective effort and not only UPDF. 

The number that died is not 1,000 people as some claim. That was very absurd. If you know about military, a company is less than 200 people. So, where did we get the 1,000 that died? The aircraft that was shot was a US aircraft and the helicopters that were shot at and they shot back were the French Army aircraft, which came from Djibouti. When they were damaged, they all flew to Entebbe.  

I would like to make an appeal. In that scenario, we are not at the frontline but we are carrying out a humanitarian response. The UN Secretary-General's Office is so happy that Uganda has a very good policy and has opened its border for people, especially the refugees. They are appreciative to the Government of Uganda through the Office of the Prime Minister.  

So, as UPDF, we want to appeal to all of you, dear civil authority seated in this House.  Yesterday, I was watching TV - Madam Speaker, give me two more minutes as I conclude - hon. Katuntu was on the TV and he talked very well and he said that we need to look at the legal aspect of the operation. That is it. We need to use the civil authority with humility. The UPDF wants you to get one, facts and two, coordinate with us and consult. We have our ministers and other people.  Three, we are your daughters and sons, brothers and in-laws –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one minute to conclude. He has been in the field.

MAJ. GEN. OKETTA: So, we would like you to take away emotions. Do not bring sensational hatred but look at the country as yours. All the regions under UN system are appreciating what UPDF and Uganda has done. I appeal to you to pass the motion in favour of our operation. May God bless you. (Applause)

12.47
THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, first of all, for calling the House to come and debate this very important motion.  I stand to congratulate the UPDF for the good work that they have so far done in South Sudan since their deployment there.  

Secondly, I would like to extend my thanks to the Commander-in-Chief, Gen. Yoweri Museveni, for the proactive approach in which he handled the situation in South Sudan. I support the motion entirely. As you can see, even emotionally, there are all signs that I support the minister's motion. (Laughter) Specifically, I would like to congratulate the minister for the consequences that have accrued since the deployment of the UPDF in South Sudan, including saving lives of Ugandans and other citizens and ensuring the political and economic stability of South Sudan.

Thirdly, I thank him for protecting the economic interests of both South Sudan and Uganda.  Madam Speaker, when that challenge broke out, I got communication from the people of Katakwi and they named some traders who were in South Sudan and they were very worried about what was going to happen to them. After the deployment, a few days later they called me and said all those traders had been rescued by the UPDF and indeed, that was the same for all traders that come from all the districts that we represent in Uganda including Kamuli and where the honourable - Amuru District. (Laughter)  I am sure, Madam Speaker, that is what you wanted to support me on but because of the time constraint, I would like you to allow me to make my three other points so that I can give a chance to other colleagues. 

I would like to appreciate the concerns from the Members of Parliament – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kwizera. Use your three minutes carefully, please. 

12.51
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Three minutes?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, three.

MR KWIZERA: Madam Speaker, I will support the motion with amendments and not as is. If you say “Parliament strongly supports the deployment of Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces in the Sudan”, it is okay but it must have a timeframe and it must be cognisant of other instruments - our laws and international laws. Otherwise, if we leave it like this, I will not support it.  

THE SPEAKER: But why don't you propose so that the minister can think about it.

MR KWIZERA: I will do it at the right time. I thank the UPDF for rescuing our people from South Sudan but now that they have rescued our people, we need to do what is necessary because we can bend our law but we cannot bend international instruments. Issues of peacekeeping are in the United Nations Charter, Chapter Six. So, we should look at what we want to do cognisant of what the international community is talking about. You will recall that we are supposed to pay US$ 10 billion to the DRC and so, we should not repeat the same mistake; let us do what is right.

There is actually lack of a sufficient law. When you look at Article 210 of the Constitution and the UPDF Act, it is not sufficient as far as deployment of the troops is concerned. If we were supposed to be here under 210(d), then what are we doing here; and was it a requirement that the motion is moved under Section 40? But now that we are here, we should see to it that next time, we do not go through the same mess.

Security of our neighbours is good for us but there must be a mechanism under which these things are done. We see SPLM fighting itself. I want to tell Members that there is no SPLM as a rebel faction fighting the national army. They are both referring to themselves as SPLM, even in Addis Ababa. It is actually people fighting for positions in their own party. So, we should not take a position with one group against the other because we can eventually have a problem. Let us help these people to fight and gain what they want.

You know, our Government helps South Sudan a lot; we often run to help them and yet when we have problems, they do not help us. As we speak now, they chased away our traders. In fact, I have a copy of an agreement signed between the Government of South Sudan and Uganda and it shows they have conned Ugandan traders of US$ 41 million, which they were supposed to have paid by June 2010. So, why can’t it be a condition of helping them that they first pay – (Member timed out.)

12.54
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. First of all, I thank the President, who is also the Commander-in-Chief, and the NRM Government for the timely intervention in this crisis. 

A lot has been said, but I have a feeling that people who are opposed to what the President did regarding the UPDF deployment in South Sudan either do not understand the geopolitics and dynamics of the region or are innocently supporting the genocide that would have happened if we had not intervened. We have heard of the UN peacekeeping force but the way things unfolded in South Sudan would not have allowed us to follow that route of going through the UN. In any case, if there is no peace, you cannot pretend to be keeping it; it has to be something else. Our people were being held up there and Uganda had to intervene.

I think it is hon. Nankabirwa who talked about a standby force. This should be a lesson to Africans; we should fast-track our standby force so that when such things happen, we move there in our own right as the African standby force, so that there are no accusations and counter accusations. Other nations have NATO and the like and they even do not wait whenever their interests are interrupted; they will be there without being accused by their own nations. 

Madam Speaker, I suggest that as Ugandans and Parliament, we should support our Government when such a need arises. We should speak with one voice as Ugandans. Our people have died in South Sudan and have lost business, while some are still there despite their desire to come back home. Kiryandongo District has already registered over 2,000 refugees but there is no –(Member timed out.)

12.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR NORTHERN UGANDA (Ms Rebecca Otengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank you for calling us for this very important sitting today. Allow me also to appreciate the Commander-in-Chief, the President, for having acted strategically and within his constitutional mandate. It would be unfair if we did not thank the UPDF.

Madam Speaker, I arrived from Northern Uganda just this morning. The people there could not understand that there are people who do not support the deployment of UPDF to protect them. Madam Speaker, recently, you were in Northern Uganda and the trucks you met in hundreds were coming back from South Sudan but that is not how it used to be. They would be moving to and fro because they were doing business. 

It is amazing that a Member of Parliament who represents a border constituency would stand up here and oppose the deployment of UPDF in South Sudan. We are now a host community of over 48,000 refugees. We would like to remind Ugandans that some of you who have been in war situations know that people run to safe places – that is what we used to do. Why do you do that? It is not by coincidence; it is because there are people who have worked very hard to make those places safe. 

The stability we have in Northern Uganda, and I say this as the minister in charge of rehabilitating Northern Uganda –(Interjections)– My brother, please, allow me to conclude. We have gone through a lot for 20 years and we have tried to rehabilitate our sub-region for three or five years now, but it is not easy. If somebody does not support the idea of a stable South Sudan so that the people of Northern Uganda continue to have peace and move together with other Ugandans, I shudder.

These traders have started returning to South Sudan because of what UPDF is doing. Therefore, I insist that because of our strategic reason, the UPDF must remain in South Sudan to protect us. If they say they are supposed to protect Ugandans, by extension even where they are currently, they are protecting us. This is because if our borders are porous and we are attacked, then the protection would not have been successful.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, allow us to reflect, as Ugandans, and count our losses because of this conflict that started in South Sudan. I heard somebody saying that these are just minor people and they cannot do much, so we should not get into the fight –(Member timed out.)

1.01
GEN. EDWARD KATUMBA WAMALA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to contribute to this motion from a point of involvement and not from the point of media, not from the point of seeing images on the TV or politics. 

Madam Speaker, the situation which unfolded in the seven days before the UPDF put a footprint in South Sudan was very terrible. One thousand people being lost within that period of time is not something small. The situation had all the hallmarks of genocide. Images of vultures eating people’s bodies on the streets are not something to be proud of. I really feel, and I want to say that any sensible leader at the level of our President who was close to that situation had to respond the way he did. I want to thank the President for having made that strategic decision and guidance to have the UPDF deployed on the ground.

Madam Speaker, people are talking about defending the country. There is no General worth his name who will wait for the bad situation to get into the territory of his country. (Applause) The best way to defend the position is to defend it away from the position itself. The best way we can defend Uganda is to stop any threat to our security from getting into our borders. The situation in South Sudan at that time was threatening our security and, therefore, we had all the reasons to intervene.
 
Furthermore, the lives of people like these you have seen up there and more were really in danger. Thousands of Ugandans were in danger. I went to Bor before it had been retaken and I found 1,257 of them living in the screened camp of the UN in very horrible conditions. We had to do all it took to get them out. One hundred are still stuck there because they said the situation was improving and they will stay and now, they are totally stuck there. We must get them.

One of the honourable members talked about the cost; what is the price? I mean, can you compare the expense to the lives of these people and the others who are still there? Is that a right comparison? Let us value our people. As the CDF, I stand here very proud that when the situation got out of hand, and many of those big nations and other nations that ran into South Sudan when it got independence to sign concessions and agreements were deserting that country at their time of need, we, the UPDF, packed our bags and landed. 

As Uganda, a neighbour to this situation and people who saw this young nation come into being, we have an obligation to see it stands and grows as a nation. We do not have to desert it. I want to appeal to the Members of Parliament, to the political leadership, to look beyond politicking and look at the strategic benefits of having Sudan as a stable nation. 

I am not an economist but yesterday, I read in one of the papers about the amount of money we have lost and the threat to our industries because all the products, which had been produced, are lying idle; they cannot be taken. Nobody is trading there and that is not what we want. We want South Sudan to thrive. On that note, I would like to reassure Ugandans that as we secure the corridor for the refugees to come into Uganda, we are going to continue securing that corridor for anybody who wants to either retrieve their property from South Sudan or who wants even to make an effort to trade in South Sudan. 

Further information, Madam Speaker, is that Uganda is the lifeline of Sudan. As the borders close, Juba will starve. Whether we like it or not, if we are going to help those people to survive, we must open that corridor and allow the Ugandans to take in goods and trade in food basically. If Uganda does not take food to Juba, all those who have remained there will die. 

I want to call upon Parliament to support this motion. Let us support this motion. Your forces, the UPDF, have done a very commendable job. We are not fighting; we are just ensuring that we create an environment or a situation where the parties will come back to the table, sit and talk to each other. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

1.08
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I seek your indulgence and that of Members to raise just a few issues. 

I have listened in to the voices supporting the motion for a resolution of Parliament to support the deployment of troops to South Sudan. None of the proponents has informed this country as to what the scope and the depth of this intervention would be. Are we giving an open cheque? 

I am saying this because I listened in to the CDF; for how long shall we be there to ensure that South Sudan is operational? The only statement we heard, and which I think was really valid, was of the President. You cannot go to South Sudan and say you are a peacekeeper and you start issuing ultimatums. It means you are now taking sides in this conflict. 

I must warn those in charge of this country that you cannot run the affairs of this country in this manner because get sucked in there and you do not have exit alternatives to choose from. This is the country you are putting at the forefront, so we, the people’s representatives here, must be told what the scope of our intervention would be. We do not oppose the humanitarian operations but we tend to get too involved in the Sudanese politics. We cannot be more bona fide Sudanese than Mabior Garang or Rebecca Garang. They have voiced a major concern that “look, the situation is not ethnicity; the situation is political.” 

I challenge Members here; when Salva Kiir dismissed the South Sudanese Government, which was a unity Government, in July, nobody raised a finger and yet they saw it happen. However, I want to say that you cannot give what you do not have; you cannot give democratic credentials that you do not have. The NRM cannot go there, and the President, to dictate terms to South Sudan as if he is a fully accomplished democrat when he is not. So, to that extent, I want to say that let us allow South Sudan to evoke its own methods. 

For us to believe that we can be more sincere to the Sudanese than Mabior Garang or Rebecca Garang is a fallacy and we are wasting time if we are here to say Uganda shall run South Sudan; we cannot! What we can do in the circumstances is to create an environment where the warring factions can get on board – (Member timed out.) 

1.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Gen. Jeje Odongo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Today’s motion creates an opportunity for us, leaders of Uganda, to stand and be counted. Ugandans are watching us; are we on their side or are we letting them down? 
	
Madam Speaker, any country has national interests. Some of those interests are core national interests like territorial integrity and security. Those can never be compromised; they must be defended at all costs. Uganda’s security is not a matter of debate. 

The strategic depth imperative imposed upon Uganda by virtue of our size is such that we Ugandans cannot defend Uganda from within. Ask yourselves, if you build a house with strong walls, why would you build a perimeter fence? It is because you understand that your house is more secure if it is defended away from the walls of the house. Today, the USA has deployed in Iraq and Afghanistan. Was it invited by Iraq or Afghanistan? No, they were not invited but they are there to nip the problem in the bud. 

Last year, there was unconstitutional change of Government in the Central African Republic. All of us in Africa and the world folded our arms and watched that situation play out. Today, you and I are witnesses to the mayhem and the humanitarian sad story in that country. Today, we have been asked to do something about that situation at a very high cost, both human and material. Is this what we would like to watch playing out in South Sudan as if we do not have the capacity and the will to stop it before it happens? Africa, therefore, must rely on itself and learn to leave by its norms. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

1.15
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the second week of November, you cleared me and other colleagues to go on official duty to Juba. While there, we had our ears on the ground and we knew what happened on 15th of December was not far from taking root. There was a lot of discontent due to the dismissal of the entire Cabinet of South Sudan. This is comparable to a situation where President Museveni decided to sack all his bush war veterans with whom he fought in Luweero Triangle. What has happened in Juba would certainly happen here as well. That was the beginning of that problem. It is more political than what we see. 

I am also touched because Terego County is a host of the refugees from Sudan. They are being hosted in Iyoro, which is in Oryem sub-county. Whereas we are talking about the pacification of South Sudan, we should also be mindful of what is happening in Uganda. Right now, refugees are continuously entering our country with AK-47s hidden in their handbags. This is something very serious, which we need to take care of as a Government. We might be talking about pacification of Juba yet our own backyard is on fire. So, Government should take care of that issue. 

Secondly, we have been misled by the media and at times by Government that what is happening in Juba is a tribal war between the Dinka and the Nuer. I want to tell you that the Dinka are the majority as far as tribal partners are concerned and the Nuer are the second largest but the Nuer are the majority in the army. As of now, the two tribes, especially the Dinka, have divided into two and most of them have joined the Nuer and are fighting side by side with Riek Machar. Even the counterpart of Gen. Katumba Wamala, the CDF of South Sudan, is fighting side by side with Dr Riek Machar– (Interruption)

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Is the honourable member in order to insinuate that Gen. Hoth, whom I am in touch with every day and is commanding the SPLA forces in Juba, is fighting on the side of the rebels? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, unfortunately, I do not know who the current or the former CDF are.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I thank you for your wise ruling. The General I am talking about was a four-star general up to 15th December. He is not with them right now; he is on the other side with Dr Riek Machar. The one Gen. Wamala is talking about is the one who replaced the other one who had crossed; we have information on our fingertips. 

Madam Speaker, whereas the justification from Government was that this was a noble intervention to secure Ugandans, which we all welcome, Kenyans went there and Ethiopians who have the longest boundary line with South Sudan went there, but no South Sudanese have ever raised an accusing finger to the nations of Kenya or Ethiopia. But right now, if you are in South Sudan and you are identified as a Ugandan, then you are finished; it is safer for you to say that you are Kenyan or Congolese than to say you are Ugandan –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One more minute to conclude. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, it is important that I complete this information. The animosity done to Ugandans is because the UPDF, which seemingly went to save Ugandans, has taken sides; it is on the battle ground, in the trenches. Therefore, the Sudanese do not look at them as people who have come for peacekeeping reasons because they have taken sides. 

Lastly, this motion is very vague. As it is now, I cannot and I will not support it. You remember some time back, a similar motion was brought to Parliament when UPDF deployed in Somalia. There was a timeframe, after which Government had to come back and ask for permission to extend their stay, but this one is vague. We might stay in Sudan forever, which – (Interruption)

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Speaker, I have been attentively listening to my colleagues deliberate on the Floor. My colleague, whom I respect, hon. Wadri, mentioned that the motion we are debating right now is very vague. I would think that it would be procedurally correct for him to propose something better before he continues with –(Interjections)– It is not a matter of shouting like market vendors; we are debating. It is better for him to propose amendments to the motion other than just rubbishing it and saying that it is vague and yet he cannot propose something better. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I have been in this House for the last 13 years and I can ably consider myself a senior legislator –(Interjections)– I know where I am progressing with this. If only my young sister was patient enough to hear my proposal. So, please, be patient and if only I am given the time, I will be able to reach there.

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, we have already stayed there for nearly one month and I think if we really went there to secure our people, this is long enough. I would, therefore, wish to propose an amendment to this motion- (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Make the proposal quickly, please.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I wish to propose that Parliament supports the deployment of UPDF to the Republic of South Sudan for humanitarian assistance for two months with effect from 15 December 2013. Thereafter, Parliament will have a way of evaluating its performance and then, we can be able to decide appropriately whether to extend the period or not but as of now, it is very vague. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

1.24
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the mover of the motion and all those who have spoken to it. I thank the President for providing leadership on this matter up to this day when we are here discussing the wider perspective.

From the African Union perspective, where I represent you, Chapter 4(p) of the Charter on Elections, Democracy and Governance is very emphatic about unconstitutional change of Government. I think it is in that spirit that the President saw it fit to make the intervention that he has made.

All of us have spoken about the social, economic and political benefits that arise from us supporting our neighbours or being in regional cohorts so that we can move together. That does not need to be over emphasised. However, I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, and the mover of the motion because I had a few minutes with him outside and I was delighted to know that we were departing from seeking approval under Section 39. I think that was a correct move because we would have embarrassed ourselves here today. 

Just for the information of Members, we would not afford yet to move under Section 39 to seek authorisation from Parliament for deployment of our troops outside the boundaries of Uganda because as you are aware, Section 39 would demand that we comply with Chapters 6 and 7 of the UN Security Council, which has not yet been put in place. So, Madam Speaker, I want to thank you and the mover for moving under Section 40 because Section 40 of the UPDF Act gives Government the latitude, through the minister here, to sign a Status of Forces Agreement, which is what he has laid on the Table. 

I think we have not done this debate enough justice because the gist of today’s debate is under Section 40 and is in the Status of Forces Agreement, which Members ought to have read and understood. Personally, I confess that I do not have a copy save for the copy that the minister has laid on the Table. So, we have not done this debate very good justice because this House is not very well informed about the details of the agreement that Government signed under Section 40, under which we are proceeding.

Suffice to note, honourable members, that Uganda is footing its own bills in this struggle. A bullet costs US$ 1, which means a magazine of 30 bullets, I believe, and our Generals will help us here, costs US$ 30. That is the cost of the venture that we have found ourselves in.

Worthwhile as it is and while I support it, I believe that at some point, we will have to move for a review of this Status of Forces Agreement. I request the minister that we have a review, especially of the timeframe within which we shall be in South Sudan as we wait for sections 6 and 7 of the UN Security Council to come into place. We can then come back to Parliament under Section 39 and seek the approval of Parliament for deployment outside. I think that is what must be captured very clearly, and as the press people report, that is what they should capture and not come out and say the Uganda Parliament has approved under Section 39. That is not true.

I also want to urge our Government, which is in close ties with the South Sudan Government, to urge the government there to embrace democratic progression now that there is a government elected. There must be a proliferation of democracy in that country and I think if that happens, then we shall have sorted out the bigger picture.

As I conclude, and from the African Union perspective, I would also like to urge our Government to urge all member states of the African Union to pay up membership so that the African Union can have money because all these things that we are doing require money. We are saying African solutions to African problems but when we are paying lip-service and the AU is broke and IGAD has no money, it means it will depend a lot on goodwill like the goodwill of the people of Uganda.

Finally, I would like to speak for my constituency. There is a refugee camp in Panyadholi in Kiryandongo, which is currently overwhelmed by the inflow of refugees, and you can be sure that we have resource constraints. At this point, I would like to urge the government to help my district so that these people who are coming in do not come and constrain the meagre resources that the district has. The government should move in to make some sort of affirmative action and provide facilities to help in this cause.

Otherwise, I support this motion under Section 40 of the UPDF Act, which is basically asking us to give messages of solidarity with our Government. I beg to support.

1.31
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by saying that the debate before us is not whether or not the UPDF should have been deployed. I think that as a country and by common understanding, UPDF should have deployed. I think that baseline should be something we all agree on as a country - that UPDF should have deployed or should continue the deployment.

To me, the question is the scope of the deployment and issues that we should focus on as a country during the deployment. The mover of the motion has articulated quite well why we have deployed - economic interests, humanitarian, evacuation and regional security. What I would love to see in the motion is also the question of the peace talks taking place in Addis Ababa. While it is rightly stated that almost all the countries and the UN are trying their level best to ensure that the political question should be addressed through mediation and negotiations, the issue in South Sudan is not so much about military defeat. I am glad that even this Government recognises that.

There is a political question that has to be addressed. It is the reason why the UN, China and all those countries are locked up in Addis Ababa and are doing everything possible to make sure that the political question is addressed in Addis Ababa. I would like to see this Parliament pronouncing itself in supporting the peace talks in Addis Ababa, which is not part of the prayers in the resolution.

I appeal to the mover of the motion to agree with the section of this House that is calling upon you to ensure that we deal with the scope of the deployment of the UPDF and specifically state that the deployment is for safeguarding our economic interests, evacuation of Ugandans and humanitarian mission. There are people - (Member timed out.)

1.34
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to tell this House and Ugandans that the Opposition is not against the UPDF going into Sudan to rescue our people. Do not create a situation that we are opposed to that. We are saying, how did we go to Sudan? The memories of Congo are very clear to us. This country has got to pay US$ 10 billion because we went to Congo without authority. So, we do not want this to happen again.

The UPDF went to Sudan on 16th December but on second thought, I thank those who advised the Commander-in-Chief that we must get an agreement before getting involved in South Sudan. The agreement came in on the 10th January. We could have had an agreement if Salva Kiir came to us and asked us, like he came.

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Is the honourable member in order to say that UPDF was in South Sudan on the 16th when actually our first reconnaissance party landed in South Sudan on 19th? It was a reconnaissance party not even a deployment.

THE SPEAKER: Those facts are well known to you but some of us do not have the information.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What I was saying is that before you get involved in the internal affairs of another state, please, get permission. The permission was sought long after we were already in South Sudan.

We tell Ugandans that we went to rescue Ugandans; perfect, but if you carrying out a rescue mission, you must have the targets. You have Nimule road, the airport, that is fine, but we are in Bor and we have taken sides. This is political confusion that we are having. They disagreed with Salva Kiir and that is why they got these problems, but for us to be involved, we must follow the international regulations. Uganda is a member of the UN, a member of the African Union, a member of IGAD; why didn’t we get authority from these organisations? We merely took a unilateral decision and went to South Sudan. This is not proper. Please, respect the international community! We do not want to show the whole world that we are a force to reckon with in the area. We must follow international regulations before we can be accepted.

MR RUHUNDA: The problem I have is that already, we have been informed that an agreement has been placed on the Table though the contents of the agreement are not clear. This is an agreement between the Government of South Sudan and the Government of Uganda. I am really at a loss as a result of how we are approaching this matter. The two governments have agreed and now, we are bringing in the rebels. I do not know how these rebels fit into this agreement. This is making it very difficult for me to discern, and see how we can move forward because the rebels were not there and they are not in this agreement. It is the Government of South Sudan and the Government of Uganda that have agreed.

If Uganda has been invited to go to South Sudan by the Government of South Sudan, then how –

THE SPEAKER: Is the Government fighting itself or there are parties?
MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, I am glad that you have ruled like that. What I am saying is that the Commander-in-Chief should have respect for this House. They should not bring these issues at the last moment to rubber stamp. At least, have courtesy, have respect for the House and bring the issues to the House. We know you have got the majority, you will take the show –(Interruption) 
MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Constitution is very clear when it talks about this Parliament making laws to regulate the UPDF. This Parliament went ahead and enacted the UPDF Act, 2005. 

The President, in his letter to you and in consonance with section 39 and 40, which provides for what happens when there is deployment - In this case, when Parliament was on recess, the President is given 21 days in which to communicate to the Speaker so that Parliament is convened. The President who is the Commander-in-Chief did this. Is the Member in order to say that the Commander-in-Chief does not respect this House when he has followed the law to the letter?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you were not listening when I made my communication. I said I had called you under Section 39 but that there is a lacuna in the law, which required us to move under Section 40. Please, conclude.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, the fact remains that the Government has got three arms – the Executive, Judiciary and Parliament – and there is a Constitution that we must follow. Also, we are members of the international community and we must follow international laws. We know the provisions of the UN Charter, we also know the provisions of the AU Charter and IGAD; please, let us follow these laws. 

We are not opposed to our soldiers being there to rescue Ugandans but we must do that according to the law, otherwise they are going to point fingers at us. As hon. Kassiano Wadri said, the people of South Sudan are not happy because Uganda has taken sides and is now fighting in support of President Salva Kiir yet we should have been neutral. If we went there to rescue our people, we should have just done that in a scope of time and left South Sudan. Now, Uganda is being targeted and yet the memories of Lugogo are still very clear and the memories of Westgate are still very clear. 

We do not want to risk our people in positions where we are. I have very many of my people working in South Sudan and I do not want them to be targeted. We want these things done according to the law, so that we can be respected as members of the international community but not take irrational decisions. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.43
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we are all very excited and very eager to come and speak on the issue of South Sudan. Since the war broke out while we were on recess, we have just been reading about it in the newspapers.

The duty of our country towards security cannot be overstated. I request that we amend the motion to read, “Parliament urgently ratifies the deployment…” not “Parliament strongly supports…” because our soldiers are already there. We are here to just ratify that deployment. Just clarify that point on the second page.

I would like to note that –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, maybe you also came in late. The motion has been moved under Section 40. It is not about ratification; it is just information and seeking support.

MS NAGGAYI: Seeking support! Okay, Madam Speaker, with your guidance, I also would like to get more information about the role of Parliament. I am saying this because much as the army has the support, which we have all exhibited, we are very uncomfortable, as Members of Parliament, that the army and Government routinely deploy and they inform us later. That is the question and that is an area that we are uncomfortable with. I think we cannot run away from it.

I also want to talk about the strategic intervention of Uganda. Members and the minister have talked about the issue of economic strategic alliance with South Sudan. Yes, we always go to these nations to rescue our neighbours but I hope that as a country, we are not engaging in wars as a hobby. Economically, we would want to be involved in South Sudan. However, what do we benefit after the stabilisation of South Sudan; p0etty trade? Why is it that nations that do not deploy there benefit economically and perform better than Uganda?

Therefore, I think the minister should inform us whether we will see, after this incident, better trade agreements between Uganda Government and South Sudan, and our companies being given preference over companies from nations that have not deployed their troops there. I think we cannot run away from the fact that we are involved in selling tomatoes and that that is why we are fighting - (Member timed out.)

1.47
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join others to thank you for convening this special sitting of Parliament to enable us express our position on this regional conflict situation.

Some of us who have got the privilege to sit in international fora where issues of regional conflicts are discussed are very proud of the positive role that the UPDF and other Uganda armed forces have played in restoring peace and stability in the region. (Applause)
I also do appreciate the fact that the Minister of Defence has gone on record to condemn the change of Government through unconstitutional means and let it be our culture – I want to thank him for putting that on record. 

I also want to thank him for recognising the fact that the root cause of this conflict is based on ethnic divisions. If we are sure of that ethnic tension in the community, our role should therefore be to promote reconciliation and bring the two sides together. Our role should not be to see one side winning over the other. We should be there for a win-win situation for the benefit of Uganda and all of us and the region at large. That is my prayer. 

In that regard, Madam Speaker, the motion that was moved is divided into three sections: there is a section on the coup, but which does not concern us. Part 1, 2, and 3 concerns the coup but the Parliament of Uganda has nothing to do with that. Parliament of Uganda has a lot to do with the condemnation and the concerns in regard to stopping genocide. Uganda Parliament is concerned with bringing reconciliation and promoting the dialogue that is now taking place in Ethiopia.

Therefore, I reserve my support for this motion. However, if it can be amended to carry the spirit of the law – It is moved in accordance with Section 40 of the UPDF Act and this is very clear, Madam Speaker, and I know you read it out to the House. The way it is stated here is very clear. It does not involve us going and engaging in combat beyond the definitions of the mandate given by Parliament. Let us carry the responsibility, as Parliament, and redefine the role of UPDF in South Sudan. I shall be - (Member timed out.)

1.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL) (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Madam Speaker, I also rise to support the motion. A few years ago, a Catholic Priest from my constituency went to Sudan and has taken, over time, brothers, sisters and other people from his village. They established businesses in Bor, Bentiu in Unity State and other areas. Around 19th December, one of the brothers, a one Felix, called me to say, like many other Ugandans, they were trapped but being protected by the police from the Nuer tribe. Knowing very well what was happening, it was very clear that the next step would be killing them.

I later contacted them and connected them to our Ugandan forces and within a few days, they were evacuated from Bentiu, airlifted to Hegilig and just on New Year’s Eve, they were airlifted to Entebbe.  When I met them in the constituency, as a whole clan they applauded the Ugandan forces and the Commander-in-Chief. So, on behalf of the people of Sheema, I would like to thank them for the work that is being done. 

The second point I want to make is about our history and the timing of the conflict. The conflict comes in at a time where we saw in Central African Republic the South Africans and the French, and we saw Muslims fighting Christians and we know what is happening there with Kony in the background. We saw in DRC a pastor killing people in Kinshasa. We have seen Mai-Mai in Katanga. We saw somebody who was fighting the ADF being killed in Beni. You see all the hallmarks of what is happening in this situation. You have seen South Africa coming in with Tanzania, and the M23 and M18 and all that is happening there.  

So, when you sit there, you see Riek Machar coming up wanting to take power and yet you know the history between Machar and Kony. You know the history of Uganda - Anyanya II and Obote I; Amin and how he came into Uganda; Bazilio Okello coming from Sudan to overthrow Obote; and since 1986 what has happened between Kony, Al Turabi and the rest. So we cannot sit here in Kampala and see changes in Sudan and wait for those changes to come and affect us here in Uganda.

Therefore, I want to call upon this Parliament to seriously think beyond the simple tribal wars in South Sudan. We just have to go there and defend the territory of Uganda. It hurts to see Africans being used like pawns in a chess game played by giants. It also hurts to see multinational economic vampires and firearms dealers causing Africans to fight with Africans. 

We should not look at South Sudan as a separate country and we sit here and leave Africans to kill each other. That is why we need to support the UPDF to ensure we can stop genocide, create conditions for peace and be able to talk amongst Africans and be able to ensure that at least there shall be peace in South Sudan and also peace in Uganda.  

We also need to know and support the East African integration. If we had a political federation, an East African integration, and we had East African countries working together - Kenya, Uganda, South Sudan, Rwanda and others together - as one country, you would not have Nuer fighting with the Dinka and others fighting with each other. Therefore, the conflict in South Sudan should cause us to hasten the process of East African integration and integration with other countries neighbouring us as much as possible.

Finally, Madam Speaker, we must not wait here and fold our hands and pray that Uganda shall achieve peace without consciously fighting for it. Uganda by design is located in a geopolitically volatile area, neighbouring the two largest countries in Africa, before the division of Sudan –(Member timed out.)

1.56
MS EVELYN KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to fully support the motion for the resolution as moved by the Minister for Defence. I also thank His Excellency for the strategic move he has made to deploy our troops to our neighbours in South Sudan. 

To me, South Sudan is like a dining room in our own house and when there is fire in the dining room, you cannot be in the sitting room and wait for the fire to get you there. You have to use all the tactics and tools that you have to be able to put out that fire.  

So, I support that the troops remain in South Sudan to be able to protect our territory, keep peace, keep our people and bring back our people as safely as they can.

Article 209 talks about us keeping peace - hon. Sseggona says it is in Uganda but it is of Uganda.  If we are keeping peace around the territories, we cannot wait in Uganda until our enemies come and attack us here in Uganda. So, I support that we keep our forces in South Sudan. It is immoral for us to watch our brothers and sisters being killed. So, we need to keep ourselves in touch with our sisters and brothers to be able to fight our enemies. I thank you.

1.58
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (POLITICAL MOBILISATION) (Mr Richard Todwong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When my colleagues were debating this motion, I felt so sorry that we seem to be extremely reserved, to say the least. The motion is not seeking to give authority to the UPDF to get involved in an internal South Sudan war; neither is the motion seeking permission from the Parliament of Uganda to allow UPDF take sides in an internal conflict. Where there are interstate conflicts or intrastate conflicts for that matter, the causes range from greed to grievances internally, and we are not part of that and we are not going to be part of that. 

Madam Speaker, Ugandans are scattered all over South Sudan in Abyei, Aweil, Bentiu, Bor, Juba, Kaya, Malakal, Magwi, Maridi, Nimule, Rumbek, Wau, Yambio and Yei; they are all over South Sudan. As we speak, when this conflict broke out in Juba, there were Ugandans in jail and up to now they are still in jail in South Sudan and in many of these places. In the thick of this conflict, as a country we should be mindful of how we can engage with the Government of South Sudan to find an amicable way of adjudicating their cases.  

Ugandans that have been evacuated from South Sudan have left property in that country, and many of them have lost property and money and many lives have also been lost. To hear Members of Parliament of Uganda saying we are not part of that conflict, I feel – 

Madam Speaker, I strongly support the motion – (Interruption)

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order. Hon. Todwong has said that Members of Parliament seated here are saying they are not concerned and are not part of what is happening in South Sudan. I also know that we are aware of what happened when UPDF soldiers were deployed in the DRC. Uganda has a bad image there and we still have a debt to pay. Some Congolese still believe that Uganda – 

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of order in relation to this situation?

MR SSASAGA: The point of order is: Is hon. Todwong in order to say that we, Members of Parliament seated here, are saying we are not concerned with what is happening in South Sudan?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what the dispute is about. Please, conclude.

MR TODWONG: Madam Speaker, that is why you are always and will ever remain the Speaker.

In conclusion, the Minister of Defence stated that as we follow the events in South Sudan, Kony and ADF are being re-armed and that should make all of us concerned. I am deeply concerned because I grew up in conflict and I represent a constituency that has emerged out of conflict. The epicentre of the Northern Uganda conflict was in Acholi sub-region where I come from. These are issues that should make this Parliament, with its sovereignty, and understanding the geopolitics and the dynamics of the region well, stand firm behind the UPDF and indeed support the motion. Thank you.  

2.02
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to strongly support the motion. I support the motion because I am a neighbour to the DRC and I have seen a lot of mayhem being done to our people in the Rwenzori by the ADF because of our failure to curb them. Even up to now, they have a safe haven in the DRC where they are very active. The UN has failed to tame the rebel groups in the DRC to-date, allowing them to cause mayhem to the Congolese and displace them and yet these are the people who trade with us. So, trade has been affected as a result of the instability there.

For me, the proactive move by the UPDF is right. I recommend to you a book called The Bottom Billion by Collier. It brings out all these scenarios within the Great Lakes Region. Earlier on they made us, Ugandans, believe that we are landlocked but it is only recently, when we woke up and began learning how to make money, that we realised that we are land-connected. Now, if we cannot go and safeguard our economic interests, then we are doomed. All these visions we are talking about like Vision 2040 will be wasted. 

It is, therefore, very important, even if it means amending some of these laws. Some of these laws, which were made in 1995, did not take into consideration this growth; they did not take into consideration the fact that the East African Community must now get together into one bloc. 

These are issues of growth that we have to cope with. That is why it is timely that UPDF goes to protect our economy. Let us not hide behind issues like rescuing Ugandans; we should know that Uganda has a major economic interest in South Sudan. So, South Sudan’s instability affects us and thus, she is our business. That is why I would urge Parliament to support this move. 

In future, we should amend the Constitution to give provision for these kinds of emergencies where we have to act. This is because we must build our Africa and grow a middle class to compete with the Europeans and Chinese. (Member timed out.)

2.06
MR YONA MUSINGUZI (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to overwhelmingly support the motion and call upon the officer in charge to increase the troops a thousand-fold in South Sudan. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I am an ex-seminarian and everyone should know it from today. I did not want to come here but while I was reading the Bible, I came across the portion on the Good Samaritan. This is a story about someone who was beaten and left on the road to die. People who masqueraded as good religious people, like the Levites, came and bypassed him on the road but one man, who was construed to be a pagan and did not know about God – (Interjections) – No; hold on. The man was a Good Samaritan and he helped the dying person and he became better. Who do we credit now- the Levite, the religious person or the Good Samaritan?

Having said that, I have been reading in the media about Ugandan parents talking ill of UPDF’s involvement in South Sudan. I think these people love bloodshed. If they did not, they would not have made those comments and they should stop. 

There is a time I wanted to remove my shirt for this Parliament and I do not want to do it today. In 2007, I was in Rumbek, South Sudan, and I was shot around the ribs here. Madam Speaker, with your permission, I can undress here and you all see – (Interjections)- 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is against our rules to undress in the House.

MR MUSINGUZI: Since our Rules of Procedure do not allow us to do that – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, tell us how you were shot in one minute.

MR MUSINGUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was innocently doing my own business but these people shot me. If anyone in Uganda is a parent and does not want the UPDF to go and evacuate our people who may end up being shot like me, it is unfair. To those of us who are saying that our soldiers are dying in South Sudan, I want to say that I have my own brother there – I think Afande you know him, Col Masho - and he is at the Airport.

Those of you that are crying are like a stepmother crying at the tears of a baby when the mother is not crying. (Laughter) They should be there; increase them a thousand-fold. We have got to be there because Sudan is part of Africa and it is part of us. 

2.10
MR PATRICK NAKABAALE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. 

I would like to draw the Members’ attention to the following: Do we understand our country? When you check the records, over 200,000 Ugandans are in South Sudan or have been to South Sudan. I think there is no other country that has had such a large number of Ugandans. What does that mean? Uganda and South Sudan have a lot in common. If that is the case, one cannot dare stand and await negative effects in such a scenario. 

When we look at this, one would again ask: what is Uganda known for? Uganda is a country, and this is evident everywhere, that is peaceful and stable and we always stand in for peace. When it comes to our regional matters, I think we are taking the lead as far as stability and peaceful drives are concerned, and I would wish to draw Members’ attention to that. 

Given where we are, I think we should not be shy to say that we should not in any way allow colonisation to come back to Africa. Why should we wait for somebody to come from 1,000 miles away to help us with our problems in Africa? Indeed, if you go back to history, when the SPLM were still engaged in their struggle, they had support and they collaborated with the NRM. In the past, Tanzania also went to Seychelles and also came to Uganda to help us. Because of such a spirit of Pan-Africanism, even this time round we had to help out. 

One would ask how much we are paying for this. Again, if we recall the cost we incurred to get Kony out of Northern Uganda, would that cost be the same if we sat and waited for this Kony and other security threats to regroup – (Interruption)

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to give information to my colleague and the Parliament. I would like to ask us, what cost do we put to the lives of people who were massacred by Kony at Balonyo? What cost do we put to the lives of people that were massacred at Atiak and what cost do we attach to the people who were abducted - the Aboke girls? 

So, when talking about costs which are going to be incurred in Sudan, we should also look at the cost of lives of Ugandans that have perished because of Kony having safe havens in South Sudan and because of the ADF operating in DRC. We must consider all that if we are talking about costs. 

MR ALEPER: Thank you, my brother. Madam Speaker, I want to give further information regarding this matter. I want to make a contribution on the basis of Karamoja. Karamoja is at the border of Sudan and as we talk now, when my brother Nakabaale talks about costs, most of the colleagues here will agree with me that when South Sudan is unstable, the influx of small arms into Karamoja is high and the neighbours know this. When Karamoja is armed with small arms, the Acholi, the Langi and all the neighbouring tribes suffer. This is exactly why I will also support this motion, to avoid more costs to our country and the region as a leader from Karamoja. 

Honourable colleagues, just two days ago - I came back yesterday night because I wanted to contribute to this motion - two people were arrested by our UPDF. They came from Sudan and entered Karamoja with AK-47s and four pistols. What are those for? They want to sell arms to the Karimojong so that the Karimojong can cause havoc. Those warriors were disarmed and now the region is peaceful; we cannot go back to that situation. So, we need to support the UPDF in what they are doing. Thank you. That was the information I wanted to give.

MR NAKABAALE: Honourable colleagues, if you try to find out about the northern part of Uganda, when you go to the borders – (Member timed out.)

2.16
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On 13 July 2011, this Parliament debated a motion by hon. Hamson Obua congratulating the people of Southern - the Hansard mentioned Southern Sudan but it has since been corrected to South Sudan - on the attainment of their independence. This is what I said: 

“I do not want to spoil the party but marriages that have lasted are marriages where couples listen to counselling on the wedding day more than merrymaking. As you all realise, our newest brothers in South Sudan have just got their independence. Many African countries have had these moments and they have been moments of joy and moments of hope, but something terrible has happened along the way. So, as our brothers in South Sudan celebrate, remember the fate that has befallen many of our brother nations. 

The challenges you have of nation building are immense. You are going to fight the cancers, which have affected many of your colleagues before; the cancer of corruption, the cancer of sectarianism, the cancer of nepotism; mention it all. All these countries that are congratulating you have been victims; take note and look out.” 

That day, Madam Speaker, you were not in the chair; your deputy was. Officials from the Government of South Sudan then were in the gallery. It is as if we knew what was going to happen. I am not a fun of guns. I see people get excited about guns; I do not, especially when there are political problems. What is going on in South Sudan today is a political problem. The priority for all countries and IGAD, EU, the UN should be to find a political solution to this political problem. 

Nobody is condemning the UPDF or even the Commander-in-Chief for taking that step; nobody. Actually, we do congratulate the UPDF – (Applause) - because they did manage to rescue innocent citizens – Ugandans, Kenyans and so on. However, as political leaders, we have a responsibility because the Constitution has given us that responsibility. I feel so bad because the motion was brought by a person like Dr Kiyonga, and I will tell you why. Dr Kiyonga is one of the most reasonable people seated on that side. (Laughter) That you can bring a motion and imagine it is as an NRM affair without consulting this side – (Interruption) 

MR KIYINGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order. When my friend hon. Katuntu takes the Floor and says that hon. Kiyonga is one of the most reasonable people on this side, he implies that actually, many others are unreasonable – (Interjections) – It follows naturally. Is he in order to suggest that there are unreasonable people sitting on this side?

THE SPEAKER: He can substantiate. 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, reasonableness is my sense of judgement; even the Rules of Procedure cannot take it away. Actually, I regard Dr Kiyonga as the most reasonable Member of Parliament and minister in NRM; I do not hold the same view of hon. Kiyingi – (Laughter) – but that is my judgement. Having said that, as a country – (Interruption)

MR AYEPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way. Members have been talking about the reason for this fighting in South Sudan and our colleague is also saying it is a political problem. There is both a political and a military solution to this problem in South Sudan. What is happening in Ethiopia is a political solution. What should Uganda do? Should we wait to see people dying? That is the information I want to give – that there is both a political and military solution. 

MR KATUNTU: I have got the information and I do not see any contradiction. I have just said in the same breath that the UPDF should be congratulated, and I do not know why you are uneasy about it. 

However, I want to ask: where do we invest most? Let me tell you why I am very uneasy. Do not take the risk of becoming a protagonist in that struggle; it will be very dangerous. This is because the majority of the people who have been trading in South Sudan are ordinary people selling tomatoes, pineapples, water and eggs or doing boda boda trade. With that sort of trade, you relate directly with the ordinary South Sudanese whether they are Nuer or Dinka. Should we be seen participating in the ethnicity conflict there, then you cause problems for these Ugandans who trade there. Let us not be excited. 

Leadership demands maturity and patience to take a correct decision, which we will not regret tomorrow. The ordinary Kibuuka Muwanga trading in eggs in Juba may enter into conflict with a one Biyeng of the Nuer Tribe who thinks Ugandans have come in to support a certain faction. This is the sort of information that hon. Wadri was giving. 

Let me tell you, honourable members, and the Rt Hon Prime Minister knows this, for three years I was the chairperson of the Pan African Parliamentary Peace Mission to Darfur. From Nyala to El Geneina, Kabkabiya to El Fasher – including a place called Abeche in Chad - I was on those planes with the SLM – Sudan Liberation Movement, not SPLA - and I was with the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM). The situation in Sudan is a very complex one. Do you know how we eventually solved it to the extent we did? We had a report and we had a discussion with the UN committee that was set up. Maybe the action of the UN Security Council on indictment arose out of our effort. So, the question of Sudan is not about Uganda; it is a very complex one. I would like to caution the UPDF; be cautious of the intricacies of the volatile situation in that country called Sudan. 

Lastly, I felt so bad when Gen. Jeje told us that “For us as Generals, we hit enemies from there and so on.” In situations like this, we need to be diplomatic. There should be no big brother between us and South Sudan because it causes resentment. (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR KATUNTU: Let me end with a quote. This is what I said: “I know there are many countries that contributed to the independence of South Sudan, but let our brothers crawl and learn to walk on their own; do not patronise them. Do not say, ‘if it were not for us, you would not be independent’ because it has happened before. Do not call them boys.” 

Do not call them boys because it will cause a problem with South Sudanese themselves against us or even against the Army. Yes, they could have weaknesses in their institutions, but let us not be arrogant to think we are the superior people to sort out that problem. That is a big mistake. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Wafula to conclude on behalf of the Leader of the Opposition. 

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your guidance. Having listened to the motion and the debate, and aware of the importance of Parliament pronouncing itself on this matter, I think we should be seen as Parliament to support our army and also act in the humanitarian interest of our neighbours. Also, because of the proposed amendments by different Members and the revelation from the Minister of Defence that Sudan has taken sides, wouldn’t it be advisable to give these different voices, including those of the Opposition, 30 minutes to propose their amendments so that we do not start debating amendments here? That would take us more than an hour. 

We could some point of reason, some point of confluence, where these good intentions are incorporated, more so in the area of the scope and having UPDF regularly reporting to the House, even if it is every three months.  We could then come up with a much more acceptable parliamentary position before we just go into the voting. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you are jumping the gun. I invited hon. Wafula to speak the final word on behalf of the Opposition. I was clear that hon. Wafula would speak on behalf of the Opposition. So, he will tell us what they want to do.  That is why he is here.

2.30
MR WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition is out of the country; he is in America. So, I will say some words on behalf of the Leader of the Opposition and the Opposition. 

Before I go to the motion, I would like to express our concern about one of us, hon. Betty Nambooze, who was coming to Parliament this morning and she was stopped at Namanve by the Police. The Police said she could not proceed to come to Kampala. She was told to go back home or she gets arrested. This is our concern and I hope the Government will explain themselves concerning that.

This motion is an important one for the country as we have been called from our recess. Ordinarily, it would be a bipartisan motion because it is about our children, our people, our citizens, our businesses and our properties in a neighbouring country. We are not opposed to our soldiers going to help our people in that respect. Actually, we would like to thank the Government, the UPDF, and owners of lorries who have collectively helped in evacuating about 48,000 Ugandans from South Sudan including nationals of other countries. This is from the report we were given here. 

However, we go as far as that. We support this process as long as it is for evacuation of our citizens from that country because of that crisis. We are asking Government that we need to look at this together because ordinarily, when a country is going to war - this is not war but more or less similar circumstances - leaders consult. You are sending my child, you are going to use my taxes, you are going to use my tanks and my guns as a citizen, so consult. You represent Ugandans on that side and we represent Ugandans on this side. 

We should learn to work together so that we are not fighting each other all the time. How would it look if a matter like this goes out - that Parliament of Uganda is fighting and now we have become Dinka and Nuer? We are not; that is a matter of South Sudan.

We are deeply concerned about the safety of our people and their property in South Sudan. However, this conflict is a result of, I think, bad governance in that country and some confusion within the leadership of that country. By sending our troops to South Sudan when, more or less, a president had carried out a palace coup against his own Government when, as we have been given information, the head of the army and a big chunk of the army have rebelled against him, we are simply saying that we must keep an elected but a puppet government.

We do not have sufficient resources as a country to maintain another country in the neighbourhood. We have heard here about genocide. I would like to ask the Prime Minister or the Minister of Defence to throw more light on this question of genocide in South Sudan because the President of that country said there is no tribal fighting in that country. He said it is a political question. Is it a political question that is turning into genocide? 

Who is killing who? As far as we have heard, the people are killing each other; both sides are killing. We have read a UN dispatch saying the government has killed and the rebels have killed. Do we want to get into that, and backing one side? We should get into that under a mandate that is known internationally.

I was horrified by the statement of the Minister of State for Defence and the General, and that is why maybe we should not have our soldiers in this Parliament. Ordinarily, they should not be making the statements they are making. Gen. Katumba, whom I love, and Gen. Jeje Odongo, who is my friend and whom I love, should not be making the statements they are making as key military people. 

The statement of Gen. Jeje Odongo is a declaration, more or less, of war, or a warning to neighbours that “this is our home” and he has the mandate; if this is not expunged, it is like Parliament is giving him permission to go and build perimeter walls around Uganda but far away. Of course, a perimeter wall must be far away from your house. So, Gen. Jeje Odongo would like to build a perimeter wall through people’s capitals. 

This is something, which has serious implications. This is an army commander and this is a minister of defence who is also a four-star General. So, we must be careful. We have been told that we went there to rescue Ugandans but the presentation by our Generals is that we must attack and go and stop the security problem if we hear it is going to come to our country. So, we went to South Sudan because we wanted to stop war from being brought to Kampala. That is the reason I got from the two Generals.

Hon. Otengo said the people of Northern Uganda would like us to go to South Sudan and send troops there. However, we were told this morning when we had a meeting that the people of Northern Uganda do not want our soldiers to take sides in South Sudan. Much as they want us to go there and keep peace at the border, they do not want us –(Interruption)

MS ADONG: Madam Speaker, the honourable member on the Floor is saying the people of Northern Uganda do not support the deployment of UPDF – (Interjections) - Taking sides. As far as I know, the people of Northern Uganda are all happy because they want the UPDF to keep our security. 

The Member on the Floor does not come from the epicentre of the war. Is he in order to misrepresent the opinion of the people of Northern Uganda?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, I think what the hon. Wafula was saying was that they support the deployment but they should not be on any particular side; it should be neutral.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much for the wise ruling, Madam Speaker. This is not the first time Uganda is sending soldiers outside this country without first seeking approval from this Parliament. This is the fourth time. Every time it is an emergency and every time the President does it. The first was Rwanda then Congo, South Sudan, back to Congo and now South Sudan again – (Interjections) – even Somalia. One time I was told even the army commander did not know the second time we went to Congo.

I would like to appeal to the President of the Republic of Uganda. As long as we have these laws in place, as long as we have the rule law, which he says he protects, as long as he has sworn by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, he should just be courteous and do the right thing so that we do not seem to fight on the obvious. It is something we have always begged him to do and we are speaking for the fourth time. He should respect Parliament. 

I heard the Speaker on TV talking about a letter. This declared date - the date when we went to South Sudan - might even be fake. I heard you very well, Madam Speaker. I was in the village and I heard you speak on TV and there was a conflict over when they wrote to you the letter. We should not have gone to that. The Speaker’s Office and the President’s office share a wall; a letter cannot take 12 days. There is something wrong with the operations of Government. How did that happen? That a letter took 12 days to reach the Speaker; there is a problem.

How many Ugandans were in South Sudan and where are they? We are going for a rescue mission, so you must know where you are going to carry out the rescue. How many Ugandans were in South Sudan, which towns are they in, how many are remaining there, how many have been killed, how many have returned, including our soldiers? All these questions need to be answered because we are in the villages and they are asking us about our people. There are six kids from my village in that place and they are missing. I know the size of South Sudan is like East Africa, therefore it is difficult to secure completely; I know that.

However, we have not seen or read this agreement that has been laid on the Table. We do not know what is in it. We would like that agreement to be read to this House before we can move forward on with this. This agreement is important because it is a Status of Forces Agreement dated 10th of this month. It was signed when we were one month old in that country. We would like to know how long the evacuation process is going to take. How long are you going to have our soldiers in that country because you cannot just go indefinitely?

We need a budget. We would like to know if we are spending Ministry of Defence money or Ministry of Health money. Which money are we spending, because the Government decided to spend?

This is an issue of us always being the ones going in with soldiers. In South Sudan, there are nationals of Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Egypt, CAR and Congo.  Eritrea is neighbour of South Sudan; they have their nationals there and they never sent their troops there with tanks and APCs and choppers. Maybe it is because, as was said by the hon. Minister of Defence, the President asked us to go and help.

Why can’t we also spare this money for our hospitals? Every time we are the ones going to fight; why? We are concerned about that. This does not mean that we are opposing what is being done but we are saying, can’t we spare our resources for own social services instead of going all the time? Others can also go and help; why us only?

We would like the motion to be amended to show that we are there for evacuation for a period of one month from the day we passed this motion, with regular updates from the Ministry of Defence. We would also like the minister to pray that the two sides of South Sudan work towards reconciliation. We do not support our soldiers fighting to prop up a government which might collapse on its own when we leave. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, join me in welcoming Ms Ann Platon, head of the political section of the European Union. She has come to attend the proceedings. You are welcome.

Let me invite the Attorney-General, if there are any legal issues he wishes to respond to and then the Deputy Prime Minister.

2.48
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I stand to support the motion and to re-echo the words that have been articulated in commending the Head of State and Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces and indeed, this House for demonstrating this kind of strength. This is the strength of Pan Africanism; it is indeed, a sign of strength as a country not only in the leadership.

I want to give a small example. By the time we came to the basis we had for this motion, we had also gone through a chequered history. Lawyers in this House must have interacted with the popular case in the law of torts while in law schools, Njareketa’s case. This man was a milk vendor in the 60’s and he got a problem with his leg. He was hospitalised and the leg became septic and the doctor wanted to amputate it but he first sought the consent of the patient. At first, he gave his consent but later retracted it. When he retracted it, the leg became completely septic and the doctor, on humanitarian grounds, went ahead to amputate. The man recovered but lost his leg and went to court against Government.

In the court of first instance, he was given damages to about the tune of Shs 4,000. In the 60’s, you know what that meant. He said this was not enough and he appealed. On appeal, the appellate court reversed that decision and said, “You man, this doctor saved your life on humanitarian grounds. Yes, there was technical trespass on your body, for which we give you one cent. Forget the Shs 4000; you deserve one cent because your life was saved.” So, sometimes, you may have a brush with the law but you look at the bigger picture. 

Sometimes, this is why such challenges inform the future - the future in the sense that at one point you may need to revise or amend such laws. I believe if the UPDF Act was to be enacted today, I am sure we would have included amendments to suit this kind of situation. However, without prejudice to that, I am confident that the provisions of the law that we brought on the Floor as the basis of this motion are legally sound. We went through that process after a lot of consultations.

Madam Speaker, the debate was good and I want to commend you because keeping security of your country sometimes does not only revolve within your territorial boundaries. I wish my colleague was still around – hon. Sseggona - because he cited Article 209, and when you say that you preserve and protect territorial integrity of your country, the expression “territorial integrity” has been debated; a lot of research has been done on what constitutes territorial integrity. 

I want to give you a simple example. The International Court of Justice has held that the scope of the principle of territorial integrity is confined to the sphere of relations between states. It is not confined to your territorial boundaries but to the sphere of relations between states. You agree, like we have agreed with South Sudan, for the deployment of troops to ensure that not only security – I agree entirely, that it may be a political question, but I believe that that a political question can best be handled in a stable environment.

Madam Speaker, of course, we have heard about many areas of engagement. We have even heard of hot pursuits. We all know when red ants attack you in a home, you sometimes can burn up to the borders of your neighbour but they will still come back. Sometimes, you may wish to go a little bit beyond and get them in their own anthill and destroy them from there so that they do not come back.

Madam Speaker, I was intrigued by the submission of my brother and friend, hon. Kwizera, on the condition for payment, condition for supporting them and the condition being that they should first pay our debts. This is very interesting. I liken it to a situation where you find a patient - whether you are a doctor or just a well-wisher - on an oxygen tube but that patient owes you money and you say that before you help them in any way, they must first pay back your money. (Laughter) To me, that would amount to being callous, to say the least.

Even the argument of issuing blank cheques by way of this motion, to me is not a tenable argument. This is because the motion was moved and spoken to by the mover, giving all the necessary reasons and its scope. The seconders did the same and this debate did the same. (Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, given that the Attorney-General is on the Floor, maybe he has more information about the agreement that was made between our country and South Sudan. So, can he give us more information about what is in the agreement? I am asking this because there is a letter that was laid on the Table; I would like to know whether what we are passing is in conformity with that letter.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, we have already agreed that the Minister of Defence will give more information on that. In conclusion – (Mr Kwizera rose_)

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, we need to conclude this debate. Please, minister, continue.

MR KWIZERA: He referred to me and I think it is in order to seek clarification. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, proceed, minister.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, in conclusion, I want to say that I do not know how many of us would get into their beds and sleep comfortably when our neighbours are mourning. I can assure you, if any one of us did that, then I do not know what that person would be. 

This, of course, elucidates what hon. Otada said. This is a Government challenged by an attempted coup d’état and is seeking support from a neighbour. Attempted coups are prohibited under the African Union Charter, even in our own Constitution. If a neighbour is seeking your support, by the time you go through all the formalities to get there to help, the government will be no more. So, sometimes, there is need to be proactive and take immediate action, and of course, come to our partners in development and in this process and seek the necessary support.

With those few remarks, Madam Speaker, I beg to support the motion.

2.58
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank you for convening this sitting. Further, I would like to thank the President for asking Parliament to convene this sitting.

Before I go further, I would like to react to hon. Katuntu’s assessment of this side of the House, where he said that the honourable Dr Kiyonga is one of the most reasonable Members on this side. In the same vein and applying my own judgement, I want to say that hon. Katuntu is one of the most unreasonable Members on the opposite side. (Laughter) So, hon. Kiyingi should actually settle down; that is how to handle these matters. 

Madam Speaker, I have followed the debate with appreciation and I thank everybody who participated. All that has been said is really necessary and it contributes to the motion. I want to thank everybody for supporting this motion in advance. Although few have said they do not, I feel like my brother from the mountains definitely, although he did not say, must have supported. So, I want to thank him in particular. (Laughter)

I am going to say something a little different but still related, and that is on the sequence of events prior to the Naivasha Comprehensive Agreement. there was conflict between the North and the South which was led by the then late Colonel John Garang, who led SPLM/A. Now, the Naivasha agreement actually ended something very historical and significant – the perpetual conflict between the North and the South, which was based on religion basically. They said that they used religion as a basis of the conflict but that agreement put to an end that conflict that had gone on for many years.

Another very important factor that also ended was that northern Sudan was a common enemy like colonialism was the common enemy among people in Africa who were fighting colonialism. Northern Sudan became the common enemy and people never thought about their difficulties and problems because they were fighting a common enemy in the north –(Interjection)- I am speaking about something that did not come out – (Interjections)- It does not matter, really. 
 
The Naivasha Comprehensive Agreement now ended two things but created another. It brought independence to the South and that meant the common enemy became irrelevant. So, now this war is a result of the Naivasha agreement because it never took into account what would happen if these people got independence. So, this is exactly what has happened. 

This war was not unexpected. It was expected. Some of us were even following this situation. By the way, I am from the North, bordering Sudan, – (Interjections) – Okay, I cannot deny it, originally.

Now that this war has happened, actually we could say it is a blessing in disguise that it happened now. It is a blessing in disguise because there was also an intervention by the UPDF and the Commander-in-Chief to bring about relative peace, which necessitated dialogue. If you take note of those sitting to talk in Addis Ababa, it involves so many superpowers and that is very important because this war in Sudan cannot only be solved by the gun but also by dialogue. The fact that Uganda has created that atmosphere, which has led to dialogue, we must be thanked, and if you do not thank Uganda, I will thank Uganda on your behalf –(Interjections)– Another unreasonable one here. (Laughter)

MR NZOGHU:  Madam Speaker, I am at crossroads. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Gen. Moses Ali, is actually a face of Government and therefore, I must communicate sensibly. (Laughter) What is really putting me at crossroads is whether he, as a face of Government, should actually portray as if Government is ridiculing and trying to abuse Members, which is actually against the Rules of Procedure. 

Is he, therefore, in order to make such reckless statements and yet he is the face of Government? He even knows that he is a problem and we are not in Addis-Ababa.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, stick to the motion and conclude, please.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, if this information is not relevant, I am sorry. However, I think it is very important for Members, who should have actually got this information from their iPads. Since they have not, I did it on their behalf and so, I am sharing with them - (Laughter) - and I want to thank you for this point of order raised. We hope this dialogue in Addis-Ababa really leads to another more comprehensive agreement and this time solves the problem of South Sudan itself, so that this issue does not come up again. 

In conclusion, I want to talk about the effect of refugees in the North. I am referring to the spontaneous refugees, who are not even registered; they come directly to the villages and settle and the authorities do not know what is happening and the Police is overwhelmed. This has become a very big problem. So, even though we are intervening, we also need to ask the Police and the Army to deploy and handle these people who are settling on their own among the Ugandans because we do not know what happens there. Our security people should take it up. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Before the Minister for Defence comes in, I just want to say that last week I received two Members of Parliament from South Sudan and one of their requests was that the conflict should not be seen as one between the Nuer and the Dinka, and that any formation should involve the other 50 tribes. They wanted to involve the other 50 tribes as stakeholders and they wanted us to pass on that message to you and to the Addis Ababa people. Please take the Floor, Minister.

3.10
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank colleagues for the very deep and lively debate. 

I think like hon. Oguttu and hon. Katuntu said, the matter of security, the matter of our neighbours being destabilised, is a common good and, therefore, should be discussed as a bipartisan issue. Yes, we stopped short of having formal consultations with the leadership of the Opposition; I plead guilty on that omission. When we deployed in Somalia, we engaged deeply with Prof. Ogenga-Latigo on that question and I think that helped. Nevertheless, we did go to the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs and we also had a lively discussion there. 

So, while I plead guilty on that omission, I would like, through the acting Leader of the Opposition, to send a message that when a national issue like this one happens, there is no harm in the Opposition seeking to consult with the Government. You could say, “We heard of this issue, how do you suggest we move?” However, in the future, that gap will certainly be closed. 

The second point that has been hammered by a number of colleagues is on the issue of neutrality as far as the political contest in the Republic of South Sudan is concerned. That is very important, and we are all observing that. You saw in the press that President Museveni went to Juba and met President Salva Kiir, just like other heads of state do, and you also saw press reports that Mrs Garang had met President Museveni. In the political equation in the Republic of South Sudan, Mrs Garang is on the opposition. So, at least, what you saw publicly, that Mrs Garang had a chance to meet President Museveni, indicates that the leadership of this country is ready to listen to both parties in the contest.

Having made those two points, let me underscore what I said before; the lives of people were, and still are, at stake in that crisis. We think we have evacuated most of our Ugandans and some have come back on their own. 

That genocide was looming is also a reality. Many people have referred to history; I think it was in 1991 or 1992 in Bor in Jonglei when 2,000 Dinka people were killed on an ethnic basis. Do not forget about that. That has remained in the hearts of the people in South Sudan. So, you would imagine that when an opportunity arose, people would want to take revenge, unless reconciliation has taken place. So, that point has been made – there are lives at stake and I can say that there are still risks to the lives in that situation.

Madam Speaker, I think we have a dilemma as regards the situation in South Sudan. On one hand, there are political differences in that country and Uganda, through the President, is on the side of calling for a political settlement of differences. That is why participating through IGAD, the President supported the dialogue that has started in Addis Ababa and we are not going to depart from that stand. The people of South Sudan should sit down together and look at what has caused them to disagree and fight and see how best to settle it.

This conflict has resulted into two things – the army, SPLA, is itself split vertically; one part is on the government side and the other on the rebellion side. That poses a danger in that country. At the same time, the enemies who would want to hit us and have in the past used that country can see a gap to use in order to attack us. So, while we should leave the people of South Sudan to sort out their political differences and also handle their security situation, we also must take measures to ensure that the gap arising due to this conflict does not endanger our security. This is a real dilemma. Yes, we are there to evacuate our nationals but also to close a gap that may arise and expose our own security to more danger. So, friends, we need to note that. 

From this, my understanding is that we have had a rich discussion and everybody agrees that deploying the UPDF in South Sudan was called for and timely. Because of this, we have been able to rescue a good number of Ugandans and we applaud that action.

I want to take this opportunity – I am sure the Prime Minister will expound on this – to say that we remain actively co-operating with our brothers and sisters in South Sudan to encourage them on the path of dialogue, so that they can find a lasting solution to their political conflict. So, I do hope and pray that Members support the President’s action and I will keep the House informed of the developments on this question. Thank you.

3.18
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I rise to support the motion. Essentially, most of the points have been made and I thank you, Members, for unanimously supporting the Motion. (Applause) Although I heard some – (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow him to say what he wants to say because he has just started. So, please, take your seats and maintain some order.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Although I heard some issues being raised, for instance, on the legality – questions are being asked about the agreement, I think the baseline is that support of the action by the UPDF is unanimous. I thank you for that. (Applause)

Of course, I will add my voice to those that have thanked the UPDF under the command of the President for the timely intervention in South Sudan to take care of Uganda’s interests first and foremost, and to provide a situation that is helpful to humanity as a whole. Madam Speaker, I would say I do not recollect any force in Africa in the recent or distant past that has demonstrated this capacity - the capacity at short notice to respond rapidly to a situation developing outside its borders, do it efficiently, effectively and save lives successfully. 

So, I want to use this opportunity to add mine to the many voices that have expressed gratitude, admiration and congratulations to our force for having done what it did. All should understand, without exception, that we in Uganda have built capacity and we shall use it to defend our interests - [Hon. Member: “Where necessary.”] - I accept that amendment, where necessary. 

I did not want to repeat what others have said but I thought there are two issues that I should respond to. One is on the necessity to act in the way we did. What we did is not exactly a pre-emptive action. In international practice, there is something called pre-emptive war or pre-emptive action, where in case the interests of a country are threatened or there is a threat imminent in another territory, that country that is threatened acts pre-emptively to prevent the inevitable injury that would occur if they did not act like that. 

I would like to remind colleagues that the Republic of South Sudan now, when it was Southern Sudan as part of the bigger Sudan, was the centre, the base, the springboard from which terror was imposed on Uganda for many years. We all know that. As you all know, we have our forces in the Central African Republic. We have pursued the LRA through South Sudan, northern Democratic Republic of Congo and we now are in the Central African Republic where we have absolutely no doubt that finally, we shall destroy this force; we have absolutely no doubt about this. 

What would the imminent danger then be if South Sudan became ungovernable, ungoverned and unstable or if the forces that had originally been responsible for supporting the LRA in the first place to inflict terror on Uganda from that territory were actually to be the forces in control? Obviously, this would be a danger. It would be a danger of repeating what our people have suffered in the many years, things that have been relegated to the past because of the reactions of the NRM and the UPDF. Therefore, it was necessary that we act now in order to prevent that. Of course, this is in addition to what everyone has been saying, that we had to act to rescue our people. Our own traders, our own nationals, were scattered all over and we acted quickly and successfully rescued them. 

Was this done lawfully? I think that is the question. The Attorney-General has made a very good and clear response on that question. I just want to add my voice to what he said. Hon. Sseggona quoted Article 209 of our Constitution, which is on functions of the defence forces. He quoted all the four functions, but the relevant one was (a), which says the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces is “to preserve and defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Uganda”. He continued to say that this must be done within the four corners of Uganda. 

Well, hon. Sseggona is a brave man, but to try and amend the Constitution on this Floor of Parliament like that is beyond bravery. (Laughter)  To preserve and defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Uganda does not limit you to an area from where you can do that. You can do it within the four corners of the country or you can do it beyond. That is why even today, we are in the Central African Republic in hot pursuit of those who threaten the territorial integrity of Uganda.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the Prime Minister for giving way. I was present when hon. Sseggona made his submission and he did emphasise that actually, the four corners he was referring to are the four core functions, which are in the Constitution, and not the four corners of Uganda. It is the four functions, which are outlined here in Article 209 in the Constitution. That is what he said. It would be unfair for hon. Sseggona to be misquoted when he is not in the House and yet I was around and he gave his submission clearly, Madam Speaker. That is the clarification that I want to give.

THE SPEAKER: Moreover, when you are even standing up.  (Laughter) Please, conclude.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for giving way. I was listening in and that statement was echoed by Dr Kiyonga, and it is on the Hansard. It is to the effect that the UPDF and Government cannot tolerate those forces, which were responsible for the past instability to come back to South Sudan. In this situation, apparently one side, Salva Kiir’s side, is taken to be the legitimate side and that of Machar is responsible for that chapter. 

Can this be clarified? Are we there as a country, as Uganda, to ensure that Riek Machar, because of his background and his history, is a target of our operation and therefore, must not be allowed back in charge of South Sudan? Are we there to ensure that we protect Salva Kiir, and to what extent, if that statement is indeed true as the Prime Minister has said? 

THE SPEAKER: Prime minister, please, conclude. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I thank hon. William Nzoghu, which means elephant. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, my good friend and brother, hon. Nzoghu - those who do not know, that name actually means big elephant - (Laughter) - tried to summarise what hon. Sseggona said. Certainly, among the many things he said, is what I have repeated here. I am simply making the point that under international law, it is recognised that you can defend your sovereignty even beyond your own boundaries. 

Now, Article 210 provides that Parliament shall make laws regulating UPDF, especially in deployment of troops outside Uganda. As was explained before, the Uganda People’s Defence Forces Act, 2005 was enacted by this House and it provides as follows: Under deployment of troops outside Uganda, there are two sections. Deployment of troops outside is under section 39 and it says, “(1) The President may deploy troops outside Uganda for purposes of-
(a) peacekeeping; or
(b) peace enforcement. 

(2) Deployment of troops for purposes of peace keeping shall be done with the approval of Parliament.” 

Now, this was deliberate. Someone may think it was a mistake, but it was deliberate. 

By the way, what is peace keeping and peace enforcement? These are defined in section 2 of the same Act as follows: “Peace enforcement means the deployment of troops under Chapter 7 of the United Nations Charter; peace keeping means the deployment of troops under Chapter 6 of the United Nations Charter.” These are regulated. 

Peace keeping under chapter six is about pacific settlement of disputes; this means through peaceful means, through dialogue, you reach an agreement and you need friends to come and keep your peace. So, there must be peace between the belligerents and then you go there to help them keep the peace, which they have reached. Obviously, this is not the case here; we have not had peacekeeping in South Sudan because the situation has not yet been resolved by the belligerents.  

Peace enforcement on the other hand, under chapter seven of the UN Charter, means imposing the will of the international community to restore international peace and security. So you do not need to have an agreement or peace between the parties; you actually go there in order to establish peace and security by force. As you know, this is what happened in Somalia. Again, this has not happened here.

All these are regulated by the United Nations Charter and practices over the years. This section is not applicable in the situation in the Republic of South Sudan; neither peace keeping nor peace enforcement exist in the situation that has arisen in the South Sudan today. 

The second provision dealing with deployment of troops outside Uganda is in Section 40 and it reads as follows: “Where troops are to be deployed outside Uganda under a multilateral or bilateral arrangement with other countries, the Minister shall enter into an agreement in this section referred to as a Status of Forces Agreement with the host country or organisation.” The presentation of this motion under section 40, therefore, is because this is exactly what happened. Uganda was invited by the Government of the Republic of South Sudan to deploy UPDF in South Sudan. Uganda responded positively and an agreement has been signed between the Minister of Defence, as the law commands, and the Government of South Sudan. 

A copy of the agreement is here. The content of that agreement is as in all status of forces agreements all over the world; they cover basic things – (Interruption) 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, it will be very difficult for us to decide on this matter unless we know the full contents of those agreements. I requested that the agreement be read so that we can know what is in it so that we can take a decision. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the agreement has been laid on the Table; it is property of this House. I will be assigning the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs to study it and report to this House. Please, conclude. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Okay, this agreement is here and it is not going to change. The basic content is to define the status of our forces in the hosting territory, which is South Sudan. It talks about the laws that apply to them while they are there. It states that whereas they must respect the local laws, the laws that actually govern their conduct are laws of Uganda and they would be tried by Ugandan courts. It also mentions tax liability and other things like that. It is a typical standard Status of Forces Agreement, which I know about because I have been engaged in writing and signing them before.

Section 40 is on the deployment of troops by Government – of course, by the commander-in-chief - outside Uganda under Article 210, paragraph (d). Every action that has been taken therefore, by the President and this Government, is consistent and in full conformity with the laws of Uganda. I thought I should explain this so that there is no doubt at all. 

Finally, I agree, as has been demonstrated here, that this is a matter that should not divide us. This is a case where unity of Ugandans must be demonstrated. We do not know the political affiliations of the people out there – our traders who were rescued. Maybe they are DP, - you never know - maybe they are CP or independents, or maybe they are from where I used to belong, where I left my sister, – (Laughter) – the bottom line is that they are Ugandans. So, we as Ugandan leaders have an obligation to act together in unity to protect them. (Applause) 

I am very grateful that today we have demonstrated that unity. Although we have raised a few questions for clarification, which clarifications we have given and which we are ready to give even in future any time, as I said, it is obvious that we are all together in this.

Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I just want to say that it is not that we are not conscious of the need for bipartisan arrangements, but as you know, we were not near the - I actually tried to get to the Leader of the Opposition, my brother. I have been dealing with him directly. I did not know that my comrade, Wafula, was in charge but in future, we will do better. I just want to re-echo the point made by the Minister of Defence that we will make every effort. Please, do reciprocate that as well. When an issue like this comes, let us meet, discuss it and take a common position. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. Honourable members and the Government, we have dealt with the situation of deployment before but during the debate, Members raised the matter of internal management of those people coming in with arms, their locations. I think you also need to address that so that it is managed properly. Otherwise, they will go to Moroto and cause havoc or donate guns in Busoga and so on. 

Honourable members, I put the question that this House do approve the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I direct the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to remain abreast of this matter and to report to us any further developments when the House resumes. House adjourned to 18 February 2014. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 3.42 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 18 February 2014.)

