

Wednesday, 11 January 2018

Parliament met at 2.15 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. You will recall that we are implementing a new law on the budget and it imposes some timelines on what this Parliament should do and when it should do it.

The law says that the National Budget Framework Paper should be submitted to Parliament by 31 December. I think this time round, it came earlier around the 28th of December which is a plus for the ministry responsible. 

This framework paper is supposed to be examined by the committees of the House which are then supposed to submit their reports and recommendations in the Budget Committee by the 20th of this month. Thereafter, the Budget Committee is supposed to come back to the House by the end of the month. You can see that the timelines are very tight.

I will be making the appropriate communication towards the end of this sitting to notify you of what we are going to do starting from today, up to when we conclude the business with the budget framework paper and the recommendations from the House when we take a decision. I am outlining it properly so that we know how we are exactly going to proceed in handling the budget framework paper. Thank you.

2.18
MS MARY BABIRYE (DP, Woman Representative, Masaka): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. Honourable members, I would like to report on the killing of people in the greater Masaka region and especially in Masaka District. The killings started in February 2017 where Augustine Mutagubya of Gayaza Village was killed, on 31 March 2017, Manisur Kizito of Kyabakuza was also killed and many were left injured.

On 15 March 2017, Mpugwa Village was also attacked and Meshack Kaddu Mayanja and many others were seriously injured. On the 5th of September at Kabonera Village, two people, Godfrey Mujumba and Ibrahim Kulabako were killed. On the 17th of December, five people were seriously injured and Fausta Namayanja was killed.  On 31 December 2017 in Bukomansimbi, five people were killed including Dennis Sebugwawo, a retired police officer, Jane Nantale, John Sseremba, Nancy Nafu and Godfrey Kiyemba. Another 12 people were seriously injured of whom Diana and Charles Kintu are still in critical condition.

When the President of the Republic of Uganda visited Bukomansimbi on the 3rd of January, he made a financial contribution to the families of the deceased.

Mr Speaker, my request and prayer is:

    1. That those families that lost their beloved ones be accorded the same financial assistance.
    2. I request that our Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs visits the greater Masaka especially in Masaka District and do investigations. 

We would like an independent report because the Police who are doing the investigations need to be investigated too. We have read in the newspapers that among the arrested suspects are two policemen. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government? Are the finance people negotiating or something?

2.22
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, that is what we call dangerous substitution; we work as a Government and we share some of these issues.

First of all, I think we need to formally send a message to the people of greater Masaka who have lost their dear ones through these brutal activities of some bad elements within our society. 

Mr Speaker, I suggest we observe a moment of silence for the lives lost and also send a message to the people who have lost their dear ones – (Interjections) - before we come to who killed them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been requested and granted. Let us rise.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

MR KASAIJA: May the good Lord rest the deceased in eternal peace. The Government abhors this sad trend and I would like to confirm to this House - because some of these matters come to our attention as your finance minister particularly in-charge of this economy. These events portray a bad picture of the country to the outside world, leave alone inside the country –(Interruption) 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, the member for Masaka District rose on a matter of national importance about the killings in Masaka. She wants an investigation by a committee of this Parliament; but she also wants the people who have been affected to be helped. The minister is using this as a talk show opportunity to express himself so widely about issues he must say when we are considering the budget. 

I do not even know whether he is now speaking as the Government Chief Whip, the Leader of Government Business or just a volunteer. We saw them talking to each other before he said, “Bahati, let me also take this opportunity to shine.” 

Mr Speaker, is he in order to waste Parliament’s time by sharing general information about finance instead of answering specific questions or apologising or making an undertaking that the relevant minister will come and brief Parliament? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When a person is in charge of the purse, sometimes we give them the latitude because maybe they are going to announce big things about compensation. (Laughter) However, he is taking too long to come to that. 

MR KASAIJA: Thank you. I will not handle the question of Parliament going to investigate. I think that is for you, Mr Speaker. 

On the question of compensation of the people who lost their dear ones as my sister there proposed, we are going to look into that one and the needful will be done.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a matter of procedure. These killings have not happened in greater Masaka alone but also in Wakiso, Teso and Northern Uganda. The killings have been all over the country. The method of killing is the same. 

By the way, it even has an ethnic bias in the greater Masaka because a certain ethnic group is being targeted and this requires broader investigation. 

Now for the finance minister to imagine that he is going to pay some condolences to families in Masaka without really making a commitment for the whole country that they will get to the depth of these causes is wrong. It is so disheartening because last week the information we were getting from Masaka, when the President and the IGP camped there, is that they were arresting Police officers who are a part of these murders. 

In Masaka, they have arrested the DPC and the OC/CID of Mitete Subcounty. Therefore, these are deep matters so much that members of our security apparatus are behind these killings and they are being arraigned before the courts of law. 

Therefore, we demand something broader than just a commitment from the finance minister simply to pay condolences in form of what we call Mabugo in Buganda. It is something bigger than this. 

The procedural point I am making in light of that is that we need either of the two:

    1. An elaborate statement from the Government about the state of security of our people; or  
    2. Whether Parliament, within its own powers, can allow the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to go to these areas and come up with a comprehensive report that can inform Government on the way forward. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was in the chair when a demand was made for the ministers to make a statement on the killings. That time the killings were around the areas of Wakiso and Entebbe and a statement was indeed made here. This House takes this matter seriously. You recall that day, we had to suspend proceedings until the statement was made. That shows that the House is serious about these matters. 

What the honourable member for Masaka raised, however, was very specific. It was specific that a House committee should do something. Secondly, that the affected families should be looked at favourably. 

That is the aspect that has been dealt with by the minister and I do not think the minister stood to deliver a “State of the security of this country” when he rose. The minister came and dealt with that specific issue which he thought he could handle. What he did not do, however, is to make a commitment on what would be done generally - but it was not asked, unfortunately by the honourable member.

She was specific about the killings in Masaka and that the House should do something about it and that some compensation should be given to the families affected like it has been done elsewhere. I think that was the prayer. If we are going to do something about that later, that is another matter but that is what the Member had requested and I think that the minister proceeded properly to deal with those.

The issue that is coming out now is that there is some kind of distress in the whole country. There is some situation that needs to be looked at more carefully. The member for Kitgum has said it has happened in Kitgum. I do not know what the member for Kalungu wants to say but if he wants to give procedure, I am not going to allow procedure at this time because that is what I am doing right now. 

Let us do it this way; let the minister do an assessment and deal with the specific prayers that the honourable member has referred to and the rest of the other matters should be dealt with by the committee responsible for this sector. 

Honourable members, you also recall the things happened in Kasese. The committee was tasked and yesterday, I was told that the report is ready so today we have it on the Order Paper. I am hoping that the committee will be able to present that report so that we put these matters behind us and deal with the new ones. 

A statement from the Minister of Internal Affairs or anybody responsible for this sector is important so that this country can know what the actual situation is and what is being done to protect the lives and property of the people of this country. 

Let us leave this at that and I give these directions; may the Clerk extract this: the Minister of Internal Affairs should come and brief this House on what is going on and any other related security issues in this area. The minister should also brief us on what is being done to try and deal with the situation. Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank you for your wise ruling but the procedural matter I am raising is also pertinent. It is this Parliament where we passed money for LC I elections. Indeed, there was a case tabled when we were going to vote and that very night, they stopped the elections. The main issue was that senior six students were in school and therefore could not vote.

Mr Speaker, it is the finance minister who released these funds and ever since this case was brought, it halted these elections. We have never seen the Attorney-General coming out to defend this matter so that we go for the LC I elections. 

Mr Speaker, I want to state this; the issue of not having LC I councils in our areas is one of the causes of these killings. We have tried to do some work as Members of Parliament in some of our constituencies but we need LC I elections.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So what is the procedural matter you are raising?

MR SSEWUNGU: The procedural matter I am raising is whether it is procedurally okay for the finance minister, who released these funds and the Attorney-General to give us an update on the LC1 elections as a result of the case that halted these elections.  How far have they moved and when are we having them in place so that we can have security in our areas? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedurally, it would not be correct because it is not relevant to the subject we are discussing. If you want to bring it substantially, bring it properly. You cannot use every vehicle to carry everything. (Laughter)

What you have raised is irrelevant to this debate. Find a time when you can raise it properly before this House and it will be entertained and dealt with fairly. On what matter do you rise?

MR OTHIENO: Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Under rule 215 of our Rules of Procedure, for every matter that is referred to a committee, the committee is supposed to report back to the House within 45 days.

Mr Speaker, on 20 June 2017, hon. Johnson Muyanja rose on national importance concerns regarding the mandatory motor vehicle inspection services in Uganda by SGS. This matter was referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on 29 June 2017 and it is now more than 45 days. This committee has not come back to seek for an extension of time to consider the matter. Therefore, is it procedurally right for the committee to continue keeping the matter when it is beyond the mandatory 45 days?

MR KASOLO: Mr Speaker, hon. Othieno is a member of the committee. Is it really in order for the member to raise an issue when he is a member of the committee? Thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I was a bit worried about the point that was going to be raised. However, it is okay. The member raised a procedural point and any member of this House can raise a procedural matter on anything if it requires the guidance of the Speaker to do that. Therefore, hon. Othieno is perfectly in order. 

However, it turns out that he is the defaulter. (Laughter) You are the one who should have brought this report because you are a member of the committee. Now, you are coming to ask the Speaker to rule on what you have failed to do. (Laughter)

What has happened to us? There was a similar situation yesterday - you are a member of the committee and you are the people who have not reported. Now, you want the Speaker to come and accuse you. Really? Please bring that report so that we can handle it because you are a member of the committee. Have you signed the report?

MR OTHIENO: This report was ready last year and we do not understand why it cannot be tabled before the House? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was it submitted to the Clerk?      
  
MR OTHIENO: It is for the chairperson to -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you sign the report?

MR OTHIENO: Yes, we did.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope it is with the Clerk and if it were with the Clerk, it would have already been on the Order Paper. 

We should avoid certain situations; yesterday a vice-chairperson stood up and said a report was ready. When I got back to my office, I called the Clerk to confirm whether that report was ready and it turned out that that report has not even been drafted. However, I have put it on the Order Paper today so that I see if that report is coming up and I am looking forward to the debate.

Please, let us take it as our responsibility to finish matters that are before the committees in time and bring them back for the House to take a decision rather than play this kind of – it does not help us. If the matter is before the committee, finish and bring it back so that we can finalise with it. Okay? 

2.39
MR STEPHEN BIRAAHWA-MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rise on the matter of national importance. In August 2016, His Excellency the President “licenced” oil companies with intention of having the first oil in 2020. Mr Speaker, in this current financial year’s budget, there was also a decision that 10 per cent of the budget is put to towards realisation of oil by 2020. 

The oil companies have since been in the Bunyoro area. Unfortunately, Mr Speaker, about 48 oil well pads, over 100 kilometres of the pipeline, the Central Processing Facility area and other related land is all contested. Since the early incidences of -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is the urgent matter?

MR BIRAAHWA-MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, whereas the oil companies working with Government require these areas immediately while others within six months, the land is contested. 

The land should be acquired from the community in Bukungu but we have absentee landlords in Kampala who claim to be the owners. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development came to Buliisa in January to stop this problem and promised to give the people back their land titles.

The finance ministry has not facilitated the ministry to do that, but even when the lands ministry has ably done its part trying to give back titles to the people, the courts of law are ruling against the people by ruling that the absentee landlords in Kampala are the land owners. They have also issued instructions to oil companies to deal with absentee landlords and not the community. It has caused a halt including the Central Processing Facility.

Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence and understand this problem because for the next -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member please, you are a senior member of this House. What you are trying to do, is what is now covered by our rule 46 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. All questions going to be raised in this House must be on notice. Those that qualify to be without notice are the very urgent ones like the ones of Masaka and Nakaseke which was raised yesterday concerning the disease outbreak. What you are now raising could better be handled by a parliamentary question, formally proposed and responded to in writing, which would give proper guidance.

Therefore, when you are raising a very involving matter and there is no urgency - that is why it is critical that we discuss these things before we come here.

MR BIRAAHWA-MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I always seek your indulgence. On 10th of December, oil companies were stopped from working. I am only giving you the details because I know right now that the ministers may be dealing with the Central Processing Facility, but I know for the next six months, they will want all the other contested areas.

As a leader, it would be wrong for me to assume that if we are allowed temporarily - in January 2017, we allowed the oil companies to proceed, but they again got stuck in December. The reason being -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will ask you again, where is the urgency? Give us the urgent matter so that we can deal with it.

MR BIRAAHWA-MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. That is what I was trying to give. Mr Speaker, we urgently need the Attorney-General and Solicitor-General working with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to give back the land to the community of Bukungu. 

After that, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should give the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development the necessary money to process so that there is no further delay of the land acquisition for the pipeline, for the Central Processing Facility and roads. Otherwise, even the old roads and pipelines can get a problem – (Interruption)        

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I have high regard for my brother. We were in Buliisa the whole of last Friday and we even continued on Saturday to discuss the issues he is raising now. Your wise guidance is that this is really not a matter of life and death. Subject to your guidance, Mr Speaker, when we come to speak in this Parliament on matters of national importance, they must be immediate and we need an immediate reaction from government.

Is my brother, honourable Mukitale, in order to take us into an item that requires, first, a multisectoral approach and he is treating it as if it is of national importance at this material time? Is he in order, after you have ruled?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The concern the honourable minister - Honourable member, why are you pointing at the Speaker? The honourable member from Busongora North is always pointing at the Speaker. Would you like to explain why you keep pointing at the Speaker all the time? (Laughter)

I think the matter being raised by the member for Buliisa is important and a matter of great concern to the people. That is why he is trying to use all ways possible to raise it, at the risk of violating our own rules of procedure. He has already done it.

We have listened and the ministers have listened; please do what is necessary to try and deal with these problems in Buliisa.

We do not want to – because you can see that he is quite emotive about what he is raising. Let us take it in that spirit and try to deal with it. Okay? Are we going to debate the procedure today, honourable member for Mitooma?

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure to put the Hansard record straight.

Did I hear the honourable member for Buliisa saying that His Excellency, the President, licensed two companies? (Interjections)- That is what I heard. I am sure that is what is on the record of the Hansard. Mr Speaker, the point of procedure I rose to put forward is whether it is procedurally correct that His Excellency, the President licences companies; and which law would he apply to do that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If the Member did say that, then there is a serious accidental slip of the mouth. (Laughter) The President does not licence anything in this country at all. If the records have captured that, then it should be corrected accordingly. Please, let us leave it at that.

MR MUKITALE: I could clarify.

DEPUTY SPEAKER: No.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 35/01/10 TO THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

2.48
MR CUTHBERT ABIGABA (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): “Telecommunication companies are currently outsourcing engineering services to companies abroad despite the fact that Uganda has many qualified telecommunication engineers who could do the same work. The foreigners are employed remotely and paid very highly at the cost of their Ugandan counterparts. There has also been an influx of foreign personnel who are contracted to manage networks in Uganda and as a result, reducing the Ugandan telecommunication professionals to doing basic engineering works or not being employed at all. Some of our neighbours in the East African Community have made progress in stopping the practice.

Has the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development taken keen interest in the outsourcing transactions made amongst telecommunications companies and has the Ministry made steps towards realising national financial benefits?”

2.48
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I would like to seek the indulgence of this House that this question be answered next week. The officer who was handling this issue has had problems and we have been looking for that statement to come and answer this question. We were unable to get that officer because he has a problem. He lost people and is down in the village. 

Mr Speaker, I seek the indulgence of this House that we answer this question on any day next week. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think what the minister is saying is correct. Our Rules of Procedure work like this: When a question for oral answer is submitted to the Clerk’s office and transmitted to the minister responsible for the question, it only comes on the Order Paper once an answer has been submitted and a copy transmitted to the member who read the question.

Who misled the Clerk’s office to say that this question was ready, whereas it was not? It only comes on the Order Paper if the member who raised the question has received a copy of the response to that question.
This is the way to go anyway, although this one has come out rather poorly. This would stop all the other concerns like the one being raised by the member for Buliisa. This approach would handle it better, than rising on urgent matter of public importance. Even when it is not urgent, you are trying to force it to be urgent. 

This would be a better way. Form a question for oral answer so that it is dealt with more comprehensively, instead of people getting up here and just answering what they know rather than from research.

I am not happy that this question has come when there is no answer. Clerk, ensure that for the ones that come on the Order Paper in future, you have got copies of the responses. For the questions, there should be a written answer, not an oral answer. The written one is not here so we cannot proceed with this one. Please, let us have the copy submitted to the member who raised the question and then he can be prepared to ask supplementary questions at the right time.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON FUNDING THE UPGRADING OF MASAKA-BUKAKATA ROAD FROM GRAVEL TO PAVED BITUMINOUS STANDARD

2.52
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I promised during the sitting on Thursday, 14 December 2017 that I would give an update on this matter. On the 18 December 2017, I prepared a statement and sent it to the Clerk to Parliament. The statement is as follows: 

The project of upgrading the Masaka-Bukakata road from gravel to paved bituminous standard is financed by two development partners; the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA) and the OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID). 

Details of the loan particulars are shown below – and I am assuming this statement was uploaded onto the iPads.

Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA)
The amount is $12.0 million. Mr Speaker, I am not sure whether I should go through these details. I think it is not absolutely necessary. You can look at it, but now the substance.

Procurement

The procurement is where there have been problems. The procurement was initiated on 27 December 2012 and bids were then opened on 6 January 2012. The delay resulted from the delayed approval from the bank. 

Whereas the bidding documents were submitted to BADEA for approval on 27 December, the clearance from BADEA came only on 3 October 2013, about 11 months later. A letter of bid acceptance was issued to the best-evaluated bidder (COPRI Construction Enterprises WLL) on 17 April 2015. The chronology of the procurement process is as summarised below:

    a) Procurement initiated - 27 December 2012; 
    b) Bidding document approved by BEDEA - 3 October 2013;
    c) Advertisement in local press - 24 October 2013; 
    d) Advertisement in international press - 28 October 2013; 
    e) Receipt of proposals/opening of bids - 28 October 2013; 
    f) Submission of technical evaluation to BADEA - 11 April 2014;
    g) Comments from BADEA received - 30 April 2014; 
    h) Revised submission to BADEA - 4 June 2014; 
    i) Approval of technical evaluation by BADEA - 12 June 2014; 
    j) BADEA approval of combined report - 12 November 2014; 
    k) Letter of acceptance to successful bidder issued - 17 April 2015.

However, the successful firm failed to provide the acceptable performance guarantee. Consequently, on 30 November 2015, a letter for cancellation of procurement was issued to all bidders following failure by the best evaluated bidder to furnish a proper performance security. On the other hand, the bid validity and bid security validity had both expired on 31 July 2OI5 and 31 August 2015, respectively and therefore, the Uganda National Roads Authority could not proceed with the procurement.

A new procurement was initiated and was approved by the accounting officer on 9 December 2015. The bank, however, did not concur with the decision and insisted that UNRA allows the contractor to modify the performance guarantee and extend the bid validity without further price escalation.

UNRA heeded to the bank's demands and a due diligence team was instituted. The results of the due diligence were however, unfavourable for the contractor as it was revealed that the bidder did not have the capacity to handle the assignment. On the other hand, the bidder further failed to produce the performance guarantee despite the fact that they were allowed to modify the format of the bank guarantee.

On 9 January 2017, a letter was written to the bank (BADEA) requesting for a “No Objection” to re-tender the procurement, which the bank granted on 24 January 2017. The draft bidding document and bid notice were submitted to BADEA on 14 February 20l7 seeking a “No Objection” which was granted on 23 February 2017.

This tender was re-advertised on 1 March 2017 and the pre-bid meeting was held on 24 March 20l7 and bids were received on 15 May 20l7, respectively. The technical evaluation report was approved on 21 September 2017 at the 820th contracts’ committee meeting. The evaluation committee finalised with evaluation of financial bids. The contract was awarded and the combined technical and financial report was submitted to BADEA for “No objection”.

Mr Speaker, assuming the contractor comes back with a “No Objection” the contractor will be on site by March 2018 and will be given three months to mobilise resources as is the practice.

On that note, construction is expected to begin by June 2018. Government has already secured 34 kilometres out of 41 kilometres and 93 per cent of the project-affected persons have been compensated. The remaining 7 per cent is work in progress and is expected to be addressed soon. This mainly includes persons with land disputes and families that have not identified people or persons to be compensated.

Honourable colleagues, this is the progress and we hope that before mid this year, works on that road should have commenced. The delay has been as a result of procurement processes but not lack of funding. I beg to report, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can raise clarification. This is not a matter for debate.

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, I appreciate all that has been said and since 2013, you can see how some officials in government are doing things. For example, giving a feedback does not cost anything. Until we demand for information, it does not come to us.
Mr Speaker, whoever uses this road is aware that this road is impassable. This road joins Masaka and Kalangala. It also joins the lake shores. May I make a humble request, while all that is being sorted out, for something to be done to make this road passable so that we are also considered as people who need to benefit from government services?

If you look at the state of this road; whoever has ever used it can testify of how people are suffering. That is my humble request and I demand for a commitment from the Minister of Finance. 

MR KASAIJA: I sympathise with my colleague. I have also been on that road; it is in a poor state of disrepair. The good news from the Ministry of Finance is that there is equipment newly acquired from Japan, which Masaka District can use even when UNRA has not arrived on scene. 

The only amount of money that would be required - we shall look at the budget - (Interjections) - I am giving alternatives to make the situation –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister is speaking like a layperson because I part of the team that went to that site while we were processing the loan for that road. Mr Speaker, the procedure usually is that when a national road has been identified for tarmacking, UNRA can no longer allocate funds for their maintenance – not even to the district –(Interjections)– I am not going to accept it. I am on point of order.

Mr Speaker, it is not only happening with this but also with Mukono-Katosi Road. Is the minster in order to misinform the country and mislead the people of Masaka that UNRA can allocate any funds and yet the road has been identified for tarmacking in the district?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the procedural matter that he raised is to the effect that can a district use its resources to work on a national road? Can it?

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, there is what we call practical sense –(Interjections)– the district will not be breaking the law –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, now that you are talking about practical sense – (Laughter) - how much money did you give the district of Masaka that it could use to do a UNRA road?

MR KASAIJA: I do not have the statistics with me here, Mr Speaker, but I can provide them with the money.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, this is what it is. The procurement for the construction of this road hit a snag - complaints and petitions delayed the procurement process - and the whole thing will start in June. That is what the minister has said. The question is: The road as of now is impassable, what can be done in the meantime while we wait for June? Do you have money to give, hon. Ssemujju?

MR SSEMUJJU: No, I want to help the minister. In my constituency, I had a similar problem, but what UNRA did was to ask Kira Town Council to do simple repairs. It would cost less if you asked Masaka to do those simple repairs than mobilising equipment from Kampala to go and do repairs on that road. What the minister should do is make an undertaking that he will ask UNRA to ask Masaka and they do it. However, it should be coordinated; it should not just be a declaration in Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Because there is money involved. Honourable minister, would that work in the meantime - practical solution? –(Laughter)

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, all we are talking about are national assets. I agree that maybe the local government could have a challenge but there is information which I thought I should give. When a tender has been awarded to a contractor and he is on site, he is obliged to maintain and make the road passable until he has tarmacked it. In our case now, the tender has not been awarded. 

There are only two possibilities of doing this to get the road to at least a passable condition. One is that UNRA should repair that road while we are mobilising the contractor to take over. The other way is for the local government to work together with UNRA – and I think by brother has said it – to maintain the road so that it is in a passable manner. That is what I was calling “practical sense”.

MR KIGOZI: Can I give you information, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you do not give the Speaker information. You give it to the honourable minister. Are you accepting the information?

MR KASAIJA: No. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us put it this way: Let UNRA coordinate with the district to do some remedial repairs while they wait for the contractor to get on site so that at least the road is usable. Okay?

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. Can we get a commitment and an undertaking from the minister so that when I go back I have something to tell my people? I commit myself to follow this up, up to the time when something is done. Can we get an undertaking from the minister, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Works and Transport here?

MR KASAIJA: Government is here and we work as a government. I commit that UNRA, working together with Masaka Local Government and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, shall repair the road.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That, we assume, is before it is handed over to the contractor in June. Therefore, this takes effect from midnight tonight. (Laughter)

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF PARLIAMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES ON SAND MINING IN UGANDA PRESENTED TO PARLIAMENT ON 16TH NOVEMBER 2016

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are the other ministers ready for this or is it just the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development?

3.11
THE MINISTER FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This statement is pursuant to the report of the Committee on Natural Resources, which was presented to Parliament on 16 November 2016. Furthermore, it is pursuant to the Rt Hon. Speaker’s directive to the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to present a statement to Parliament on the recommendations and issues raised in the report.

Issue 3.1.3 - Ownership of Land Titles within the Wetlands

The recommendation of the committee was that the Commissioner Land Administration and Registration should cancel the titles issued in Lwera wetland and the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should report to Parliament within three weeks on the progress of the cancellation of the titles.

The ministry has received a comprehensive list arising out of the Cabinet directive to cancel all titles in wetlands throughout the country. A roadmap of implementation has been approved jointly with the relevant ministry – Ministry of Water an Environment. Through the office of the Commissioner Land Registration, the ministry has issued notices of cancellation of titles to the registered owners of the affected land titles in Lwera wetland. After issuance of the notices of cancellation, formal hearings will be conducted where the title holders will be called and immediately thereafter cancellation of their titles will be effected. Therefore, Mr Speaker, these notices have already been issued. 

For those land titles which may be not be cancelled, the owners will be put to strict compliance of the land use for which the land was meant as per the guidelines which are being formulated jointly by the ministries of energy, lands, water and environment. Suffice it to note, Mr Speaker, that the commission of inquiry into land matters has also picked interest in broader investigations into the matter of Lwera and we shall subsequently implement their recommendations.

Issue 3.4.3 – Sand Extraction Limits

The recommendation was that cadastral mapping be undertaken to establish areas with sand deposits that are viable for commercial mining by October 2017. 

Cadastral mapping entails collecting and displaying spatial as well as ownership information of all the land in a given geographical area. A cadastral map shows all registered geospatial data related to the registered plot. A cadastral map consists of cadastral units, each of which represents the registered property. 

For the case of mapping areas with sand deposits that are viable for commercial sand mining, we are liaising with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to collect geological information regarding the locations of the sand and corresponding quantities. After the geological surveys have been carried out, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development under the Department of Surveys and Mapping shall prepare thematic maps clearly showing the location and quantities of deposits of sand and other minerals. 

Mr Speaker, the subcommittee consisting of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Ministry of Energy and Minerals as well as the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) is working on this matter. 

Issue 3.4.8 - National Physical Development Plan

The committee’s recommendation was that the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should report to Parliament within three months on the progress made in the development of the National Physical Development Plan.

The National Physical Development Plan provides the analytical parameters for the planned allocation, use and management of the country’s land and other physical resources, as well as the most efficient location of infrastructure, towns and cities and how they link to the surrounding rural areas. It is intended to serve as a framework through which the spatial location of investments, as well as planning and management of resources, are guided at the national level.

The process commenced in July 2016 and completion of the plan is expected by the end of July 2018. The progress of consultation and development of the plan so far is as follows:

i) 	An inception report and a situation analysis report were submitted. 
ii) 	National and eight regional stakeholders’ workshops for data collection, analysis, training and sectoral consultations have been carried out. 

iii) National physical development plan alternatives have been developed and submitted. Consultation on the best alternative is yet to take place in the week beginning 22 January 2018. Thereafter, eight regional and two national workshops will be held to present the first draft of the National Physical Development Plan in March 2018.

Mr Speaker, among the national workshops that have been planned is the consultation with Members of Parliament so that they give their input to the National Development Plan. 

iv) 	The draft National Physical Development Plan with the stakeholders’ input is expected by the end of April 2018 for public display. 

v) 	The final National Physical Development Plan and final report will be delivered after the mandatory display period of ninety days. 

Mr Speaker, these were issues related to my sector. I thank you, and I wish to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is there any other sector in this particular report?

3.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Mary Kitutu): Honourable Speaker, I will be responding to questions which were directed to the Ministry of Water and Environment and NEMA. I go straight to question 3.14.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, they were resolutions. They were resolutions that were sent to your ministry, not questions.

MS KITUTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

Legality of Operations

The committee recommended that NEMA should halt sand mining activities being undertaken without certificates of approval of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and also institute legal actions against them.

Mr Speaker, a number of sand mining without approval of the EIA activities have been stopped. We went down on the ground and assessed each, one by one. Those which were illegal have been cancelled.

Secondly, NEMA has instituted legal actions against Simpson Birungi for failure to comply with an earlier restoration order. This is before court. 

Tesco Industries Ltd and River Katonga Investments were fined for mining when activities in Lwera wetland were on hold.

We also issued notices on improvement of sand mining operations for those with valid approvals but were violating them. Examples of these are: 

    a) Capital Estates and River Katonga Investments were guided on how to conduct restoration using equipment on site. I led this, Mr Speaker.
    b) Tesco Industries Ltd was guided on restoration and removal of demolition waste.  
    c) Capital Estates and Kalungu District Local Government were directed to halt sand mining activities until the site in Mpigi was restored to the satisfaction of NEMA.

National Environment Management Authority also required and received site layouts - this was also another directive from the committee - excavation and restoration plans from the following companies, and this is what guides the restoration works:

    a) Capital Estates; 
    b) Tesco Industries Ltd;
    c) River Katonga Investments; 
    d) He Sha Duo Company Limited; 
    e) The Registered Trustee of Masaka; 
    f) Parkson Hong Kong Investments Limited; 
    g) Aqua World (U) Ltd; and 
    h) Simpson Birungi.

Irregular Issuance of an Addendum to Wetland User Permits

The committee recommended that NEMA should immediately stop issuing addendums to wetlands or Lake user permits without prior independent environmental impact assessment or environmental audit for alternative equipment or activities.

Mr Speaker, issuance of addendums was stopped and all sand mining permits with addenda were recalled for consolidation of conditions. Where changes in operations or technologies are envisaged, the respective companies were advised to conduct further environmental assessments and other studies for the consideration of NEMA.

Another issue was that NEMA should ensure that Aqua World Ltd and Seroma Limited undertake independent EIAs for sand mining and the dredging equipment. 

Mr Speaker, a team from NEMA inspected Seroma Ltd’s site to assess the mining technology. Seroma Ltd was required to use only a dredger of the specifications permitted by NEMA and to halt activities until sections of the area so far mined were rehabilitated. The permit for Aqua World (U) Ltd was also recalled so that another is issued after an assessment. 

Inadequate Scrutiny of Sand Mining Methods 

The recommendation from the committee was that effective December 2016, NEMA should ensure that sand miners undertake independent assessment and acquire certification of sand mining technology. 

Mr Speaker, NEMA took note of this and sand miners for commercial purposes are required to undertake independent environmental assessments. Therefore, the technologies for sand mining are subjected to scrutiny, in liaison with the relevant lead agencies, to advise on the following:

    a) Nature of the technology; 
    b) the ability of the technology to work in a confined space that can be quickly restored; 
    c) ability to put back the over-burden as clean sand is being extracted and heaped for removal.

In the absence of any modalities to certify mining technology, NEMA plans to use the Sand Mining Guidelines to prescribe suitable sand mining technologies, since it has been noted that technologies are site-specific. Along the same line, an assessment of technologies has been done and is currently being used to guide the permitting process.

Another issue raised was that NEMA should develop capacity to guide on appropriate sand mining methods. This, we have done.

Another recommendation was that the Minister of Water and Environment should stop sand mining in water bodies with immediate effect until NEMA issues guidelines. My Ministry has never sanctioned sand mining in water bodies. Therefore, those were illegal activities.

Due to the fact that many such activities are occurring in Lake Victoria, surveillance has been a great challenge but we have worked very closely with the Marine Po1ice to track some of the culprits. However, it is a venture that requires constant surveillance using motorized boats and as a ministry, we do not have boats, so we normally use the police to do this.

My ministry commits to dedicate the limited resources to step up monitoring on water bodies. We shall continue working closely with Marine Police and the UPDF to monitor the water bodies.

Another recommendation from the committee was that NEMA should institute legal sanctions with immediate effect against Mango Tree Ltd as provided for under the National Environment Act and regulations 36 and 37. 

Mr Speaker, NEMA only approved a ship building activity for Mango Tree, not sand mining. National Environment Management Authority, jointly with other stakeholders, carried out site verification from the 10th to 11th April 2017 regarding Mango Tree activities.

The Environmental Protection Force also opened up a criminal file against Mango Tree for illegal sand mining. This can be traced under police record reference 11/21/06/2016). Inquiries are not yet complete because evidence is being consolidated by the Directorate of Public Prosecutions (DPP). 

Illegal Dredging of Sand in Lake Victoria 

The committee’s recommendation was that my ministry should, with immediate effect, revoke the river dredging licence issued to Mango Tree Group Limited. 

Mr Speaker, this licence was only for one year. It expired and was not renewed.

Encroachment on Kyewaga Central Forest Reserve 

The committee’s recommendation was that National Forestry Authority (NFA) should issue restoration orders to Aka & Bino Fish Farming and report to Parliament within one month. 

Our response is that National Forestry Authority issued a restoration order to Aka & Bino Fish Farming and enforcement modalities are being worked out. Aka and Bino Fish Farming was issued an EIA permit on 13 January 2010 for fish farming by NEMA. On 31 October 2O12, the permit was cancelled and the facility closed.

Sand Mining Guidelines

Another recommendation for my ministry was on sand mining guidelines. We are working on this together with the energy ministry. The National Environment Management Authority prepared terms of reference for sand mining guidelines. The guidelines are expected to have the following:

    a) Require a developer to produce evidence of sand quantities and quality. 
    b) Define the most appropriate technology. That is now in the guidelines. 
    c) A developer will also be required to define the most ideal rehabilitation strategies. 
    d) Require a developer to prove tax payments and clearances. 
    e) Define the requirements for performance bonds and how they will be implemented.

These are in the line with what we are working on together with the ministry of energy. We have a draft but it is yet to be finalised. 

Restoration Orders

The committee recommended that in line with Section 9.2, objective 1, of the environment and natural resources subsector articulated in the NDPII of restoring degraded fragile ecosystems, a restoration and rehabilitation Bill be presented before Parliament with the view of mitigating the effects of the rampant environmental degradation. 

Our response is that this has been taken care of in the National Environment Bill, 2017, which is now before the Committee on Natural Resources.

Another recommendation was that NEMA should institute legal proceedings in courts of law against all non-complying sand mining companies by January 2018. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to report the following cases which are before court:

(i) 	A criminal case, REF: 21/l2/0l/2O17, was opened up against Zou Yunyan for wetland degradation in Lwera by sand mining. The offender has now abandoned the site and efforts are going on to trace his whereabouts.

(ii) 	Another criminal case, CRB 110/2017, was opened up in Mpigi against Drake Francis Lubega for wetland degradation in Lwera by sand mining. He was fined and the file closed and put away.

(iii) 	A criminal case, REF: 18/06/O5/2O17, was opened up against the proprietor of Only You Company for commencing a project of sand mining in Kasangi without approval from NEMA. The company abandoned the place and NEMA is discussing with lead agencies about modalities of removal of the equipment he abandoned.

(iv) 	A criminal case, CRB: l236/2O16, was instituted against Sebalamu & Ssenoga (Capital Estates) for violation of a sand mining permit issued for activities in Lwera. The case was closed and put away after restoration efforts by Capital Estates.

(v) 	Another case, REF: 26/02/0l/2017, was opened against River Katonga Investments - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, just hold on a bit. I see some guests leaving. In the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from Budiope East, Buyende District. I do not know whether they are the ones. They are represented in Parliament by hon. Geoffrey Dhamuzungu and hon. Veronica Babirye Kadogo. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Proceed, honourable minister.

MS KITUTU: Mr Speaker, another criminal case, REF: 111/2017, was opened against Birungi Simpson for illegal sand mining in Lwera. The file was sanctioned by the DPP and is now ready for commencement of proceedings.

(vii) Another case, REF: 1190/2017, was opened up against Mutumba Charles Dickson in Mukono for commencing a project of sand mining without approval from NEMA. The case is ongoing.
 
(viii) In the High Court, Misc. Cause No. 29 of 2017, John Sebalamu trading as Capital Estates sued NEMA for threatening to enforce for non-compliance with a restoration order issued to him on 30 October 2O15. Capital Estates declared commitment to ensure compliance with the restoration order and the subsequent directives to the said order. Consequently, the company complied and a consent order was entered on 12 April 2017.

Mr Speaker, the rest are cases. Those were some of the concerns which required a response from my ministry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us finish all the statements. Minster of Agriculture. 

3.35
THE MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to request for your indulgence to allow us to present ours on Thursday. As you know, ours was to indicate to Parliament how sand mining affects the breeding areas in our lakes. It was a bit technical and we had to employ a technical team to do a thorough study, which they have concluded. We have the report; it’s only that we had not discussed it in top management. Allow us to conclude so that we present a scientific explanation to the Parliament. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these are not new matters; they are responses. So if you are bracing yourselves for a debate, there will be no debate. 

Our in-house Committee on Natural Resources did a study and came here with a report on 16 November 2016. Parliament debated it and all of you made contributions in that debate. A resolution was passed by this Parliament making recommendations and assigning responsibility to the sectors of Government to do certain things. Timelines were given to them - some for three months and some weeks - to respond.

What happened, and we need to thank the honourable members for bringing it up this week, was that under our rule 217 there should be a report on actions taken. The actions-taken report should come from the sectors that have been assigned responsibilities to come back to the House. This is because we have passed a resolution and you must tell us what you have done with it - If you are not implementing the recommendations, you tell us; if you have implemented them, tell us how far this has gone. This was on the 16th of November 2016.

I am, therefore, not very happy that the honourable Minister for Agriculture is saying that they are just commissioning somebody, in 2018, to go and do a study. He should have briefed the House so that we do not have so many questions still arising from the same things. 

No guidance is given in rules on what happens to the report on actions taken. I am using the prerogative of the Speaker to pass this back to the committee that did this investigation, to verify whether these things have been done or not. They can then come back and tell us if what was done and what was not done, then we can take it to the next level. Thank you very much.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. Sometime last year, this august House debated a motion on police brutality. After that debate, we noted specifically that the Officer in Charge (OC) or Commander of Kampala Central Police Station called Baguma had evaded court despite the continued issuance of a directive by the DPP for him to appear.

Mr Speaker, it was after this that Parliament raised a concern. We had also noted that while he was under investigations, the same officer had been promoted. Police took action after Parliament raised this and arraigned him before the courts of law. He was then sent on remand where he spent an unusually short time for a murder suspect. 

On a sad note, the country is now awash with information that the DPP has withdrawn the charges. Mr Speaker, it is not within our power to go after the powers of the DPP, but our humble appeal is that justice should not only be done but should be seen to have been done. Our biggest fear is that sometime back, His Excellency the President noted that there was impunity and that the police needed a clean-up. 

Mr Speaker, the humble procedural point I raise to you on this matter is that since Parliament raised this issue and things have happened in the way they have - It is the lead story in both the New Vision and Monitor. There is public concern about what has gone wrong. We must be very careful as Parliament and as a country not to inculcate a culture of impunity where the law does not appear to apply to all of us.

Mr Speaker, the point of procedure I am raising is that we need to hear from the minister concerned, so that he gives us a brief account of what has gone on. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is true that this matter came to this House and the debate was quite intense. It came as an urgent matter and I think a request was made by the Speaker to have a statement made. The processes that evolved from this was that there were arrests made.

As the honourable member is saying, we have all seen in the New Vision, the Monitor and on television that the person who was the subject of this particular parliamentary discussion has been found to be without a case by the DPP. Substantially, under Article 120(6), the DPP in the exercise of his powers is not subject to anybody’s control or direction. This Parliament cannot direct the DPP or control it. 

We are hoping that in taking this decision, it did it judiciously by looking at the evidence. Of course, they will say, “based on the evidence that we have, we will not be able to secure a conviction” and then they come to that conclusion. That is what normally happens, and I am hoping that this is what happened in this case. We will leave that to the DPP

However, what is in issue now is, you can see the excitement in the public because everybody is talking about this in the news. Maybe it would be good for the minister to come back here one of these days and tell us what is going on so that the public can remain calm. Maybe tell us that processes have been done properly and there are no issues with it, so that we can respect the systems. 

We just want to stop the excitement. Honourable minister, it would be a good thing to do if you could find time. If you want to make a preliminary statement, I will welcome you. However, if you prefer to come when you are ready to just brief the House that this has happened, this is what it has gone through and there is no problem, that would be okay.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Mr Speaker, I do not have a preliminary statement to make. I only wanted to get your directions a little bit clearer so that when I come here, I know the issues on which I will be proceeding. You have correctly said that there was a judiciary process through which this gentleman was released. However, I am not yet sure on what I am supposed to make a statement on and that is why I need your clarification. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think it is very simple. You can see the excitement in the public about this development; can you come and give confidence to the House that everything is okay and that things have been done properly? That is all.

MR OBIGA: Mr Speaker, most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, and we hope that this will be done in the course of next week or at the earliest possible time.   

MR OBIGA:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the macroeconomic and fiscal performance report for the financial year 2016/2017.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Finance for them to look at and advise the House on what is in that report.

3.47
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the report of the delegation of the sectoral Committee on East African Community Affairs on the participation and oversight of the 8th East African Inter-Parliamentary Games, 2017. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, this is equivalent of a report of delegations of this House, not essentially a report of a committee. Therefore, we will find time and have this matter debated. 

However, yesterday there was a brief on this particular subject by hon. Hamson Obua, but that is another perspective of the participants. You are also a participant, but you are the chair of the committee. We will find time and deal with it. I am glad you were in the House yesterday, so let us leave it at that.

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE NATIONAL BIOTECHNOLOGY AND BIOSAFETY BILL, 2012 AS RETURNED BY H. E. THE PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 142 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that I read the President’s letter on Tuesday and made direction that the processes within the rules now should be obtained. This matter is coming up today and the minister in charge of this Bill is here to present this motion for onward transmission to the committee. 

3.49
THE MINISTER FOR SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Mr Speaker and dear colleagues, Parliament of Uganda passed the National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill, 2012 and a Bill for an Act was sent to His Excellency the President on 11 December 2017.

The object of that Bill for an Act was to facilitate the safe development and application of biotechnology; to designate a national focal point and a competent authority; to establish the inter-ministry policy committee on biotechnology and biosafety chaired by the Prime Minister; to establish the national biosafety committee; to provide for the establishment of the institutional biosafety committees; to provide for mechanisms to regulate research, development and general release of genetically modified organisms; and for related matters.

His Excellency the President returned this Bill for an Act to Parliament to reconsider the specific clauses outlined in the letter that was read to this House on Tuesday by the Speaker. Specifically, the President wants us to reconsider the title of the law as well as sections 3, 15, 16, 25, 26, 35 and 36. 

According to rule 142(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, “The Bill as passed by the House and returned by the President for reconsideration shall be laid on the Table by any Minister in the case of a public Bill or in any other case by any Member, within two weeks of its return, if the House is in session, and the Speaker shall refer the Bill to the relevant committee, which shall consider the recommendations of the President and report to the House within two weeks.” 

Therefore, according to that rule, allow me to lay on the Table the returned Bill by the President and also beg to move that the Bill be reconsidered. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Motion seconded. Honourable members, this motion at this stage is not subject to debate. This particular motion and the Bill at hand stands referred to the appropriate committee that will process the Bill. They will look again at those issues that have been raised by the President and report to the House in two weeks and then the House will take an appropriate decision. The House will decide whether to embrace the changes proposed by the President or to readopt the Bill as it had been passed and then the next procedures will follow. 

The motion and Bill is referred to the committee responsible for this Bill to handle appropriately and report in two weeks.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO INCREASE SHARE CAPITAL OF HOUSING FINANCE BANK (U) LIMITED (CAPITALISATION)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chair, it is supposed to be a motion for resolution of Parliament to increase share capital of Housing Finance Bank first and then your report. So, the mover of the motion should move the motion. I can see the minister coming from the other side of the House. (Laughter) You are now moving the motion for consideration. Had you moved it already?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, before the matter was referred, we had moved a motion here in the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you justify it?

MR BAHATI: We did justify. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament to increase share capital of Housing Finance Bank (Uganda) Limited, capitalisation. That is the motion I propose for your debate, and to inform the debate we will first receive a report from the committee. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, let me take this opportunity to thank you for allowing me raise this procedural issue. The Minister of Finance read the motion on the Floor of Parliament on 26 May 2017, wanting an increase in capitalization for Housing Finance Bank. That was more than six months ago, and he appeared before the committee. 

On Monday, at about 10a.m., I got a message from the clerk of the committee on WhatsApp because I am a member of the committee. The message said that we were supposed to have a finance committee meeting to work on the report on the capitalisation of Housing Finance Bank. 

Mr Speaker, I live in Mbale. I was travelling from Mbale on Monday, and you know the state of the road between Mbale and Iganga - Tirinyi Road. Therefore, it takes about five hours to reach here. By the time we arrived - I was with hon. James Kaberuka and others - the chairman told us that the meeting was over. The question we raised was: we have just been on recess, the Speaker has just called the House back, we are starting on Tuesday, so how do you call a committee meeting before the House resumes? If he had wanted us to sit urgently, he should have told us last year.

We had issues with the report and we wanted them to be discussed. Therefore, we raised issues and told the chairperson that if he could agree, we would write a minority report. He said that we go ahead and work on a minority report – that was on Tuesday via WhatsApp. 

Mr Speaker, the issues we are raising are basically about the money we want to use. The background to this money is that it was raised from the sale of public houses to civil servants and there is an agreement -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You were rising a matter of procedure. We do not want to go into the substance of your majority or minority reports.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, yes the report was presented, but we had told the chairperson that we have a minority report to be attached and the clerk is even aware. However, when we went there to deal with this matter, he said that the report had already been submitted.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, would it be procedurally right to do that, because we raised this matter with the chairman and the clerk is aware? Wouldn’t it be right for us to be given an opportunity so that this report has a minority report attached to it and they can be presented together?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chair, is that true? Was there notice of a minority opinion on this matter?

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Without going into the challenges committees face in regards to Members’ attendance, I would like to state that it is not true that the message inviting Members for the meeting, and the letters henceforth, were sent on Monday; they were actually sent out on Thursday.

Mr Speaker, I would like to state that we manage committees in accordance with our Rules of Procedure. In this case, we were moving in accordance with rules 200 and 201. 

That notwithstanding, it is important that when we are in positions of leadership, we strive to speak the truth. The honourable member has just submitted that he was coming from Mbale and found when the meeting was being concluded, but also those who watched television that evening can testify where that Member was when the meeting was going on. Mr Speaker, the Member was addressing a press conference in Najjanankumbi. Therefore, it is important -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is Najjanankumbi between Mbale and Kampala? (Laughter)

MR MUSASIZI: It is also important to note that the rules that govern how minority reports are processed are very clear. The Member came to the committee, found deliberations going on and he just picked the draft report and went back to his office. Later on, we saw on the WhatsApp group of the committee that he had an intention to present a minority report.

I told him that it is was all right, that it is within his mandate to present a minority report. I also advised him to liaise with the clerk over the matter, something that he never did. He is now rising points of procedure. 

I would like to seek your guidance as to whether we should run committees as individual Members in disregard of the rules, the sacrifices and desires of the majority of the Members who want to do work in the committee. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I hope you know the time I addressed the conference. It is true that after Mbale, I went back to Najjanankumbi and after a few minutes, I was in Parliament -(Interjection)- Yes, because I knew I was going to Najjanankumbi and that is it.

However, Mr Speaker, I have my WhatsApp messages here. The finance committee chairperson said, “Today, Monday, 8 January 2018 at 10.00a.m, there will be a meeting in room…” -(Interjection)- please listen; I kept quiet when you were speaking and if I am handling you badly, you will also keep quiet - “…on the capitalisation of Housing Finance Bank”. That was at 8.45a.m. 

At 9.37a.m., Loy responded and said, “I am in the constituency. I am coming. I was not aware”. I then said, “I am also coming. Can you kindly send us a draft report on our emails? We cannot have a meeting when Members are just returning from their constituencies. This is an important case for all of us. Thank you.” That was at 10.28 a.m. I was on the way at that time, but I first went to Najjanankumbi because that was a gazetted place. For this meeting, I was not aware. Besides, I am a secretary general. 

Mr Speaker, hon. James Kaberuka replied and said, “Honourable, I do agree with you; we must review the report before the meeting”. That was now at 10.42a.m. “We want the draft report before sitting to discuss. It is not in good faith that we get to discuss such an important report without looking at it first.” Those were now Members raising their views. Hon. Luttamaguzi then said, “James, swim in your thing…” - that was from my brother over there - “…we shall clean the sewage. There is no longer business as usual.”

Mr Speaker, what I am trying to say is that we raised the issue. I can even see somebody saying, “Swim in your sewage”. The reason I mentioned the date - 26 May 2017 - is to find out what the hurry was for.  

In addition, capitalisation of Housing Finance Bank is in interest of all of us. We really need a local bank that we should own. Even as we speak, we are not the majority shareholders and some of us believe -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is now the substance of the report.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, even hon. Kaberuka agreed that the chairperson must hold on. We asked the chairperson to hold on. Mr Speaker, I do not like minority reports in my life. I have been a chairperson before and I do not like them. We had asked our chairman to put this thing on hold so that we incorporate our issues, at least so that they are taken up as recommendations to be part and parcel of this report.

In addition, we had to engage. If we had not engaged you, we would have just gone and done it. When we came, we said, “Mr Chairperson, can we have another meeting to look at this draft with our amendments?” He just told us to go and sign the report with the clerk. That is what you said yourself. “Hon. Nandala, I acknowledge your concerns. Just go and sign the report. If you do not want to sign the report, write a minority report.” I replied: “Mr Chairman, can we do it better?”

Mr Speaker, the minority report we are raising would even help the report better and that is the reason I am begging that you allow us. I wish hon. Kaberuka was here he would have -(Interjections)- Yes, we got him, but we went with hon. Kaberuka. Even James Kakooza, for the first time, said “These Members have a point. Let us listen to what they are saying”. Kakooza was there –(Laughter)- however, our chairman became adamant and we asked a question: “What was the problem?” 

Mr Speaker, on Thursday, we were still upcountry. We had just come from Christmas and the New Year celebrations. That week, when we left nobody told us that we were going to meet. If you said you took the letters on Thursday, that means you took them to the pigeon holes. If you took them to the pigeon holes, none of us was here because Parliament was on recess –(Interjections)- please, let us make a case. You must have called a few people to come with you to attend. We got you with Kakooza and the clerk. You were only two people –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: For the purpose of our colleagues who are listening to what you are saying, we were not only two Members. I informed you that some Members have been here. We have discussed this report but the timing –(Interjections)- yes, for the timing I said you have a point and I said. “No, these people have been discussing this report. If we are absent and people are doing work, we cannot delay them.” This is what I said. I said you had a point on that. I was out of the country, when Mafabi came, I said, “Yes, it is true”. 

I actually borrowed an audited report from the chairman because I was not there. I borrowed to read and confirm what was in the report – is what they are going to recommend to the House authentic, compared to the audited report which they gave? We were not two. We were about six and I told hon. Mafabi that there are some Members who had been there and they had left but they had participated in the report.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, hon. James. I thought you would deny. You have said when I came, you were two and the other Members had left, but you were still continuing to discuss the report -(Laughter). That is really what I am saying. You have made my case even better. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, you can see from that, that it would be better –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The procedural point.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The procedural point I am raising is that the chairperson allows us to attach our minority report so that when he is presenting, he presents both so that we can move in a better way. That is why a few minutes ago, I was talking to my brother, David Bahati – you know David Bahati is my brother sometimes. (Laughter) I said, “David, please, this would be the best way to move” -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of capitalising Housing Finance Bank is an important matter for this Parliament and country. We can hardly afford to draw negative energy to that debate. We do not want the debate to get wrong because Members feel aggrieved. One of the cardinal rules of parliamentary practices and procedures is that the majority rules but the rights of the minority must be observed. 

Notice was given to the chairperson that there were views that were not supporting the majority and usually when it is done, a minority report is attached to the main report and the two go together. In the circumstances, as it is, it would only be fair if we hold onto this and let the people who hold the minority opinion attach their report to the main report and we receive both on the same day. I think that would be proper. (Applause)

Therefore, let us do it that way. We will not be able to proceed with this item but you should be ready by the next sitting of Parliament. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, it will be ready and by tomorrow it will be given to the chairman but, Mr Speaker, this chairman -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we have finished. (Laughter)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE MARCH AND NOVEMBER 2016 CLASHES IN THE RWENZORI SUB-REGION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the vice-chairperson, who said the report is ready? Hon. Kezekia? Any committee member?

4.11
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA-KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I am a committee member. Yesterday, I was not in the plenary but I got reports that the vice-chairperson committed to the effect that there was a committee report ready, signed and debated by Members. I can stand here on behalf of the committee –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, as a Member of the committee.

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: As a Member of the committee, I say, maybe the chairperson was not well advised by the technical people. To the best of my knowledge, there is no report being debated on the issues concerning Kasese murders. 

When Parliament recommended an investigation by the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs over Kasese issues, the committee started work. It had witnesses and one of the witnesses was supposed to be H.E the President of the Republic of Uganda. I attended the committee at State House Entebbe, where we were supposed to have the President as a witness. We met the President alongside the Attorney-General. 

Before the meeting could start, the President invited the Attorney-General to address the committee. The Attorney-General informed the committee that by that time the king of the Rwenzururu had appeared before the courts of law. Therefore, the Attorney-General informed the committee that continuing with the investigations would prejudice the case before the courts of law. 

The President in a very tough language wondered how the Speaker of Parliament would continue to have a committee of Parliament go ahead with investigations fully aware that there was a court case. He said the matter is prejudicial and requested that the Speaker should order the committee to stop the work immediately. The meeting diverted into other issues of general nature for Members’ concerns. 

I remember the likes of Kezekia asked the President for many favours for the constituency. I remember hon. Abiriga saying “For many months, I have looked for you, Your Excellency”. Those are the issues we discussed on that day and that was the end of the report. (Laughter) 

Therefore, I do not know where the vice-chairperson got the audacity to inform this Parliament that there is a report on Kasese matters. There is none of it. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you but honourable members, you who were there should have also informed the President that the Speaker is usually moved once the matter comes up in the House that this matter is sub judice and the Speaker would rule on it. For you to make the President say those things and you do not correct the situation is also putting the Speaker in bad light. (Laughter) 

You should have told the President that at the time the Speaker commissioned this, no such development had taken place and there was no objection saying the matter was sub judice. You should have corrected this impression from there.

I am now charging you that next time, please, in meetings where the Speakers are not, if issues come up, you should also defend the integrity of the Office of the Speaker –(Mr Nzoghu rose)- Honourable member, you want to debate this? No, please. The issue is that you raised the matter yesterday. The vice-chairperson of the committee said the report was ready. I asked here emphatically and said a report is only ready when submitted to the Clerk and then we put it on the Order Paper.

Therefore, since I had the assurance that the report was ready, I put it on the Order Paper. It turns out that not only the report is not - (Laughter) - there isn’t even a draft. Even the meetings were not concluded.

Therefore, honourable member who raised this issue, that is the complication that was here. I do not know whether the status has since changed and whether the situation that had led to the matter being called subjudice has since changed because if it has then nothing stops the committee from concluding and if the matter has also been overtaken by events, they should come and inform the House so that we know that this matter is concluded.

My guidance on this is, for as long as that issue remains as it was that proceeding with the investigation would jeopardize the case that was pending in court, if it is still standing, then let it be. However, if that case is no longer there, then the committee can proceed and finish what it should be doing and then we have -

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also watched on television - because the vice-chairperson was interviewed by a journalist on television and he said the committee has a report but that members of the committee were still editing out matters, which they think are sub judicial before presenting the rest of the content to Parliament.

That is what I heard him say on television but which is different from what hon. Kivumbi is saying that there is no report at all. Maybe if the chairperson or the vice were here, they would still confirm to us because in that television interview, the chairperson said the committee had a draft report but that, as I have said, they were only removing facts they thought were subjudicial. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not complicate this issue. The issues of the things that happened in Kasese are already complicated enough on their own. So, let us not complicate the procedural matters relating to this issue.

The situation is there is no report that has been completed and ready for processing by this House. I am calling upon the chairperson and members of this committee to meet with the Speaker on Tuesday morning so that we know exactly where we are on this matter, and then I can guide the House properly on how we are going to proceed.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Many times I prefer discipline wherever I am. It is very embarrassing for a whole deputy chairperson of a committee to come and lie to Parliament knowing exactly what is has happened in his committee, and we believe and even the Speaker goes ahead to program him on the Order Paper.

When his item is on the Order Paper, he does not even have the courtesy to come and tell the Speaker it was a mistake so that it is not continued to be considered as an item on the Order Paper. 

Yes, we have laughed over it but, Mr Speaker, the chairperson who made the statement should be subjected to some disciplinary action or else he will take it for granted that chairpersons will come here and lie just like sometime Government ministers do.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know there is what they call “parliamentary language”. In parliamentary language, we desist from using words like “lies”. You can use words like “factual inexactitudes.” (Laughter) You have to avoid saying things that immediately sound too strong because if you say, “lied”, you are imputing - the things were only not factually accurate. It would make more sense.

Therefore, that is why I said I want this meeting on Tuesday morning where we shall have interactions with the committee and if it is found - because I now hear what is being said by hon. Dr Baryomunsi - that indeed that the information that was presented by the vice chairperson was not entirely correct, then I will make appropriate administrative announcement following that so that the matter can be dealt with properly.

MR ARIKO: Further procedure, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Under what rule do we have further procedure? We only have procedure so there is no further procedure in our rules. Next item.

MR ARIKO: Procedure! (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know when you say, further procedure, it would mean you are now questioning the ruling of the Speaker.

MR ARIKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You continue to make some of us better legislators. On the specific matter that the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs was proceeding on, Parliament made a decision to beef up the committee with other Members other than those that were already part of the committee. I was among the five Members of Parliament that the Speaker designated to join the committee to investigate and have this matter reported on.

Mr Speaker, unfortunately we were never invited even for one meeting and never participated in any of the activities. So, if the matter is being reconsidered, we would also like to know whether our assignment with the committee just fell short. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what I have already said. I have already guided that we have a meeting on Tuesday and look at all the situation. Then we will be able to come back and guide the House on how we handle this matter because it has been outstanding for a while and if that is a prohibition, we also come and brief the House accordingly. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO REVIEW PROVISION OF VEHICLES TO POLITICAL LEADERS, PUBLIC AND CIVIL SERVANTS

4.22
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, I beg for your protection from hon. Bahati. Anyhow, I beg to move a Motion for a Resolution of Parliament to review the Provision of Vehicles to Political Leaders, Public and Civil Servants.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by the members for Ndorwa and Butambala. Is there any secondment from this side? (Laughter) Would you now like to speak to your motion? 

MR SSEMUJJU: Do I present or speak to the motion, or do I do both?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ordinarily, you would have stated the motion in full before being seconded but you have chosen this other way. You can now go to the text of the motion and then we handle it; present the motion itself first.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker the motion reads: 

“WHEREAS it is Government policy to facilitate leaders, civil and public servants of certain category with means of transport to ease their mobility;

AND WHEREAS this policy is rooted in Public Service Stand Orders, Section (F-I), paragraph 15/16, which provides that a public officer at the level of a Director and Head of Department at the scale of U1SE shall be entitled to a chauffeur-driven vehicle at the Government expense; 

AND WHEREAS the Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice President and Prime Minister’s Act, 2010 provides for appropriate transport to these offices in the second, third and fourth schedules;

AND WHEREAS Government, through Statutory Instrument No 259/1 Parliament (Remuneration of Members) Act Cap 259 undertook to provide Members with hire purchase facilities to acquire a motor vehicle;

NOTING that the number of leaders such as Ministers, Members of Parliament, Local Council V Chairpersons and presidential advisors has drastically increased as is the number of public servants such as Resident District Commissioners and civil servants in both central and local governments;

NOTING THAT the number of commissions, authorities and state enterprises has also increased requiring Government to spend billions of shillings on motor vehicle purchase every year;

AND FURTHER NOTING that this financial year, 2016/2017 Government is paying Shs 185 billion on purchase of vehicles, Shs 99 billion on maintenance of vehicles and Shs 150 billion on buying fuel, lubricants and oils;

AWARE THAT we are still a poverty-stricken country that relies heavily on loans for our major infrastructure development and knowing the abuses both the policy and vehicles suffer;

APPRECIATING the need to redirect our resources to critical sectors of the economy such as agriculture, tourism and social services in this kisanja hakuna mchezo;

NOW, THEREFORE be it resolves by the Parliament of Uganda as follows:
    1) Save for the President, Vice President, Speaker of Parliament, Deputy Speaker of Parliament, Leader of the Opposition, Chief Justice, Deputy Chief Justice, Government abolishes provision of vehicles to the rest of the leaders, civil servants and public servants.
    2) Government sells all its current fleet of vehicles to the current users at the current value. Where the user is not in position to buy the vehicle Government should immediately auction it.
    3) Government extends loans to leaders, public and civil servants currently entitled to vehicles to pay for or buy vehicles, which loans should be recovered from their salaries and allowances for a period of four years.
    4) Government in a phased manner, extends the loans facility to its other deserving employees such as teachers and health workers. The money for fuel and maintenance of these vehicles can kick start the loan facility. And
    5) Government waives taxes on the vehicles and any other transport equipment purchased under this scheme.” Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DPEUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Since you have already moved and the motion has been seconded, you can now justify your motion briefly; it is a very clear motion.

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am happy that I have been given permission to present this motion. This motion was presented to the Clerk and to the Speaker at the time the country was discussing a grant to Members of Parliament to buy vehicles. The way that debate was skewed, it was as if Government spends more money and extremely a lot of it on the political leaders who are in Parliament yet if you look at the scheme of Parliament where you are given one-off to buy a vehicle, it is a big saving. Where we are spending lots of money on vehicles that suffer abuses everyday are vehicles that are provided to civil servants and other public servants. 

Mr Speaker, if you do the calculations alone - and I would like to thank the Minister of Finance because they aggregate the budget items every year - for a year I am talking about, we spent Shs 435 billion on replacing vehicles because as you are aware we replace vehicles for people who are entitled after every five years or when the vehicle has reached 100,000 kilometres.

As we replace those vehicles every year we spend on average Shs 180 billion. We are also spending Shs 150 billion on buying fuel, and if you look at the aggregated items, you realise that we are spending Shs 100 billion on maintenance yet these vehicles are abused as each one of us can bear me witness. You find them carrying charcoal, goats, ferrying children to school. And they also suffer further abuse. In some departments the entitled officers at the level of director and above sometimes when new ones are bought, they simply pass on the old ones to the officers who are not entitled under the standing orders. This motion is intended to cure that.

In Rwanda, in 2005 they started what they called the zero fleet. If you follow the story of Rwanda you will realise that they auctioned most of the vehicles and extended loans to whoever wanted a vehicle for them to pay, which would make beneficiaries respect that particular mode of transport.

I read one of the policy statements of the Ministry of Health where they were complaining that they wanted Government to give them Shs 40 billion to kick-start the Uganda Ambulance services – the hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi was a minister in that ministry and he can bear me witness -  but the Government said they did not have that money to kick-start the Uganda Ambulance Service to transport sick poor Ugandans to health facilities. Yet the same Government has money to transport -and using very huge vehicle - commissioners, permanent secretaries, directors - some of them stay in my constituency. You find someone has a vehicle of 5000CCs and stays in Najjera; he is entitled to a driver and vehicle maintenance but the same Government cannot find money to buy ambulances for health facilities.

In Kireka, where I have my constituency office, almost on a daily basis I see ambulances bringing people to Kampala but such ambulances donated by members of Parliament. Therefore, this motion intends to make money available for us to spend on the critical sectors in the economy. For example, when I was chairing the Committee on COSASE, we asked all departments to submit a list of their employees and their entitlements. At the time, the Governor Bank of Uganda earned a salary of Shs 53 million, the Commissioner-General of URA earned a salary of nearly Shs 40 million and there was the KCCA - why should people who are entitled to those huge benefits be given free vehicles, fuel, drivers, maintenance, free everything in a country that cannot buy ambulances for regional and a few district health facilities?

Mr Speaker, this motion was at one time poorly presented and that is why it got some resistance from colleagues who had not been properly briefed.

However, its intention is a broad - we must curb abuses, some of them are administrative where vehicles are simply passed on from an entitled officer to another, but also abuses on the roads. The moment you are given a facility to buy your own vehicle, you will not use it to carry charcoal or goats.

The other day as I was coming from Kamwokya, I saw a government-registered pick-up truck - I do not know whether it was for a minister - carrying what looks like sacks of rice but with sirens blowing. Maybe he had a function and delivery was late and so he ordered the vehicle that is supposed to clear the road for him to carry what looked like sacks of rice. So, to curb these abuses, this motion is asking Government to periodically review when there is a need. But also the amount of money that a poor country like Uganda spends that every single year Shs 500 billion is spent on vehicles that are transporting people from Kireka to Ministry of Health, Public Service and so on.

Mr Speaker, I do not have to repeat this information because each one of us has been given copies by Ministry of Finance. If you look at the aggregated budget items and you see the amount we spend on vehicles every year - the other day we had a minister who handed over a vehicle to his son and the son knocked it near Fairway Hotel - such these levels of abuses can only be curbed the moment people are extended facilities to buy their own vehicles so that they can begin respecting them.

Mr Speaker, briefly this is what this motion is all about. I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to present it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Seconder of the motion, can you say something?

4.35
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my Chief Whip for bringing this motion. In the Eighth Parliament, my very good friend, the hon. Baryomunsi, hon. Tinkasiimire, the then leader of the “rebel MPs” the hon. Banyenzaki and I brought a motion of this nature in the then NRM Parliamentary Caucus where I used to sit. There was unanimity in the caucus then that this motion should proceed and succeed. 

I remember the then State Minister for Public Service, the hon. Sezi Mbaguta, on behalf of Government, undertook to come up with a policy that would streamline the allocation of vehicles and vehicles scheme, substantially agreeing with us. 

However, two years later, I think hon. Banyenzaki and hon. Dr Baryomunsi were appointed ministers and somehow the motion died. It is good that it has resurrected and I believe the hon. Baryomunsi it vehemently as he would then did and was.

Mr Speaker, this motion is basically aimed at helping Government cut down obnoxious costs. If you look at the cost of public administration with the creation of new administration units literally every year and if you look at the cost of public administration in respect of the establishment of statutory commissions and others, and you look at the budgetary allocations as hon. Ssemujju has indicated and pointed out, allocation to purchase of vehicles, maintenance and fuel, you realise we are spending no less than Shs 500 billion annually. 

If we became more conscious on the need to serve our people and aspects of health, education, agriculture, electricity and other physical infrastructure, this money would go a long way to help our citizens get the services they desire.

It is true, we would still need particular officers of Government to have official Government cars, but surely there is need to regularise this particular area because of too much wastage of resources and at times unnecessary resources. 

Therefore, we would like to invite honourable members - and this should not be a motion that would require any opposition - to support this motion and ultimately urge Government, if it concedes, to come up with a system and policy where we would know those who are entitled and those who can be given loans to acquire their own cars. There are institutions that definitely would still need vehicles like the police, army and prisons, but most of the officers now entitled would be done away with and in essence save a lot of money to put in crucial areas.

I, therefore, invite honourable members to support this motion. It is brought in good faith and intended strictly to help Government to cut down on wasteful expenditure. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is for a Resolution of Parliament to Review Provisional of Vehicles to Political Leaders, Public and Civil servants. That is the motion I propose for your debate and it starts now with each Member taking three minutes. Is the Minister for Public Service rising to speak? Okay, please do so.

4.37
THE MINISTER FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Muruli-Mukasa): Mr Speaker, I am just raising with your indulgence and that of the House - as Ministry of Public Service, now that we have seen this motion, for the first time, it was posted on our iPads about three hours ago - I am seeking the indulgence of the Speaker and the House that Ministry of Public Service be given some time to look at it so that we come up with a harmonised approach, which we can present to the House and debate more meaningfully. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was it a procedural request or a contribution? Was that a procedural matter which required – it was a request.  That request was presented to the House through the Speaker. Therefore, honourable members – would you like to be on record because you are not on record on what you have said?

MR MURULI-MUKASA: Mr Speaker, I would like to request that we stay debate on this motion until we have had time to discuss this it as Ministry of Public Service after which we will come back to debate it from a more informed point of view.         

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow me to say this. I think the spirit in which the honourable Minister of Public Service has risen, he is not objecting and it could be positive because if he had risen to object, it would be another issue all together. However, would it be something you would consider as a House that the person who is in charge of authorising specifications for purchase of vehicles for entitled people in this country, which is the Ministry of Public, would look at this in a more comprehensive way and comes back to debate? Would it be something you would like to consider?

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, as my colleague said, we are moving this motion in good faith. My only fear - and if he can allay them – are that when I wrote to him asking him to provide me with information on a list of those who are entitled to those vehicles so that we can know the numbers, his reply was a one-paragraph letter, just tell me it is this rank and  so on.

I hope - if this Parliament grants him that request - he would help and provide all the information that we need so that this matter is not looked at as a matter of the movers, but as a matter of this Parliament because I consider it a very serious one.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that there is merit in what the two honourable members have said - the Minister of Public Service and the mover of the motion – it might be something we should consider because we do not want technical objections raised to a motion of this nature, and when you do things in a difficult way, you tempt people to start putting road blocks where they are not necessary. I am speaking this now very professionally without being direct about what I am going to say.
 
Therefore, it should be a spirit that we should embrace and see if we can reach the person who does these specifications and authorises, looks at the motion and comes back in the next sitting of Parliament and we see how we can process this motion better. Is that not the way to go?

MR GASTER MUGOYA: We were looking also at the existing legal provisions and see whether this motion, if it carries the day, may not override those existing legal provisions that were cited by the mover of the motion. I think an adjournment would be appropriate to afford the two parties an opportunity to harmonise areas of conflict. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I was saying we do not want technical objections raised; we want the spirit of the motion to be processed and debated properly. That is what I was proposing because I have seen some of those issues also. (Ms Alum rose_) Oyam, on what matter do you rise? There is no debate.

MS ALUM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a simple request. This is a very important motion that will go a long way to help the Government if it passes to get some money because we are struggling to widen the tax base. My only request is that we give a timeline for the movers and then the ministers to sit down and come back to the House so that we do not just leave it like that. Could it be like one month, two, a week or in the next sitting?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The very next sitting of the House, this matter will be on the Order Paper for examination. I said the next sitting of Parliament; you do not know when the next sitting will be. I told you that I will give procedural guidance on how we are going to process the Budget Framework Paper, what time we are going to give to committees, the sectoral committees and what time we are going to give to the Budget Committee so that we are able to finish with those issues.

I am just processing and waiting for the specifications of the details of how I am going to guide on this matter. Therefore, the next sitting may not be Tuesday. Therefore, please, do not be anxious about things you should not be anxious about. (Mr Nzoghu rose_) Yes, any other issue Busongora North but why are you always – (Laughter)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This motion touches more than Public Service and I must confess here that hon. Muruli Mukasa is one of the few sober ministers we have on this front bench. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, I was of the view - (Interruption)

MR RUKUNDO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for the honourable colleague to undermine the senior ministers like hon. Mzee Kivejinja whom we highly respect, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and other respected ministers like you can see the grey hair, hon. Byaruhanga and other ministers who are here, to belittle them and say they are not sober? Is he in order and is he is even pointing at them with a very gloomy face? Is he also sober by the way? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not have the testing equipment to find out whether the Member is sober or not. However, that is beside the point; you know, honourable members, sometimes it is good to let things pass.

We have a saying in my vernacular that when you have a group of dogs and you throw a stone, the one that will yell is the one that has been hit by the stone. Therefore, sometimes it is good to leave these things because now, we are beginning to wonder whether you are feeling guilty and then you begin to think, “They have referred to me because I am like that”. Please, do not-

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. I was simply seeking your indulgence to find out whether it is  permissible to expand the team that the Minister for Public Service would work with because it is not only just the Ministry of Public Service. For example, we have other leaders who are not necessarily in civil service.

Therefore, how do we have their participation included in this so that it becomes comprehensive and then it can be debated in a manner that is comprehensive- (Interjections)- Mr Speaker, political leaders are not necessarily civil servants.

4.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I think the concern here of the movers of the motion is to cut expenditure and rationalise the use of vehicles within the Government and the Minister for Public Service, the one who is responsible for rationalising who is entitled to a vehicle - and this points to the Consolidated Fund. That is our major concern.

Therefore, anything beyond the resources we use as Government, I do not think that is what Parliament is – so, there is no political leader who does not get instructions as far as the entitlements are concerned from the Ministry of Public Service.

I think we are beyond the mandate of Public Service then probably, this is beyond the motion that we are talking about here. All entitlements within Government are supervised by the Ministry of Public Service.

However, of course, if the mover of the motion and the Ministry of Public Service require extra support from other departments, the minister will guide us and we shall be available.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MR GAFABUSA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also request the minister together with the committee he is going to work with, the intentions of the motion and proposal are good but under the circumstances, unless we get clear information from the Ministry of Public Service, aware that we are currently waiting for the results of the salary review - If we are looking at officers entitled to vehicles according to the standing orders, unless we get clear information on the proposed salary review results - because for some people, it can even take 20 years looking at the current salaries to pay for a vehicle if you are going to pay from your salary.

Therefore, we need that information to enable us properly consider this motion and see its feasibility looking at the different salary scales of the different officers. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. I think that is a specific aspect that has to be handled by Cabinet first. It is not within this motion but if the same minister has information that he can avail this House in relation to this, that would be fine but that decision has to be made by Cabinet first before it comes back here.

I think let us leave that to be dealt with administratively by the people who are going to consult on this matter. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, let us leave this matter. Let us come back when the motion is ready, when the consolations are done, then we debate this motion and take decisions that are capable of implementation. I think that is the best way to proceed.

Honourable members, I had said I would be making a communication to guide how we are going to proceed with the issue of the budget, especially the budget framework paper, consideration and handling as well as decisions that this House has to take by a certain date. Here is my communication.
 
Honourable members, you may recall that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act and Rules of Procedure of Parliament laid at the Table the Budget Framework Paper on 20 December 2017. I congratulate the minister for doing this, way before the deadline of 31 December last year. This is good progress. (Applause)

In accordance with Rule 144 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Speaker committed the Budget Framework Paper to the Committee on Budget for consideration and to each sectoral committee the part of the Budget Framework Paper that falls within the jurisdiction of the respective sectoral committees. I hope that the sectoral committees are already considering, discussing and reviewing their parts of the Budget Framework Paper. 

Accordingly, further in line with Rule 144 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, it is expected that the sectoral committees shall present their reports to the Committee on Budget not later than 20 January 2018 – and today is already the 11th. 

Further, Rule 144 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament provides that the Committee on Budget shall scrutinise the Budget Framework Paper and the reports of the sectoral committees on the Budget Framework Paper, and present a report for the approval of Parliament by the 1st of February. That is prescribed by the law.

In light of the above, I would like to adjourn the sittings of the plenary until Tuesday, 30 January 2018 to allow the sectoral committees and the Committee on Budget to handle their responsibilities in relation to the Budget Framework Paper. 

I further guide that the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget should liaise with the sectoral committee chairpersons and provide to the sectoral committees clear reporting deadlines and dates for each sector. By so doing, the exercise should be completed systematically and smoothly. When Parliament resumes on Tuesday, 30 January 2018, we shall expect the report of the Committee on Budget on the Budget Framework Paper. 

I urge all the sectoral committee chairpersons to convene meetings and Members should attend meetings to handle this matter. I do not need to overstate the importance of this exercise with regard to the budget process and its relevance to the nation.

I further direct that given the timelines given for completing the Budget Framework Paper, all the other standing committees should suspend their meetings to allow the Committee on Budget and the sectoral committees to process the Budget Framework Paper. 
I look forward to your cooperation in this regard. However, if there is a matter that is very urgent that is being handled by a standing committee, you know what to do. 

The House is adjourned to 30 January 2018. Thank you.

(The House rose at 4.58 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 30 January 2018 at 2.00 p.m.)
