PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTTHIRD SESSION - THIRD MEETINGMONDAY , 22 JANUARY 2024PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA11375Monday, 22 January 2024medical care but unfortunately, she passed away on 18 January 2024. We tried all we could but God’s timing is not our timing. I would like to thank His Excellency the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for honouring Hon. Cecilia Ogwal with a befitting send-off in the form of lying in state and a gun salute, as he has communicated. (Applause)  This is testimony of her remarkable contribution to this country. Hon. Ogwal was a strong woman who left a trail wherever she went, yet she was not the kind of person who craved for attention. Her humility, despite her massive profile, is a lesson for all of us to emulate. She loved to see everyone happy and would withhold even critical information about her life and health if she sensed that it would make anyone sad. This is why most of you did not get to know that she was not well; because she wanted it treated as something private. It is therefore my humble appeal that we celebrate the life of Hon. Ogwal and not mourn because she lived an impactful, industrious life and served her country with distinction. We would like to thank the party that brought Hon. Ogwal to Parliament; the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC), but as she legislated here, she legislated as a Member of the Parliament of Uganda. (Applause)She was an icon of love, unity and a mentor to many of us. Most ladies joined Parliament IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentTHIRD SESSION - SPECIAL SITTING - THIRD MEETING Parliament met at 12.03 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, can we have free sitting? Do not squeeze yourselves. I want to welcome you to this special sitting with a heavy heart. It is a pity that we convene here today to pay tribute to our own Imat, Hon. Atim Cecilia Barbara Ogwal - Miss Uganda, as has always been said, and the iron lady who was the Woman Representative of Dokolo District. Although death is an inevitable journey for all of us, the pain of losing a remarkable woman like Hon. Cecilia Ogwal is unbearable, a distinguished legislator who sat here with us. It is unbelievable to see her casket being brought before us; death is indeed bad. This is how mysterious life can be and it is a bitter reality that we must contend with. Hon. Ogwal’s health deteriorated rapidly during the Conference of the Speakers and Presiding Officers (CSPOC).When we got information that she was not well, I had to step out of the conference to ensure a swift evacuation to India for specialised 11376TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ATIM CECILIA BARBARA OGWAL [The Speaker]because they wanted to be “a Hon. Cecilia.” Most of us who came here said, “I wish I could be a Hon. Cecilia.” She believed in human rights and was a mother to all. You would find Hon. Cecilia calling people “my daughter” or “my son” and you would fail to understand who the real son or daughter was. Hon. Ogwal was an accomplished Member of Parliament who put her country first in all her deeds. She spoke eloquently for all Ugandans and not just for the people of Dokolo or for her political party. It was about Uganda first, the next would follow. In a special way, I would like to extend my gratitude to the general public for the outpouring tribute. Hon. Ogwal’s death has manifested a true spirit of goodness and an indication that the deceased lived a righteous life, which should be emulated by all of us. We need to serve humanity with dignity, respect, and equality as these are the attributes that Hon. Cecilia Ogwal had in her life. I want to urge you, honourable colleagues, to come together and stand with the family to ensure that we walk together on this sorrowful journey as we give Atat a decent send-off. Hon. Ogwal was a true Christian; she believed in prayer. She would come to you and say, “Let us pray for one minute”, she would pray for 30 minutes. For her, it was about prayer. She always put God first in whatever she did. She was a distinct legislator with a strong national outlook, a remarkable public figure and an advocate for a just and fair society that works for everybody. I urge the bereaved family to stand strong and further the legacy left by the deceased. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal is an irreplaceable icon who will be dearly missed by this House. When I would want to have a balanced debate, I would just look to my left. I am wondering how I will be looking on my left. Who is that person that can always come and not talk politics, but talk for this country? May her merciful Lord grant her soul eternal peace.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I invoke my powers under Rule 7 of the Rules of Procedure – which I told Hon. Abdul Katuntu not to reduce – to admit the Honourable Chief Justice, His Lordship Alphonse Owiny-Dollo into the Chamber for the purpose of this special sitting. (Applause)  The deceased and the Chief Justice were both Members of the Sixth Parliament. Your Lordship, you are most welcome to this special sitting. Honourable members, allow me to recognise the presence of Dr Rosemary Alwoc Ogwal (PhD) and the first-born daughter of Hon. Cecilia Ogwal who is here together with her family. We are comforted that the late Hon. Cecilia Ogwal leaves us an enhanced version of herself. I am saying, “an enhanced version of herself”. The legacy of Hon. Cecilia Ogwal will be carried on by Dr Rosemary Alwoc Ogwal. (Applause)Honourable members, we are in receipt of condolence messages from the following:1. The Vice-President of Uganda, H.E. Jessica Alupo, Member of Parliament, Katakwi District - at least clap for once. (Applause)2. The National Vice-Chairperson of National Resistance movement, Al-Hajji Moses Kigongo. (Applause)3. The Rt Hon. Speaker of the National Assembly of Kenya, Francis Masika Moses Wetang’ula. (Applause)4. The Rt Hon. Speaker of the National Assembly of the United Republic of Tanzania, who is also the President of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU), Dr Ackson Tulia. (Applause)5. The Vice-President of the Republic of Cuba, H.E Salvador Valdés Mesa. (Applause)11377THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAMONDAY , 22 JANUARY 20246. The Alliance for National Transformation party, signed national coordinator, Hon. Alice Alaso. (Applause)7. Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA), signed by the chairperson, Hon. Sarah Opendi. (Applause)8. Ham General Enterprises, signed by the Chief Executive Officer, Ham Kiggundu, attached with Shs 10 million for the family. (Applause)Honourable members, may we please rise for the National Anthem.(Entrance of the late Hon. Cecilia Barbara Atim Ogwal)The National AnthemThe East African Community AnthemLaying of wreathsTHE SPEAKER:  Hon. Jonathan, have you crossed?Laying of wreathsTHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, silence. Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) members, you can stand where you are and raise your hands towards us.  (Members rose and sang the UWOP A Anthem) - you will sing that after the body has left here.Hon. Cecilia Ogwal has been a permanent member of the Budget Committee. Hon. Lugoloobi has never forgotten the Budget Committee, thank you.Laying of wreathsTHE SPEAKER:  She has been a member there with Hon. Mpaka and Hon. Mwijukye. NRM caucus –Laying of wreathsTHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, pursuant to Rule 7 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, allow me to admit, in the Chamber, His Excellency the former Vice President and former Speaker of Parliament, Rt Hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi. (Applause) You are most welcome. He has joined us in the proceedings to pay tribute to our sister. Allow me to - Can I have silence? If you want to laugh, go out.Honourable members, we have received a condolence message from Deputy Speaker Esmond Forde of Trinidad and Tobago. He is a delegate of the African, Caribbean and Pacific European Union (ACP-EU) delegation where Imat Cecilia has been a member.Allow me to read a condolence message from Uganda Parliamentary Savings and Credit Cooperative Society Limited (Parliamentary SACCO) signed by Hon. Robert Migadde, the Board Chairperson.There is also a condolence message from the Government Chief Whip and the Chairperson of the National Resistance Movement Parliamentary Caucus, signed by Hon. Obua Denis Hamson.Honourable members, allow me to introduce the family members seated on the technical bench. We have:1. Mr Lameck Ogwal (Mr Smart) . The late has always referred to him as Mr Smart .2. Dr Rosemary Alwoc Ogwal (The other version of Imat).  Doctor, you are most welcome and be ready to take on the legacy of Imat.3. Mr Otyek Moses Michael    - son4. Mr Ogwal Nicholas Awongo - son5. Mr Opio Andrew Ogwal   - son6. Mr Ogwal Joshua   - son7. Mr Okello Ogwal Henry  - son8. Ms Atim Stella - daughter9. Mr Ogwal Ronald Lameck  - son10. Mr Otyek Ronald James  - son11. Ajok Susan Awongo - daughter They are here to join us in paying tribute to the Late Cecilia Ogwal Barbara.11378TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ATIM CECILIA BARBARA OGWALHonourable members, in the VIP Gallery, we have former Members of Parliament and different dignitaries. We have:1.  Dr Kiggundu - former Chairperson of the Uganda Electoral Commission2. Hon. Butele Anthony3. Hon. Alice Alaso Asianut4. Hon. Ongaria David Steven5. Hon. Akika Othieno Emmanuel6. Hon. Sebalu Mike Kennedy7. Hon. Dr Miria Matembe (Iron Lady)8. Hon. Okello Okello Livingstone9. Hon. Ruzindana Augustine10. Hon. Etyang Paul11. Hon. Okello Anthony - Commissioner, Electoral Commission12. Hon. Namusoke Sarah Kiyingi13. Hon. Osegge Angellina Asio14. Hon. Abala David - ( otyoo)15. Hon Amuriat Patrick Oboi - the President, Forum for Democratic Change.16. Hon. Justine Khainza17. Hon. Twarebireho Tungwako18. Hon. Sam Rwakoojo19. Hon. Beti Olive Kamya Namisango20. Hon. Sitenda Sebalu21. Hon. Sam Okuonzi Agatre22. Hon. Abdulatif Sebaggala Ssengendo23. Hon. Freddie Ruhindi24. Hon. Anthony Okello25. Hon. Mariam Nalubega26. Hon. Jacob Wangolo27. Hon. Willy Washington Anokbonggo 28. Hon. Rose Akol Okullu29. Hon. Veronica Kadogo30. Hon. Sarah Kataike31. Hon. Wandera Ogalo32. Hon. Daniel Fred Kidega33. Hon. Stephen Biraahwa Mukitale (National Dialogue)34. Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere35. Hon. Jack Wamai36. Hon. Judith Amoit37. Dr Gerald Siranda38. Hon. Peter Claver MutuluzaFrom the family, we have one of the twins, Mr Andrew Opio. You know Imat was also a Nnalongo . We also have Ambassador Tiperu Nusura from Turkey and Ambassador Rebecca Otengo from Addis Ababa. Honourable members, I thank you all for coming. We, who are sitting here, must learn a lesson. Tomorrow when you are lying there, how many members will be here? As the 11th Parliament, we are highly grieved because this is the fourth body lying here. We must put this House in prayer.MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. CECILIA BARBARA ATIM OGWAL, FORMER WOMAN REPRESENTATIVE, DOKOLO DISTRICTTHE SPEAKER: The motion is going to be delivered by the Leader of Government Business. 1.07THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, I beg, under Rule 56 of our Rules of Procedure, to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Hon. Cecilia Barbara Atim Ogwal for her dedicated service to the Republic of Uganda. “WHEREAS Parliament of Uganda received, with shock, the sad news of the untimely death of Hon. Cecilia Barbara Atim Ogwal, the District Woman Representative of Dokolo, warmly referred to as “Atat” in Parliament; a title meaning a respectable grandmother in Lango, which occurred on Thursday, 18 January, 2024; AWARE THAT Hon. Cecilia Barbara Atim Ogwal has been a distinguished legislator who meticulously served the institution of Parliament and Uganda in various political capacities, including the following: (i) The District Woman Representative, Dokolo from 2006 when the district was created until her death, (ii) Uganda representative to the African, Caribbean, Pacific and European Union Joint Parliamentary Assembly, commonly referred to as ACPEU, [The Speaker]11379THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAMONDAY , 22 JANUARY 2024(iii) Chairperson, Institute of Parliamentary Studies from 2020 to 2021,(iv) Parliamentary Commissioner from 2016 to 2018 in the 10th Parliament,(v) The Opposition Chief Whip in the 9th Parliament from 2013 to 2016, (vi) She was His Excellency’ s special envoy to different African heads of state to seek support for Uganda’ s bid for the Chairpersonship of the African Union Commission, (vii) Leader of Uganda’ s delegation to the Pan-African Parliament in the 9th Parliament from 2011-2013,(viii) A Member of Parliament for Lira Municipality from 1996 to 2006, (ix) A Member of the 1994 Constituency Assembly that drafted and promulgated the 1995 Constitution of Uganda, (x) The Chairperson of the Presidential Policy Commission of the Uganda People’ s Congress (UPC) from 1992 to 1996. (xi) Secretary General of the Uganda People’ s Congress (UPC) from 1985 to 1992. (xii) A great pillar for the National Prayer Breakfast; FURTHER AWARE that Hon. Cecilia Ogwal had a long notable public service career as a proficient accountant, an ardent champion of corporate governance and has served Uganda in many non-political capacities, including chairing several governing boards in the finance and governance sector;RECOGNISING that Hon. Cecilia Ogwal has been a competent leader who, together with others, strengthened constitutionalism, democracy, parliamentary practice, political tolerance, rule of law and encouraged cohesion among different shades of opinions. For her exemplary leadership, His Excellency President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni bestowed upon her the Uganda Leadership Award in 2023; APPRECIATING that Hon. Cecilia Ogwal has been a fountain of knowledge and wisdom, a member of both the young and the old in the political arena, a nationalist who loved her country with passion and promoted it both at the local and international fora and a Pan-Africanist who fearlessly defended the African identity on a global scale; FURTHER APPRECIATING that Hon. Cecilia Ogwal has been an excellent politician who, with vibrancy, articulation, and logic advocated for the rights of women and children and spoke the truth to power with unwavering confidence and conviction, yet with respect and was an indisputable political icon in the post-independence Uganda; NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:1.  Parliament collectively conveys its deepest condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends, and the people of Dokolo, Lango and Uganda at large for the loss of a distinguished and exceptional leader of this country;2.  Parliament takes cognisance of the profound, patriotic and Pan-Africanist service that Hon. Cecilia Barbara Atim Ogwal has rendered to Parliament of Uganda, the people of Dokolo District, the Lango community and the people of Uganda and Africa at large.” Madam Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Is the motion seconded? (Members rose)  The motion is seconded by the Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda, the Leader of Government Business, the Government Chief Whip, Hon. Muhwezi, the Attorney-General, Hon. David, the Arrow Boy, the former Vice-President, Hon. Magogo, the Leader of the Opposition, the president of UPC and by the whole House – and FDC. (Laughter)  Thank you. 11380TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ATIM CECILIA BARBARA OGWALWould you like to speak to your motion?MR SEMUJJU:  Madam Speaker, you used your power to admit some distinguished leaders into the parliamentary Chamber. The procedural issue I am raising is whether they were briefed on what to do and what not to do. This is because I have seen the former Vice-President, H.E. Ssekandi, participating in the proceedings of Parliament.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Ssemujju, this is a tribute motion. H.E. Ssekandi is right to stand up. I admitted him inside so, he is right to stand up. The only thing I cannot allow him to do is to vote. He is my guest. That is why I am saying that Rule 7 gives me all the powers. (Applause)Honourable members, listen to the Prime Minister as she justifies her motion.MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, this is my justification. On Thursday, 18 January 2024, the country woke up to the sad and unfortunate news of the passing on of Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, the District Woman Representative for Dokolo. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, the iconic leader, succumbed to cancer-related illness in India where she had gone for cancer treatment. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was born on 12 June 1946 in Agwata in the then Lira District, but in present day Dokolo District, Lango sub-region in Northern Uganda to the late Bonifacio Opio and Rosemary Apio. She rose to prominence as a career woman, politician and businessperson.The late Hon. Cecilia Ogwal took her primary and secondary education from local schools before joining Gayaza High School for an Advanced Certificate of Education, completing it in 1967. In 1969, she obtained a Bachelor of Commerce Degree from the East African University in Nairobi.In 1995, she obtained a Certificate in Christian-Based Leadership from Haggai Institute, Singapore.In 2007, she obtained a certificate in Public-Private Partnership from Australia.Madam Speaker, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal has had an illustrious career that spans over 50 years in both the public and private sectors, which shaped her identity as an Iron Lady.i. From 1972 to 1977, she was the Director, Uganda Breweries and Uganda Pepsi Cola.ii. From 1972 to 1974, she was the General Manager Operations, Uganda Advisory Board.iii. From 1981 to 1986, she was Chairperson, Uganda Development Bank as well as acting Secretary-General, Uganda People’s Congress.iv. From 1993 to 1996, she was the Chairperson, Presidential Policy, Uganda People’s Congress.v. From 1994 to 1995, she was the Constituent Assembly Delegate for Lira Municipality.vi. From 1996 to 2006, she was the Member of Parliament, Lira Municipality.vii. From 2006 to date, she has been the Woman Member of Parliament, Dokolo District.viii. From 2011 to 2016, she was the Chief Opposition Whip.ix. From 2016 to 2018, she served as Commissioner of Parliament.Madam Speaker, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, in her extraordinary life, has been a wife and mother. She has been married to Lameck Ogwal, mothering seven biological and many adopted children.Hon. Cecilia Ogwal will be remembered for her tireless dedication to public service. She was an eloquent legislator who legislated objectively and with passion. She has been a nationalist who always fronted the country first above any political affiliations. She has left a footprint as a true patriot in advocating for women’s rights and the girl-child. (Applause)[The Speaker]11381THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAMONDAY , 22 JANUARY 2024Madam Speaker, although the late Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was an Opposition politician, she was a good friend to H.E. the President and that is why he always referred to her as his sister. I would like to thank the President for the support he gave the deceased and her husband when they flew to India for treatment after both of them fell sick at the same time. I also thank him for having accorded the deceased an official burial in appreciation of her dedicated service to the country. (Applause) Madam Speaker, I thank you for according Hon. Cecilia Ogwal a special sitting in honour of her dedicated service to Parliament. The Government of Uganda wishes to extend its profound sympathies to the family, the people of Lango region and the people of Uganda at large.May the Almighty God grant her soul eternal rest.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, Prime Minister, for the motion. Before the seconder, we have Prof. Celestino Obua, the Head of the Okii-Amat  clan where Hon. Cecilia was married. He is also the Vice Chancellor of Mbarara University of Science and Technology and Chairperson of, Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB). You are welcome.We also have Hajjat Farida Kimbowa, the Chairperson of the National Women’s Council. We have Dr Grace Kaboyo, the Executive Secretary, the Pan African Women Organisation. You are most welcome. I know women wanted to do a lot of singing but I will allow you to sing the whole night since the body will be sleeping here. (Applause )Condolences from Hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara, the Chairman of the Board of Trustees for the Parliamentary Pension Scheme. We also have condolences from the Deputy Speaker of Parliament, Rt Hon. Thomas Tayebwa, who is out for official duty but will be joining the family for burial in Kole District. Can we have a seconder? Leader of the Opposition?1.25THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Joel Ssenyonyi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion to pay tribute to Hon. Cecilia Atim Ogwal under Rule 60 of our Rules of Procedure. Madam Speaker, as I get started, I would like to convey a message of condolences from Hon. Kyagulanyi Ssentamu Robert who was in the 10th Parliament with Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Also, I register condolences from Col Dr Kizza Besigye who was in the Constituent Assembly together with Hon.  Atat  Cecilia Ogwal and from Hon. Erias Lukwago who was in the Ninth Parliament. Even though Hon. Cecilia was not in Parliament at the time, they were in the trenches together. They would have loved to be here in the gallery but they are unable to because they are under house arrest and some, on the run from the military. Madam Speaker -THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, can we listen? The good thing is that the house arrest is not by this Parliament so, can we have the motion seconded?MR SSENYONYI:  Madam Speaker, the nation has again suffered a great loss with the passing of Hon. Cecilia Atim Ogwal, Dokolo District Woman Representative in Parliament. We condole with the family, relatives, friends, the people of Lango sub-region and the country at large upon this untimely loss.While we mourn the loss of our gallant colleague, we pay tribute and celebrate a life that was well lived. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was a stateswoman of outstanding and unparalleled dignity, a mother, an inspirational leader, and one of the few politicians who exemplified impeccable work ethics and acted in the interest of her nation. She embodied peace and was an ardent advocate of affirmative action, the rights of women and the girl-child in particular, but above all, she was a champion of the rule of law and democratic governance. 11382TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ATIM CECILIA BARBARA OGWALWhile Uganda may never see another Atat Cecilia Ogwal, she has inspired countless men and women of valour. She deposited herself in many of us. Throughout her life as a leader, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal consistently exhibited compassion and a strong commitment to fostering our national democracy. She gained notoriety when she blatantly opposed the monolithic movement system which had outlawed multi-partyism in our country. It was this bold stance that earned her the appellation “Iron Lady” - a respect she greatly walked with in life and guarded in action and candid speech. It is with great respect and gratitude that we extend this tribute to Atat, a true guardian of parliamentary institutional memory and a repository of rich experience.Relatedly, we should credit Atat for her effort in the global campaign for women emancipation and empowerment in our country. Women emancipation and empowerment are broadly encompassing concepts and require concerted efforts and a comprehensive approach to fruition. It is not enough to boast about the number of women in leadership. These statistics should be accompanied by equitable and efficient service delivery. The citizenry desire leadership that is cognisant of the plight and aspirations of its citizens and an economy that creates opportunities for all.This august House should take cognisance of Hon. Cecilia Ogwal’s achievements and wise counsel which will forever be relieved in her towering legacy and profound impact on the downtrodden. She was an astute leader, seasoned politician, excellent banker, successful business personality and a pioneer on various fronts. She was one of the founders of the Housing Finance Bank and the first female Chairperson of the Uganda Development Bank. Her tenure as the Secretary-General of the Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) from 1985 to l992 was quite transformative and entrenched the UPC. She also played a pivotal role in the Constituent Assembly and participated in the drafting and promulgation of the I995 Uganda Constitution. As a member of the Forum for Democratic Change, she diligently served as the Opposition Chief Whip and a Parliamentary Commissioner. Indeed, her remarkable leadership skills enabled the Opposition to achieve tremendously during the Ninth Parliament. It is absurd that the Constitution process she dedicated herself to was gradually eroded by the ruling Government. Her passing has occurred at a time of heightened concern among Ugandans regarding human rights violations ranging from enforced disappearances to detention without trial.Hon. Ogwal, in her interview with The Observer  newspaper in 2018, published in an article titled, “ I Survived Death 12 Times ” disclosed that she had been targeted and repressed for her alignment with the Opposition. This repression has been recurrent to all politicians who have challenged the regime. When shall these predatory tendencies stop?We unreservedly celebrate Hon. Cecilia Ogwal’s distinguished service to the legislature and her unwavering commitment to constitutionalism, the rule of law, human rights, equity, and inclusivity. Without a doubt, she has played her part.Fellow Ugandans, I wish to remind you that we have not yet attained the desired freedoms and enjoyment of human rights guaranteed under the Constitution that she vehemently fought for. It is our constitutional obligation to pursue full realisation, respect, uphold and protection of our rights. This obligation, Madam Speaker, transcends our political affiliations and stature in society; what is required of us is to rise to the occasion and demand for what rightly and constitutionally belongs to us. Therefore, do not wait for another Atat Cecilia to rise and fight for you. Rather be a Cecilia Ogwal in your own right and for the common good.The passing of our esteemed colleague, Hon. Ogwal, and many other similar deaths from foreign hospitals, continue to expose the lacuna and deficiencies in Uganda’s health care system. Many Ugandans succumb to treatable diseases, a consequence attributed to corruption and failure of the Government to prioritise the health sector. This is why a handful of able Ugandans continue to seek medical attention [Mr Ssenyonyi]11383THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAMONDAY , 22 JANUARY 2024abroad due to lack of confidence in the country’s capacity to provide comprehensive healthcare for its citizens. This lamentable reality highlights the urgency of addressing systemic issues within Uganda’s healthcare sector to ensure that our sovereign nation is not only capable, but also trusted to administer proper medical treatment to all Ugandans. Madam Speaker, to the best of my recollection from the newsroom where I was up to date, I have known Atat Cecilia as a leader who detested corruption in all its moral and legal forms. We should, therefore, applaud Atat for her clean record and for advocating for equitable sharing of national resources to ensure national cohesion and balanced national development.We urge this august House to seize every lawful opportunity and ensure that development disparities plaguing our country are thoroughly addressed through the budgetary process and effective legislation. As the Bible reminds us in Ecclesiastes 3:1, “To everything there is a season and a time to every purpose under the heavens.”  We celebrate a life well-lived and implore ourselves to emulate Atat and the values that she embodied. May the Almighty God grant her eternal rest. Rest in peace, Hon. Cecilia Atim Barbara Ogwal. I beg to submit. (Applause)  THE SPEAKER: Thank you, the Leader of the Opposition. As we pay tribute to a very peaceful, uniting and peace-loving lady, for today, let us talk about the good deeds of Atat. Let us put politics aside; we will discuss politics on Tuesday. (Applause)  Let us discuss politics when there is nobody in front of us.I also thank the President for having been a good friend of Atat; those two were inseparable. We may disagree but respectfully. Let us talk about the good deeds of Atat because this is the last time we will have her here. Can I have Hon. Zijjan, the Dean of Independents; my representative? 1.35MR DA VID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise, on behalf of the Independents, to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Hon. Cecilia Barbara Atim Ogwal for her dedicated service to the republic. How does one sum up the life and legacy of such a leader towering in every respect? Permit me, if I may, Madam Speaker, to allude to the wise counsel of St Paul, as he gave charge to his protégé, Timothy, in the book of 1 Timothy 6:5-8, which reads:“Perverse disputing of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of truth, supposing that gain is godliness: from such withdraw thyself. But godliness with contentment is great gain. For we brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out. And having food and raiment let us be therewith content.” Madam Speaker, the world out there assumes that politicians are self-seekers who pursue self-aggrandisement and enrichment at the expense of the public. If such an assumption had any iota of truth, Hon. Cecilia would be the exception because hers has been a life without scandal - (Applause) - no scandal. She lived and served beyond self, always propagating the best interests of the country, especially the rights and welfare of the girl-child. She stood for values without regard to political correctness. She was content with her modest means, debated with facts, appreciated the times and guided us in this House on what we ought to do as leaders. Finally, she did not shy away from telling the truth, no matter what others would think. (Applause)  For example, even though she had a different political orientation to His Excellency the President, she did not shy away from admitting that President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni is a great leader who has done great good for the country. (Applause)  She also, while paying tribute to the late Hon. Kyemba here on the Floor, made an admission. 11384TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ATIM CECILIA BARBARA OGWALI said she did not shy away from speaking the truth. She said that Basoga men are the most handsome and charming in Uganda. (Laughter)  She was – (Interjections) - I beg for your protection, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the view of the seconder. Please give him time; let him speak. However, they are handsome men. (Laughter)MR ZIJJAN: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal has been and continues, even in her resting, to be a beautiful soul whose beauty has moved the nation from when she was Miss Uganda to date, which beauty could move even us, the princes of the land. Her beauty has been both internal and external; she can never be forgotten. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. [Hon. Nandala-Mafabi: “Procedure”]  What is the procedure on and under which rule? The Secretary-General of the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) should be the last person to interrupt the send-off of his member.MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. This is just a correction. I was here when we were sending off the late Henry Kyemba. The late Hon. Cecilia said that she had the smartest man; Mr Smart  and that the most handsome boys come from Busoga College, Mwiri. How can Busoga College, Mwiri become Busoga? (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members - what was the procedural matter? (Laughter)MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am raising the procedural matter because Busoga is different from Busoga College, Mwiri. Busoga College, Mwiri collects from the whole country and I happen to be one of them – (Laughter) - and I am not a Musoga though handsome. Madam Speaker, the procedural issue is, is it procedurally right for somebody to mistake Busoga College, Mwiri for Busoga? THE SPEAKER: However, it is a fact that Busoga men are nice. (Laughter)  Can we now open the debate? Honourable members, I will start with the Vice-President. Please sit; I will pick you. I know all of you want to speak. Honourable members, please listen.1.42THE VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Ms Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker - THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, please listen. MS ALUPO:  I stand here to support the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I learnt with deep sorrow the untimely death of our comrade, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal Atim ( Imat) who passed away on 18 January 2024, in India. On behalf of the Office of the Vice President, my own behalf and indeed the people of Katakwi District, I would like to extend sincere condolences to her family, the people of Lango, the Parliament of Uganda and the country at large. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was a great stateswoman who loved her country and she will be missed dearly by all the people of Uganda and particularly us, the women and girls. I, therefore, reiterate what I said before; that I stand to support the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and I state that I entirely associate myself with all the contents of the motion. We can say so many things about Hon. Cecilia Ogwal but I would like to keep it to the motion. I pray that the Almighty God grants the entire family the courage and strength to go through this trying moment. I thank His Excellency, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of the Republic of Uganda, for giving her an official burial. Relatedly, I thank you for convening a special session to allow us to pay tribute to her. May her soul rest in eternal peace. [Mr Zijjan]11385THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAMONDAY , 22 JANUARY 2024THE SPEAKER: Thank you, the Vice President (VP). Hon. Obua- 1.45THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua): Madam Speaker, I rise to support the motion as moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. In loving memory of the late Hon. Cecilia Ogwal (Atat),  I wish to pay tribute to her on three fronts. First, I recollect my maiden meeting with her while I was a child. Second, to put on record the moment she felt a bit disappointed in me in my political life and third, to state the moment that changed my world view on who she was.Madam Speaker, in 1994 at the age of 14 years while a student at Lango College - it equally has handsome men and they are here in this Parliament - I had the opportunity to represent the children of Northern Uganda at the Parliamentary Mock Debate during Constituent Assembly (CA) when it was considering the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution. That formed my maiden meeting with Hon. Cecilia Ogwal (Atat)  at the age of 14 years while in senior one representing the children of Northern Uganda. What we debated then was what the children of Uganda thought would be embedded in our national Constitution as the rights of the children of Uganda and that forms part of Chapter 4 of our national Constitution. In 2001–2002, I was a youth leader; the Chairperson, District Youth Council of Lira and a Member of the National Executive Committee of the National Youth Council of Uganda. During that transitional process from the movement system to full multiparty, we all know that Hon. Cecilia Ogwal’s ( Atat) political origin is Uganda People’s Congress (UPC). While in leadership, as a youth, she managed to persuade all the youth leaders to join UPC with the exception of Obua Denis Hamson, the then District Youth Council Chairman of Lira and a Member of the National Executive Committee. However, I state that much as Atat felt disappointed, she respected my opinion and I salute her for that. All the two district youth councillors were UPC, the district delegate to the National Youth Council was turned to UPC, my secretary for finance, who is the current Chairman, Local Council V Dokolo District on FDC ticket and one of their national vice chairpersons was equally taken by Atat. I remained where I was. Later on, when I narrated to Atat the reason I made a choice to support the movement, currently the National Resistance Movement, I told her my childhood story to the effect that in 1986 to 1987, when the National Resistance Army took over power, there was a notorious character called Ojuko who came and traversed the entire Lango. I still recall, as a child, that Ojuko drove us up to Abako to look for Agetta. We walked with the family from Abako up to Lira and ended up at the home of one of my maternal uncles. When I told Atat that, that formed the basis of why I support the movement, President Museveni and the National Resistance Movement; because they saved the life of Obua and family when he was young, she respected that. That said, Madam Speaker –(Interruption) THE SPEAKER: There is an order. MR NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker - THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am going to limit the time so you should be able to - MR NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You guided us well that we should concentrate on the good deeds and not invoke politics. Otherwise, the way you can see the proceedings, the Government Chief Whip is taking us to political - and that can open a Pandora’s box in that regard. THE SPEAKER: Counsel, Hon. Hamson Obua is saying that Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was 11386TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ATIM CECILIA BARBARA OGWALa tolerant lady and would respect everybody’s views; that is all he is saying; and much as he refused to join the UPC, and remained where he was and Atat was okay with that. Can you conclude? MR OBUA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hold the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) Whip in high regard. Finally, Madam Speaker, one moment I will live to remember was in 2012, when Lango was confronted with a land conflict in Otuke that led to the death of one of the cultural leaders. We assembled as members of the Lango Parliamentary Group and had a visit to Otuke District. While in Otuke, Atat played the role of an atat in the culture of the Lango. The situation was exceedingly volatile. That meeting of Otuke culminated in another meeting with the President in Rwakitura on the land question. That was another very volatile meeting. It took the wisdom of the Hon. Atat lying here, knowledge of the Hon. Atat, understanding and a wealth of experience. That is the elder I am talking about.In any society, there is always this one elder that everyone would coalesce around when it comes to a critical moment when there is a storm and Atat would be that elder for Lango. When there was a storm regarding the matters of land, Atat was the only one who could calm down the storm in the presence of the President. Hon. Atat, I thank you, and I say that your commitment, dedication, zeal and stamina in fighting for the cause you believed in, will live as your legacy. We can only promise you, as the Joshua generation, as envisaged in the Bible, that we will try our best to follow in your footsteps. Rest in peace, Hon. Atat Cecilia. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, Gender –1.54THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I pay tribute to the woman who broke the glass ceiling for other women in this country. (Applause)  When we talk about breaking the glass ceiling, what do we mean? We mean a woman who has broken barriers that would otherwise have stopped her from ascending to that powerful position. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal stood first with the men, in a period where standing with men as a woman was not easy. They were here with Hon. Winnie Byanyima, and Hon. Specioza Kazibwe; they were less than five women who stood with men. Number two, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was Assistant Secretary-General of a political party, a position that would be occupied by men in most cases, but she occupied that position. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was a woman who championed issues that were always championed by men. In most circumstances, Cecilia was the one who drove the multi-party agenda and men followed her to drive that agenda. In Northern Uganda, she drove the land question and the men followed her to ensure that customary land ownership was integrated into the Constitution of Uganda with the likes of the Chief Justice; that was Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. The issues that were male-dominated - she drove them. That is what we call breaking the barriers. Breaking the barriers where women would not otherwise be. Issues that women would otherwise not be doing. She, in the Constituent Assembly, with the likes of Hon. Matembe, Hon. Winnie Byanyima, Hon. Specioza and others, they institutionalised affirmative action in the Constitution. (Applause)  Most of the women here have come on affirmative action. She will forever be remembered for institutionalising women’s issues, policies and laws. She fought against gender-based violence, which is why today, we are in this colour. She ensured that everything [The Speaker]11387THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAMONDAY , 22 JANUARY 2024she talked about, be it democracy or human rights, was engendered. She always reminded the President, Parliament and everybody to; number one, include women, two, ensure that girl-child is protected and ensure that women’s issues are mainstreamed in everything. I salute you, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  We have a condolence message from the National Resistance Movement signed by the Secretary-General, Hon. Richard Todwong and from the Speaker of EALA. Yes, Health, Dr Aceng. Then I come back to –1.57THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Ruth Aceng):  Madam Speaker and honourable members, allow me to bring condolences from the people of Lira City where Imat Cecilia, served as a Member of Parliament for 10 years, from 1996 to 2006 when it was still a municipality. Condolences to you, Madam Speaker, the Parliament of Uganda, the family, the people of Lango, and the entire Government. Hon. Imat Cecilia Ogwal, also popularly known as Atat, mummy, or iron lady, was a prayer warrior, mentor, mediator, and a great advocate for the girl-child and women empowerment, a Nationalist and a Pan-Africanist. As one of the longest-serving legislators Hon. Imat Cecilia was committed to ensuring that our country develops in all aspects. Madam Speaker, allow me to highlight a few critical contributions, especially in the health sector, that stood out very prominently. She strongly supported the establishment by law of the specialised institutions, the Uganda Heart Institute and the Uganda Cancer Institute, emphasising the need to give autonomy to these institutions to function as specialities. In a special way, allow me to appreciate Uganda Cancer Institute for taking care of Atat before her demise. Number two, Madam Speaker, in the Ninth Parliament- I was the Director General of Health Services - she and many other Members put up a strong fight for the increase of the budget for the health sector to cater for the upgrade and construction of health centres III, to an extent that there was a stalemate for two weeks. Parliament could not pass the budget until the Government granted their request. Because of this effort, as of today, we have been able to upgrade 340 facilities under the Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers (UgIFT) Programme and constructed 31 new ones. In addition, under the Association of Maternal & Child Health Programmes (AMCHP), we have upgraded 41 health centre IIs to health centre III and improved 40 health centres III, including equipping all of them. The total number came to 452. Madam Speaker, I hope somebody else will rise to that challenge. Number three is maternal and child health improvement. As a permanent member of the Committee on Budget, she always emphasised the need for Government to invest in maternal child health services to improve quality. She saw the high maternal and child mortality as a hindrance to the development of our country. No wonder, when the Uganda Bureau of Statistics released the results of the Uganda Demographic Health Survey in October last year, indicating that maternal mortality had dropped from 336 to 189 per 100,000 live births and under five mortalities had dropped from 64 to 52 from 2016 to 2022, she gave me a call to say, “well done my daughter but it is not yet enough. As long as women and children are still dying, you have to increase the effort.” Lastly, a very emotional one. Madam Speaker, Imat’ s  voice rose up on the issue of the Positron Emission Tomography (PET) scan at Uganda Cancer Institute. She would always ask why we cannot have a PET scan in the country to avoid referrals abroad for its use. For the last two financial years, she roared this concern in this Parliament. 11388TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ATIM CECILIA BARBARA OGWALMadam Speaker, allow me to report that Hon. Ogwal’s efforts were not in vain, although she did not live to use the PET scan, which was one of the reasons for her referral. Today, the process for procurement and installation are in progress and I believe that her family and all of us will be witnesses to this. (Applause)In conclusion, Imat Cecilia was a great ally to the health sector in all aspects, whether it was drug availability, equipment, human resources, infrastructure or otherwise. The health sector will greatly miss her. Mummy,  rest in eternal peace. Amen.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, all of you are going to speak. We shall sit here up to six o’clock. Let us reduce on the time.2.03THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE  (Dr Chris Baryomunsi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Interjections)  Yes, they are reminding me to smile and the Ugandans have complied with smiling. I stand here on behalf of the people of Kinkizi East Constituency in Kanungu, the Kigezi community as the Chairperson of Kigezi Parliamentary Forum and also on behalf of NRM where I serve as the Vice-Chairperson of the party for Western Uganda; I convey condolences to you, Madam Speaker, the honourable members of the House, the family of Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, our friend and colleague, the people of Lango and Northern Uganda and indeed, Ugandans, the FDC party where she belonged and the Opposition. In the Ninth Parliament, I served as a Parliamentary Commissioner and we used to prepare budgets for Parliament with Hon. Okupa here and others. One of the difficult moments was when we would reach the item of how many MPs we should budget for, who would die in that year - because supporting ourselves when we die is one of the V ote items - and we would be at pain to estimate how many. My prayer is that this does not happen again in this Parliament and in many other parliaments to come because it is sad. However, it is also a sad reminder that all of us have to take this journey in our lives. Therefore, we feel pain, saddened and our condolences go to everybody. Somebody said that “It is not the number of years in your life that matter but the life in your years.” At 77, Atat has had an impactful life. And if we were to speak about her, we can speak until the cows come home. We salute her because she was a voice of reason. She was a person who did not speak for the sake of speaking but every time she spoke, the direction would change in this House when there was a contentious matter. We have a lot to learn from her. Her mother and my mother were sick and they shared a room in the Uganda Heart Institute. We were spending nights together as MPs nursing our mothers. We had time to share. Her mother died first and mine died the following day so, we bonded and became very close. She was passionate about health like the Minister of Health said, but she became even much more passionate when I told her that we had Bills on the Uganda Cancer Institute and the Uganda Heart Institute, to bring to Parliament.She started visiting my office saying, “You must bring those Bills.” She mounted pressure on me as the Minister of State. Indeed, we brought the Bills and passed them into law. Since then, she even increased her passion for issues of health and other related items. We thank her for her contribution; she was a member of the Opposition but extremely respectful to everybody, including us, who serve in Government. I think tolerance and respect for each other is one great lesson we should pick from her plus [Dr Aceng]11389THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAMONDAY , 22 JANUARY 2024many other causes, which she championed. We thank her family for looking after her and pray that the good Lord rests her soul in eternal peace. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Let us reduce the time to two minutes.2.08THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS  (Mr Nobert Mao):  Madam Speaker, those of us who were in the Sixth Parliament have a lot to say but many will be able to publish our tributes in the other media because time will not allow us to say all we would wish to say. The Members of the Sixth Parliament are both in this Chamber and in the gallery. I want to salute them for showing up in full force to remember a gallant stateswoman. I also wish to salute the spirit in which this debate is taking place. Imat Cecilia Ogwal was a fun-loving lady. I do not think she would be happy to see people mournful and being too solemn. The spirit in which we are debating is also a true spirit of the kind of person she was. Out there in the foyer where the body lay for viewing, I had a little chat with one of those who were with us in the Sixth Parliament, Hon. Dr Miria Matembe and I asked her, “What would you say?” She said, “Only one thing; Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was always for God and her country.” nothing summarises the person we are celebrating more than that.  (Applause) The Rotarians have the four-way test but I think she had a two-way test. Is it God’s will, and does it serve my country? Full stop. I also met our High Commissioner to the United Kingdom, Ambassador Nimisha Madhvani who said she celebrates Imat Cecilia Ogwal for advocating for more money to improve our embassies and the work of those who serve our country abroad. We had the CSPOC, which you presided over, Madam Speaker. We had NAM and now the G77+ China; we live in a global village. As part of our tribute to Imat,  let us support our Missions Abroad because those are the ones that advocate for better trade. They can explain some of the laws that we pass here better than anybody else because they live there. Some of us visit but we do not have the networks. No wonder, because of her international reach, there has been an outpouring of tributes from far and wide. She had a loving heart that never tired of giving. She always spoke about what it means to be a woman in politics, that it is not fun. In fact, she called it a journey of pain. There is a book called “Dancing Backwards in High Heels”. I will send a copy to UWOPA. That is what it is for women; it is like dancing backwards in high heels. I think men would even have it rougher if they tried. She was capable of speaking truth to power.We need people who can talk to powerful people, not necessarily in public, but even in private. All of us know powerful people. Whether you are the President of Uganda, the Speaker of Parliament or the leader of a party, you need people who can come and tell you what you look like and put the mirror in front of your eyes. She had that ability. (Applause) Every country needs that. This is the time to summon our elder statesmen and stateswomen to call us to order – we who are still on the frontlines. She also debunked the fact that a powerful woman does not necessarily have to be feminine, have a family or be a loving wife. Some people think powerful women do not have husbands. (Applause)  It is a tribute to Imat Cecilia Ogwal that you can be a powerful advocate for women’s rights without simply degenerating into cantankerousness. (Laughter)  We also thank Mzee  Lameck Ogwal for standing by Imat Cecilia Ogwal. I remember Imat Cecilia teasing the President, that, “You are only counting 50 years of marriage; I have been at it longer than you.” That is the kind of person we are saying bye to. 11390TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ATIM CECILIA BARBARA OGWALShe was a torchbearer for freedom. She believed in pluralism. She denounced the stigmatisation of people simply because they belong to a particular political party or a particular tribe. She committed herself to her family like all of us should. All of us have our family stories – some of us have dropped out of that arrangement. Thanks to Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. It is important to have your family by you. It is very important because you, Members of Parliament, passed a law primarily to protect the family. In tribute to Imat Cecilia, it is important that we thank her for going out of her way to explain what the anti-homosexuality law was all about to people who were refusing to understand. She said it was not targeting homosexuals but aggravated defilement, rape – whether heterosexual or homosexual. Out there, there are those who are trying to distort our message. So, Imat Cecilia Ogwal has been speaking out for Uganda. She was the embodiment of a true patriot.She was assertive but also had empathy. She could understand without judging. The fact that you understand does not mean you have agreed. That is how she was a complex person who was very easy to deal with. May her soul rest in eternal peace. (Applause)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you.  We have a condolence message from His Royal Highness Yosam Odur Ebii, signed by the King himself. In the public gallery, we also have;(i) Ambassador George Atim, representing Lango Kingdom. (Applause)(ii) Prince Edward Frederick Walugembe, representing the Buganda Kingdom. (Applause)  (iii) Hon. Jacqueline Amongin from EALA. (Applause)(iv) Hon. James Kakooza also from EALA – we had introduced others before. (Applause)(v) The former Leader of the Opposition, Hon. Winnie Kiiza. (Applause)(vi) Hon. Proscovia Alengot Oromait (Applause)(vii) Hon. Annet Nyakecho (Applause)(viii) Hon. Isaac Musumba (Applause)   (ix) Hon. Jovah Kamateeka (Applause)(x) Chris Rwakasisi (Applause)(xi) Hon. John Emilly Otekat (Applause)(xii) Hon. Asuman Kiyingi (Applause)(xiii) Ambassador William Kinobe (Applause)(xiv) Hon. Gerald Karuhanga. (Applause)They are all here to join us in paying tribute. You are most welcome. Can we have -  I had said Hon. Jim Muhwezi, Hon. Rebecca Kadaga and the Attorney-General2.17THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Jim Muhwezi) : Thank you, Madam Speaker – THE SPEAKER:  Members, I am coming to this side; do not worry. (Mr Ssemujju rose_)  What is your procedural matter?MR SSEMUJJU:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was wondering – because you are usually angry with people who do not attend Parliament but today, they are the ones you are giving the opportunity.THE SPEAKER:  Who does not attend Parliament? MR SSEMUJJU:  The last time I saw Hon. Jim Muhwezi was about a year ago. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER:  Are you the Speaker to determine who is inside and who is not? MR SSEMUJJU:  No. That is why I am putting this matter to you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Please, sit. (Laughter)MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to talk about an honourable Member of Parliament who was different from many, like many people know. I bring condolences from the people of Rujumbura, Rukungiri and from my family, especially my wife, Susan, who was a friend to Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Many things [Mr Mao]11391THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAMONDAY , 22 JANUARY 2024have been talked about and I do not intend to repeat what has been said, in the interest of time. I would like to thank now the late Hon. Cecilia Ogwal for showing a difference in Opposition: to oppose without bitterness and being principled. (Applause)  Many people have talked about the Sixth Parliament. I was here and I know many people who were in the Sixth Parliament know that at one time, there was an unprecedented organisation, but she could not be whipped into simply following a group. I remember vividly when she refused, together with Hon. Ben Wacha and Hon. Okullo Epak. They said, “Let us first investigate.” She hated injustice wherever it was, on either side of the House. I thank her very much. Madam Speaker, I wish we turned this House into a debate of ideas – where we debate and disagree on ideas and in a very friendly way like she used to debate with a lot of humour. Mine is just to make that statement. Others have talked about her patriotism, and Pan-Africanism, which are true. I thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Recently, everybody walked out but Hon. Cecilia remained here, seated alone. We thank her for that.2.21THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS  (Ms Rebecca Kadaga):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I bring condolences from Kamuli constituency, where Cecilia was a guest on 17 September 2022. She arrived unexpectedly as we were celebrating with my supporters, all the way from Dokolo. Condolences to “Mr Smart”. That is how she called her husband, Smart Ogwal- and the family.Secondly, I want to speak to her patriotism. One of the things we take for granted in this House is health insurance. When she was a Commissioner of Parliament - I think I can say this:  We used to give Members money to pay for medical insurance, but they would not pay. When they fell sick, they would come to me and say, “you know” - so we would struggle. Where do we get money? We gave you money, you did not go to the insurance. She brought a proposal that we should pay directly to the insurance companies.  (Applause)So, I dispatched her together with Hon. Nabbanja.  I sent them to Tanzania to check what the Parliament there does. I also sent them to Nairobi and to South Africa. We even sent her to India because she was trying to link Parliament to the hospitals in India so that we could have direct access. But, of course, we did not succeed on that. That is one of the things I credit her for in this House. She was really a Ugandan at heart. Many times, I went out with her - when I first travelled with Cecilia abroad, I was worried. I said, “what is she going to say at this meeting?” But, when we got there, she said, “Madam, I am a Ugandan, I will never speak against my country”. Throughout her tenure, this is what she did.  (Applause) She would defend vigorously. She would attack anyone who was trying to attack Uganda. I credit her for that.The other one was her relentless campaign for multi-party democracy. Cecilia campaigned and campaigned and campaigned. They used to quarrel with the President and everyone until, finally, we agreed that multi-party should come back. She is a voice that contributed to that. I want to thank God for her life. Here, I used to call her Hon. Ogwal, but in the office, I called her Atat. She is someone who would just enter and say, “this is Ogwal, I am here.” Then I say, “but you should have told me.” She would say, “no, no, it is okay. I am here.” She would just announce herself in that manner. That was Cecilia. We shall miss her. May God rest her soul in eternal peace.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. I remember we lost a member of Parliament who diverted money for medical and Cecilia was really very firm on that as a Commissioner. Therefore, Members, I really want to urge you 11392TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ATIM CECILIA BARBARA OGWALthat when you are out of Uganda, love Uganda, speak about Uganda; love your country. 2.25THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. It is, indeed, a very sad day as we pay tribute to Hon. Cecilia. I have personally known Hon. Cecilia Ogwal outside politics for many years from the 1980s, when we went to school to Buddo Junior and Kings College Buddo with her children. We interacted with them as friends and we grew up to know them and know Hon. Cecilia Ogwal quite well.When I came to the House, Madam Speaker, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal came to my aid severally when I was trying to find my feet in this place. She personally advised me and even when I made mistakes, she never rebuked me on the Floor but took me outside in the lobby and guided me on what needed to be done right. I found that very refreshing and she always guided me and said, do not worry, as long as you are doing the right thing, just continue irrespective of the noise you may hear in the House. I thank her very much. She was bold and she made her points clear but she was always ready to listen and understand where you are coming from. She will be dearly missed.I send sincere condolence to my friends, my brothers, Moses, Nikki, Joshua and the twins. We are with you. We will stay with you. May the good Lord grant Mama  eternal rest. God bless you. Thank you.2.27THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you. Condolence to the family and the people of Lango. We shall remember Mama  Cecilia Ogwal as a champion for those who had none; a soul of multiparty politics in this country and the lioness of the Ugandan Parliament.2A woman whose name graces more than 5,000 motions and Bills, a mentor and a friend to many of us. I think she was one of the greatest legislators of our time. I want to remember her for two things. The first is her defence and advocacy for faith and marriage issues. She defended the institution of marriage in practice and in action. I visited her at her home and I saw how she respected Smart Ogwal. Madam Speaker, allow me, in one minute, tell a story of   how I discovered this. One time, as the Minister of State for Planning in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, there was an issue with money to National Medical Stores and she came here on the Floor of the House and attacked me aggressively.  She said, “In fact, the blood of those who are dying now is in the hands of this young man.” She was here. I was going to see somebody in Kiruddu, people surrounded me and almost lynched me. I became scared, Madam Speaker. I called Mr Smart Ogwal, for two reasons. I wanted to know whether Mama  had an issue at home because she had never attacked anybody in the House as she attacked me. I also wanted to report her so that in case something happens - and he is here - Mr Ogwal came. He drove, we sat in his car, a pickup, and I narrated my story and fears. Two days later, I met Cecilia Ogwal here in the lounge and she looked at me and said, “You wanted us to divorce, we are not going to divorce.” (Laughter) I knew that Mr Ogwal had done his job. I thank you very much, Mr Ogwal. Madam Speaker, she was a prayer warrior and an intercessor to the extent that she had earned her permanent place on the programme of the National Prayer Breakfast. Every 3rd or 4th October, she would call me and say, “Son, what role are you giving me at the prayer breakfast?” She is one of the people who could pray and speak to God about somebody in the room without fear or favour. [The Speaker]11393THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAMONDAY , 22 JANUARY 2024For the last few months, I know she has seen God darkly through the lenses of this terrible disease that she suffered. Last Thursday, she faced God face to face. I am comforted that as a believer, she is seated at the right hand side of the Creator. (Applause)  This is because we believe in Mathew 25:32 and other verses that we shall be separated according to what we do on earth. I think what she did - she was a voice to the least in our community; she was a voice to those who had no voice. Mama  Cecilia Ogwal, we honour you, we are very happy that you contributed everything you had in your life. She was honoured to have a long life in politics. Many of us never have that opportunity but she used it greatly to impact the world. I think she lived a life of purpose, a life of love and a life of joy. Goodbye,  Mama  Cecelia Ogwal.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable ministers, you will allow me to first get five people from her party and then I come back.2.31THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang):  Madam Speaker and colleagues, permit me, in a special way, to read my message in memory of my dear mom here. The date of 18 January 2024, when our elder, senior colleague, mentor and role model, Hon. Cecilia Barbara Atim Ogwal, was called by the Lord will remain another dark day in our great Parliament’s history.She now joins our departed colleagues, notably the Rt Hon. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah, whom we all respected and is in the heavens. The 11th Parliament has suffered big losses in a period of two and a half years and may God have mercy on us. Madam Speaker, before you lies an institution and a powerful story of our country’s progress in terms of women emancipation, society’s pace-setter and an embodiment of the best of humanity. Before you is greatness and we mourn the passing of an icon, but also celebrate the fact that God gifted her to Uganda and she leaves the world a better place through her deeds and the power of her example. Madam Speaker, permit me to share a few highlights of my personal experiences with our departed mother. Atat was such a legend in our country’s politics that some of us met her before physically meeting her purely through the stories we have heard of her leadership skills. I fondly remember my own mother who was a staunch Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) person whom I buried last December. Atat to the UPC supporters like my mother in the 1980s, 70s, 90s, and early 2000 – Hon. Atat’ s  commitment, consistency, eloquence and leadership skills were always the reference points. The lesson we learn from this signing star is that in whatever we do in life, let us do it with all our hearts, minds, strength and all our souls. This is a trait that our dear leader, His Excellency, General Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, shares in common with Atat Cecilia Ogwal and it is not surprising that the two patriots and Pan-Africanists respected each other despite having a different political opinion. Atat, we shall always remember and live by your mentorship and advice to have fidelity in the national interest to rise above political party lines and serve the people of Uganda and Africa with one heart irrespective of the diversity of our political world views in a world that is increasingly polarised with the politics of “us against them”, “either we win or they lose”. Our mother stood out for her level-headedness, maturity, wise sense of judgment and above all, patriotism.Madam Speaker and colleagues, I had the honour of serving with Atat in the Parliamentary Commission alongside the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and my brother Hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara where we all benefited immensely from Atat’ s  mentorship, considering her rich experience as one of the longest-serving members of Parliament. Colleagues, in the course of duty, we travelled to different parts of the world and she always reminded us to be mindful of our health, 11394TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ATIM CECILIA BARBARA OGWALencouraging us to do regular check-ups, balance our work as leaders with the family, and encouraging us to have our young families at all times. In my case, she met my dear wife and encouraged us with her own marriage experience with Papa  Lameck, being an inspiration on family life, and the value of the family institution. As a voluntary marriage counsellor to the young members of Parliament, she was always a role model in that aspect of life and we thank Mzee  Lameck for giving our mother the best of her life during our time on earth. Colleagues, our icon has bowed out of the world with her head high; as a selfless person with a heart of gold, what you saw is what you got. In my own experience, she was a mother, indeed. One time, while on official duty to China, Atat and I were at Guangzhou Airport. That day, the immigration desk was busy with thousands of travellers. Atat had a diplomatic passport and asked me to move with her for faster clearance. The authorities objected since I did not have the same passport but she stood her ground and told them that she would not leave her son behind, otherwise, she too would not go through the diplomatic clearance. That is the woman who is lying before us here – until the Chinese authorities conceded.Atat, as your son, I will always strive to live by your example. As Nelson Mandela said in 1993 at the funeral of Oliver Tambo, the African National Congress (ANC) “I say that Oliver Tambo has not died because the ideals for which he sacrificed his life can never die” . Indeed, Atat Hon. Cecilia Ogwal continues to live because the values she stood for live on through us. Patience, consistency, patriotism, Pan-Africanism, respect for divergent views, honesty, being straightforward, commitment to love, and for family unity in diversity. Atat, we shall not fail or forget you. Lastly, I am aware that at the end of 2023, Atat was starting to work on her book project but her health would not allow this to happen. Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I suggest that the family begins this process of the book project and that we support them in documenting our icon’s life as a gift to future generations and the institution of Parliament. Atat,  may your soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. In the VIP Gallery, we have Hon. Malinga Johnson and Hon. Sarah Nakawunde - you are most welcome.2.39THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Mr Jacob Oboth Oboth):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand and bring condolences from the people of West Budama Central.THE SPEAKER:   Honourable colleagues, when you finish speaking, we want you to listen to others and be here in the evening to receive the President when he comes to pay his tribute to Atat.MR JACOB OBOTH:  I bring condolences from the people of West Budama Central and, indeed, Tororo District on the passing on of a gallant Ugandan. I want to agree with others who have described her, especially using the two words that she stood for. She stood in this Parliament for God. She protected, defended and promoted anything that would uplift, promote good faith in this House and also for this country. I saw her for the first time in 1996 in Tororo when I was in high school. I think I had never seen anybody as powerful as Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. She had the late Dr Paul Kawanga Semwogerere as the President, of the Inter Political Forces Cooperation ( IPFC) . We had people like Akisoferi  Ogola  and they roared in Tororo. I can tell you that day, President Museveni was the second candidate in the whole of Tororo District. They won massively. When I went to study on scholarship - and the son is here. Nick came and met me at the airport [Mr Ogwang]11395THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAMONDAY , 22 JANUARY 2024for the first time, at 2.00 a.m. It was moving to me. Before I came to this Parliament, I got to know the family deeply through the son. However, when I came to this Parliament, I think you must have followed the way we were debating. Honourable members, we need to write our tribute while we are still alive. Hon. Cecilia did that.The tolerance the Speaker is referring to and everybody will acknowledge - she was very tolerant. Tolerant people are those who know more and are patient with others. Even when you are saying something not pleasant to her, Hon. Cecilia would listen to you to the end. She loved you, Rt Hon. Speaker; she did. Many times, she would summon me from here to there and share with me privileged information. I knew she was in love with you and she wanted you to succeed as a Speaker. This Parliament witnessed many things and we get lost into many things and we forget the main purpose of our being here. This Parliament wants us to offer service to Ugandans. We would never be able to know which political side she was because she would make a unifying statement. If Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi wrote a minority report, like he is famously known as “Mr Minority”, I would only want to see whether Hon. Cecilia Ogwal’s signature is there. If it was not there, then it would be a fake report. (Laughter)  If her name was there, then you would have to listen to it. Therefore, Hon. Kivumbi, you have lost a partner who would validate your report according to me. If I saw her signature, I would know that –  (Hon. Aisha rose_)THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Aisha, Hon. Kivumbi is here to – No, he will speak for himself. Let us not have the mood of argument. He is just cracking a joke. Hon. Kivumbi himself is laughing. MR OBOTH:  I would repeat this without fear of contradiction and I said according to me, the validation of the minority report – if I saw Hon. Kivumbi and Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, I would know that that report was authentic and it had issues not sentiments. Therefore, the Committee on Budget and Hon. Kivumbi have lost a great partner. I believe many of you will agree with me that she was into issues not sensation. She was into what was pertinent. I was seated there together with her classmate- I hope you will give him an opportunity to speak, Hon. Mwebesa in Nairobi- Only three of them are in this Parliament; the Minister of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development, Hon. Mwebesa and now the late. Three years together in Nairobi. I think those are very different people. Let us love our country beyond politics or political parties. Let us love Uganda more than we love ourselves. Let us not look at what divides us but at what would unite us. As a tribute to you  Mama  Cecilia, you have left this country better than many years during the struggle. You worked with everybody; you were a Christian leader, a national leader and better than many of us. I wish we could learn from you so that you rest in peace.The people of Dokolo have lost a great leader. I remember one Supreme Court Justice Opio Aweri, who passed on when he lost his mother, I sent my condolences through her and she represented me there. However, Hon. Justice Opio Aweri told her never to retire from politics but to keep contesting again and again. Now, they are going to meet. Nobody knew that he would go first and she would follow. Why are we fighting and for what are we fighting? Mama,  rest in peace.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable ministers, I will come back to you in a bit. Let me give Hon. Katuntu, Hon. Nandala, Hon. Emmanuel, Hon. Akena, and Hon. Abed.2.47MR ABDU KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish it were possible for 11396TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ATIM CECILIA BARBARA OGWALHon. Cecilia Ogwal to attend this session; by now, she would have made some comments. Madam Speaker, the year was 1988, the Late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah and I were asked to go and meet Hon. Cecilia Ogwal on the first floor of Uganda House. At that time, she was the Deputy Secretary General of UPC but acting Secretary General because the Secretary-General, Dr John Kirunda was in exile. That is when my path started with Hon. Cecilia; that was 36 years ago and we have walked that journey together. When I walked in here, I had ideas on what I was going to say. However, listening to the debate, I have changed. I hear you paying tribute and this becomes an academic debate. Why do we not learn from her and do exactly what she was doing? (Applause)  She was a patriot, she loved so and so. All that you have said; why do we not do it?I am a product of Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. For those who have followed, you know that there is something same between Mama  and I. I never set out to be a politician. I was in the comfort zone of a professional and I was cruising. I did not realise that I would go into the turbulence of politics. It was Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, Hon. Ben Wacha and Hon. Patrick Mwondha who recruited us into politics. The values they inculcated in us are the very values you are talking about. You need to have politics and you add value. What will people talk about you when you die? People might struggle with words. Many people would not be here. Everybody is trying to grab a microphone because it was her.To the marginalised and vulnerable groups, you have lost a very, very fearless fighter.Madam Speaker, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal - my mama , never looked at herself as a woman. She looked at herself as a leader. Let me give you an example. She led a team of us - my seniors; Hon. Okello Okello - I understand he is up there, Hon. Abednego Ongom, Prof. Kagenda Atwooki, Prof. Akiiki Mujaju, Patrick Mwonda, mention it, and she was the only woman in that group and the leader.One day, while I was still young and a little bit naughty, I asked her “Why is it that you are the only woman in this group?”  She said, “Look at this stupid boy, I am the only man here.” (Laughter) Later, she told me that is what Margaret Thatcher said at the time she was a Prime Minister of the United Kingdom and she had a Cabinet full of men.She fought for the women’s cause not really as a woman but as a leader. (Applause)  Let me tell you one thing; she had a sense of humour. I am going to - she had mentioned to many colleagues here but it is an experience, which is a little bit difficult for others to understand but try to understand it.When my economics was not doing very well, we used to drive to Bugolobi with the late Patrick Mwonda and somehow on a Friday she would look after us but she was mean also.To pay tribute to her, I will talk, indeed, the way she would have talked because that is her- she was mean so she would give us little money.  Cheeky as I was, I used to look in the bag and say, but there is still more money there and I did it twice. She said, “Stupid boy, stop looking in your mother’s bag. Next time, I am going to put condoms there and see whether you will look there again.” I tell you, if you are talking about a mother with a sense of humour who loved her children- forget about my biological kid brothers, but all of us, at times, the love for us who were adopted was the same like for her real children. She really loved us equally.I asked her one time, “Why are you always speaking the way you do.” Then she said, “It is in the interest of you young boys because when you get married, you need to understand your wives. If they speak to you like that, do not think they do not love you because you know even your mother speaks like that but she loves you and that way, I am going to save your marriage, but also tell you to respect the [Mr Katuntu]11397THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAMONDAY , 22 JANUARY 2024voice of women in whatever they do or even if they raise their voice, do not think they are disrespecting you because even your mother raises her voice at home.” I mean - there is everything to talk about Hon. Cecilia Ogwal.The business she last attended in this House was a committee, which I was chairing and as usual - Hon. Aogon Silas has walked out. He had raised very many issues but we were preparing for the Speakers to come and then one asked, “What if we assign what we call ‘courtesy MPs’ to each Speaker?” The Hon. Silas asked, “What if my principal Speaker asks me, can I have some fun somewhere and so on?” Then she immediately stood and said, “Can I answer that one straight away?” We told her, “You are not going to answer because we know your answer.”Why? Because there is no way she would allow anything unethical under any circumstances and that is what they call Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. I am talking about someone I have known for 36 years personally and it is not like I have read about her. My whole life for the last 37 years has been intertwined with Hon. Cecilia Ogwal’s life.Let me tell you one thing – you, the career women should learn from her. Here, in this Chamber, if you are a career woman, you must have two or three biological children, not so? Yes, two or three at most, four. How many of you have the same biological children as Hon. Cecilia Ogwal? Not many. It tells you what Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was. She was ready to play her role as a mother and not go to these career limitations that because I am read, a member of Parliament, I need to have 1,2,3,4 children. She went all the way, all my brothers and sisters are there and they are well educated. We thank Hon. Cecilia Ogwal for this.To the family, I would like to thank you and also apologise because we took over your home and it became our office and home. When we were evicted from Uganda House - by the way, we were once evicted from Uganda House - we shifted to Bugolobi and turned Mr Ogwal’s sitting room into our office.Every day, we disrupted the entire family network because we were doing national work in her house. For that, I would like to thank the family for having allowed us the UPC at that time to conduct our affairs at home - you should have enjoyed your privacy. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal in matters of the country did not have privacy. She allowed us to do whatever we wanted and fed us.Madam Speaker, I end on this note and it is personal to tell you how close we were. When she made that famous speech in Mozambique, she flew because we were doing something at the Pan-African Parliament in Midrand, South Africa.She asked me to book a room for her at the hotel which I did. She was coming to meet the former President Olusegun Obasanjo. So, the following morning, when the President’s Office staff came to pick her up, she was at the restaurant having breakfast and she had forgotten her handbag. She told a white assistant manager lady who was there that “Go and call for me that boy.”This assistant manager was looking for the boy and could not see and she said, “Madam, I have not seen the boy” and she said, “That one was wearing a suit.” This lady came and she was uncomfortable telling me the very words and she said “There is an old lady looking for you” and I said who? She said “The other one.”I walked with her and she said “I am calling you, what are you doing? Go to my room and get my bag.” She gave me her card and I went to her room and picked up her handbag.When I came back with the bag, I held it like the women do over my shoulders. She said “Look at this stupid boy - am I your girlfriend? How do you hold my bag like that? You hold your mother’s bag with both hands.” I started looking at the muzungu  woman and I am like; “Oh my God, am I not getting embarrassed here”?  By the way, that was my mother, Hon. 11398TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ATIM CECILIA BARBARA OGWALCecilia Atim Ogwal. Mama, travel well, till we meet again.THE  SPEAKER:  Thank you for being a good son. Hon. Nathan.3.01MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am Hon. Cecilia Ogwal’s other son. We have seen her longer than majority of you who have spoken. We ask you to listen to us in good faith because if you want to learn, learn to listen. My mother, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, used to call herself the “last chairman.” When they amended the Constitution to introduce the title “chairperson” instead of “chairman.” She said she was a “chairman”. This is because she led a bank called the Uganda Development Bank (UDB), and during her term as the Chairman, it made a lot of progress. What some of us are trying to do here is taking a negative direction. I met Hon. Cecilia Ogwal when she came to our home. I was a young man. I come from a UPC family. My mother and father were congressmen, and the UPC knew where to go. She looked at me and told my parents “We need to walk with this one,” and the UPC knew how to do it. They would go to secondary schools and look for bright boys to go into the homes of ministers during holidays. When I say “boys”, it is because I was in Busoga College, Mwiri and I never knew that they were also going to the girls’ schools. However, I think they used to go to the girls’ schools also. I stayed in Hon. Mateke’s home in Kololo, a man from Kisoro and I from Bugisu, leaving Hon. Masette Kuuya and Hon. Kirunda-Kivejinja from the East. What were they preaching? Nationalism. It is unfortunate, and I want to tell Hon. Jimmy Akena to thank Hon. Elijah Okupa, otherwise, he would not be a President of UPC. We would be the ones there. You heard Hon. Katuntu say that they were chased. We wanted to capture Uganda House. As young men, in the Seventh Parliament, we were planning to go and capture Uganda House. Mama  Cecilia came with the late Dr Okullo-Epak. She looked at me and said, “You boys you are after something wrong. You are going to do something.” Hon. Okupa said, “ Mama , we are going to capture Uganda House.” Then Hon. Okullo Epak and Mama  said, “Please, leave. We are going to handle it.” That is why we never went to capture it, and you were able to find it. (Laughter) Otherwise, we would be the ones in charge. Therefore, you must thank Mama  Cecilia Ogwal who is lying here. When people were going to contest for the Constituent Assembly (CA), they had to get a clearance from the Ministry of Finance. I have two experiences to speak about. One of them is Rt Hon. Kadaga and Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. The Government then, using some methods, would use taxes for you not to contest, so you would not get clearance. Hon. Rebecca Kadaga had a law firm and arbitrary estimates. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal - she was a businesswoman - those of you who know Lira Millers - she had her estimates. I was there to decide. I wrote a note to the Secretary to the Treasury that I had cleared the two ladies because those were just estimates. Otherwise, those people were planning to stop them from contesting for the CA. Mama  Cecilia Ogwal came and said, “You are a true son and a true Ugandan.” From that day, she confirmed that I was one of her sons. In 2001, I came to Parliament, and found Mama  Cecilia and she was there for us. Again, we must tell the people of Uganda that sometimes [Mr Katuntu]11399THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAMONDAY , 22 JANUARY 2024we never did the undoable because Mama  would say, “today, no action.” When she said “cease fire”, we would do that and when she said, “go and say this,” we would do it. Whenever we spoke, we would look in her direction to ensure that we were not disappointing her, otherwise, we would be in problems. (Laughter)  Much as we have grown up, we still looked up to her. She would call me and I would go. That is why I would like to thank such leaders. You people clamour for committees - Mama  Cecilia knew figures. These are the women who studied for a Bachelors of Commerce when it was still in Nairobi. To do Commerce, you must be bright. That is why Hon. Mwebesa, the Minister of Trade, did it and they knew that it was not in Makerere. When she went to the Committee on Budget, she knew what to say. That is why Hon. Oboth Oboth is right, that whenever she signed on a report, she knew the figures. Here people clamour for committees for the sake without an idea of how things operate there. Madam Speaker, we have already completed two and a half years; look through it further; should a person go to a committee for the sake of taking tea and claim to be a member without competence? We are talking about Mama  Cecilia who would come with figures because she had the competence and you see everybody jumping up to speak when they are talking about the budget, even when they do not know how the figures were derived. Colleagues, I am worried for you women. They are now gauging you against her. I do not know which woman will take her mantle. When she spoke, even us, her sons and men who are bright, would keep quiet. I have not seen any woman who can speak here and we keep quiet without putting her on order. This Parliament must grow; as Hon. Katuntu said, we must practise what she was doing. She would debate in this House without fear or favour. She was a nationalist but some of us come here to debate as if you are debating for only your homes, which is very dangerous for this country. Mama  Cecilia, some of the women you have left behind never wanted to learn. However, I hope that from the speeches, they are going to check themselves and start learning. One Member of Parliament wanted to give Hon. Katuntu information. There are people who can give Hon. Katuntu or Hon. Nandala information. You do not just jump up and say information. What do you know? If I was the one who got up to speak, he would have sat down. (Laughter) We must learn.THE SPEAKER: Hon.  Nathan, there is information from Hon. Asuman. MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, Hon. Asuman, you are a fellow lawyer; you can come and talk. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: The other thing is that the leadership of committees is assigned by party whips. Nobody goes there on his own. People learn. It is not the Speaker that assigns. MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. The information I am giving you relates to the fact that it is possible for a novice to give information in an area where they are competent. It may not necessarily be on account of age or experience in Parliament but I also wanted to test whether you would allow me to give you information. Thank you. (Laughter) THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Nathan, can we conclude because everybody wants to speak.MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  Madam Speaker, we thank you as a party. What I raised was in good context and Sometimes, we need to give Parliament information that is based on research.11400TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ATIM CECILIA BARBARA OGWALWhen we are debating an issue about Cecilia, we should give it real-time. I also thank Mr Smart for having looked after Mama . You know Mr Smart is from Busoga College Mwiri. Mwiri boys are the best boys in this country and they are the most handsome – and I am one of them, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, you are not. (Laughter)MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Finally, to my brothers and sisters whom mummy has left, you have a big family here. Do not go hungry and alone; we are part of you. In that context, as the FDC party, we also thank members of Parliament for being here to pay tribute to Mama . We also thank the country for honouring Mama  Cecilia Ogwal. Mama travel well. May your soul rest in eternal peace.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Everybody here was either a daughter or son to Mama  Cecilia. In the VIP gallery, we have H.E. Tophace Kaahwa, Uganda’s Ambassador to Japan. We also have Hon. Bihande. You are most welcome. We have Hon. Peter Mutuza, former MP. Thank you for coming. (Applause)3.12MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I am here to support the motion to pay tribute to our mother.When I heard about the death of Mama  Cecilia, I cried. Yesterday, I came here when the front there was being prepared and, alone, I cried.This morning, when I saw the body, I cried. I cried for three attributes. One of them has already been mentioned: the fact that Mama  would criticise the Government, but with respect. I felt we need more people who can criticise but with respect.Secondly, we have heard here about her contribution in the Committee on Budget and sometimes, they would even come up with a minority report. However, one aspect that I mourn is the fact that even when she was a signatory to the minority report, in the debate here, Mama  would be fighting for a situation where there would be a compromise.I still remember the days they would walk out with the ministers of finance to go and find a meeting point. I thought that was very important. We need such people. Even where we disagree, we should be looking for a headway or a meeting point where we take our decisions.The third aspect is the element of reconciliation. I remember during the elections for the Speaker. After the results were announced, I remember our mother walked and got Hon. Kadaga and took her to Rt Hon. Oulanyah to greet and to show that we need to reconcile and move on. (Applause)These were the three attributes for which I have mourned. I am also looking around to see the people who will be making sure that we reconcile if we disagree. It is important for us to carry that kind of attribute in our House here. Otherwise, how else are we going to say we are speaking for the country if we are going to stay in our positions or blocks without looking for areas of reconciliation? Those are the three attributes for which I cried. Mama, rest in peace.3.16MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira East Division, Lira City):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the UPC and my own behalf, I would like to extend our sincere condolences to the family and the nation for the loss of a true patriot. I also want to point out that in support of the motion, there were some inaccuracies contained in the mover’s – Prime Minister’s motion: the position of Acting Secretary-General of UPC and the period in which it was stated in that motion. I would like to state clearly that in November 1980, UPC had a delegate’s conference at the Conference Centre, now Serena. At that delegates’ conference, in the [Mr Nandala Mafabi]11401THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAMONDAY , 22 JANUARY 2024team, which was put in place to lead the UPC into general elections, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal got the position of Assistant Secretary-General, which was de-facto No. 4 in the party.After the coup of 1985, with the President of UPC in Zambia, the Secretary-General partly in Zambia and Zimbabwe, the Vice-President of UPC in Luzira, Cecilia Ogwal was the senior-most leader of the UPC and, hence, took the role as the de-facto leader in the party.Even at the time when UPC was in Government, as assistant Secretary-General, Cecilia Ogwal handled the administration of the party. Her office and her base were in Uganda House, first floor, where my colleagues went to meet her. (Interjections) I am not going into that. I am putting the record straight. On this particular point, I want to thank our forefathers in UPC for identifying talent way back then. In 1980, a youthful young lady was put in a very senior position of a leading party. She held that position without disappointment. So, when we see the product, there were those who recognised it earlier and put her in a position where she could shine.As Uganda, we have benefited from giving her that opportunity and breaking the glass ceiling as the minister of gender said, –(Laughter)-  opening the door to the young women of Uganda to know that leadership is available.I must also appreciate Mzee  Lameck for giving her that opportunity to shine and for allowing and supporting her in this difficult political journey, which has a lot of treachery, misunderstandings and backstabbing.I also brought a condolence message from my mother, whom Hon. Cecilia Ogwal sought to honour under the Pan-African Women Organisation and was able to go to Addis Ababa, where they were honoured for their contribution to the women’s struggle. She was unable to come to the family home but she sends her sincere condolences. May the soul of Hon. Cecilia Ogwal rest in eternal peace.THE SPEAKER: We also thank President Museveni for giving an opportunity to the First Lady of UPC.3.20DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I bring condolences from Masaka City. The late Hon. Cecilia Ogwal represents the virtuous woman that the Bible speaks about in Proverbs 31: a woman who does business that supports her home and a woman that excels at her place of work. The late Hon. Cecilia Ogwal debated with quality. She always debated from an informed point of view. I was always thrilled when I went near her and she had these files full of information. I looked at her when she was giving her last speech, which you had posted for us and she was reading from her tab. She researched - I can hear the voice of Hon. Katuntu. What do we learn from her? It is important when we are debating, not only to have an opportunity to speak but we must speak from an informed point of view. That is what she represented because information that is researched is key, if you are going to make decisions. Madam Speaker, Mama  Cecilia also debated and practised politics that is balanced. I saw you looking at our side and you said, “You do not know whether there is someone.” I am there and I represent politicians that must be balanced. God first and this nation must be second. Anything else must come after the nation. That is what Hon. Cecilia represented. Sometimes, we dwell in the politics of parties, where we come from, and forget this nation. This woman that we are celebrating represented the nation. I can hear people when they say she was a nationalist. Nationalism has some negative connotations. I think she was a patriot. That is the right description of Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Rest in eternal peace. 11402TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ATIM CECILIA BARBARA OGWALTHE SPEAKER:  Thank you, Hon. Rwamirama, Hon. Aisha. Hon. Henry Musasizi, Hon. Mwebesa. I am coming back and you are all going to speak. We are only going to reduce the time. 3.23THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion to pay tribute to my Aunt Late Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. The motion read by the Prime Minister says wholesomely the attributes of the person we are mourning today. I support the motion and I want to expound on very few areas. One is that the late Cecilia Ogwal was an objective legislator and a rational leader. The late would oppose a motion to develop, but not to fail. Many times, she would support motions on the Floor brought by the Government side and many times, she would expose the contamination in motions brought by the Executive. So the late was an objective legislator. She was also a rational reader. Today is a testimony. All of us from different political divides converged here today. People who left Parliament in the Sixth and Seventh Parliament are here today. It sends a message about who she was and it should send a message to all of us that when we are dead, what will they speak about us? There are many people who would gamble to look for what to speak about. I can speak for the whole day. I associate myself with the messages of Hon. Katuntu and Hon. Nandala-Mafabi. That was Cecilia Ogwal. Madam Speaker, we are mourning an objective legislator and we honour a rational leader. I thank the President for according her an official burial and I thank you, Madam Speaker, for your inestimable contribution towards her health and the programme of her descent send-off. Rest in peace, my aunt. God bless you. We shall meet in Heaven. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your attention. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, Mzee . Yes, Hon. Henry –3.26THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING, AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Rubanda East constituency, the people of Rubanda District and Kigezi sub region, I extend my sincere condolences to the passing of Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. I joined this Parliament at the age of 30 in 2011. The first people who saw me and picked interest in me were Hon. Adolf Mwesige, who is the current Clerk, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal and Hon. Kasiano Wadri. Whenever we would come here to debate, Hon. Cecilia would call me aside and guide me as a young man. We did a number of business together in the committees where I was. I want to remember two incidents.When we were enacting the Public Finance Management Act, which we started in 2014 and stretched for one year and a half, Hon. Cecilia made me learn and appreciate the powers of Parliament. She was always concerned that the law that had been proposed was to ensure the powers of Parliament were maintained, both through the same Act and fighting to ensure that the Budget Act was not repealed. The second incident I want to remember Hon. Cecilia for was our experience with the Committee on Budget. As Hon. Oboth said, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal and Hon. Kivumbi were always on the side of supporting the minority report. Whenever I would come here to debate both the main and the minority report, at the end of the day, we would achieve consensus and Hon. Cecilia would allow the Government side and the main report to carry the day. 11403THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAMONDAY , 22 JANUARY 2024Lastly, was on corporate governance. As a graduate of Bachelor of Commerce (BCOM), as you have heard, she graduated with BCOM in 1969. Later, in 2005, I also graduated with BCOM and one of the key areas of concentration in BCOM is corporate governance. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was a corporate governance defender. In 2010, together with her, we moved a motion to establish the corporate governance institute, which I seconded. It is unfortunate that she has passed on before we have established this institute. We shall carry on the mantle and the future will see Uganda with the institute of corporate governance. I want to once again wish her eternal rest.  I would like to thank the President of Uganda and particularly you, Madam Speaker, for meeting all the costs for her send-off. May God grant her eternal rest. THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Anifa Kawooya – 3.31THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Anifa Kawooya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join the rest of my colleagues to pay tribute to our friend, mentor and sister, Atat Cecilia Ogwal. I stand here in pain.From 1994, with my colleague, Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, now an ex-officio Member, I am the only one remaining among those who participated in the Constituent Assembly (CA). We looked up to her mentorship and guidance. First of all, I thank the late honourable for the peace and stability we are enjoying. She contributed a lot to ensuring that there was political inclusiveness. Where we were cantankerous in the CA under the “Movement” arrangement, she calmed all of us down, brought us together, and pumped sense into us to accept that we can coexist and the country remains stable, and she did it. I thank her for that. Madam Speaker, again, I thank her for pushing for one of the most gender-sensitive Constitutions across the continent. Those who have taken time to read the Constitution will see that a lot of thought was given towards the girl-child. When we discussed all the Articles, be it human rights or political inclusion - which allows decision participation - she emphasised this and whipped all of us, despite our different ideologies, to look at ourselves as women. She was our leader; she was our focus. That is how we came out with that Constitution which was the first gender-sensitive Constitution that considers the girl-child. Every woman here and outside there should appreciate her. We should be grateful. (Applause)  I am saying this because that is the journey I started with her. I would like us again to look at Hon. Cecilia Ogwal as a mother. Her first words would be, “Girls, you are young, but you must know that you are mothers, have homes and have husbands; do not mix things”. She instilled that in us. At our young age, she made sure that we concentrated once we are doing the duties, but at the same time we should respect ourselves. We should respect ourselves as women; we should respect ourselves as the girl-children. Finally, Madam Speaker, you said that she was prayerful and I would like to confirm that. I know they have read out how many forums she belonged to. She was not only prayerful; her prayer was always received by the Lord. She was sincere in her prayer. Many of you say you are prayerful, you are this and that, but deep inside, you are not. (Laughter)  You know that you can pray some of these prayers the whole day and night but there are those which God receives directly. Hon. Cecilia’s prayers were some of them; many can testify to that. I will come to that as I conclude.Madam Speaker, I thank you. I have known you for a long time - I cannot say when - but I am happy that you emulated Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Your humanity to reach out to people, touch people’s hearts – (Applause) - care about 11404TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ATIM CECILIA BARBARA OGWALothers and think about others above yourself; you got it from her. She was close to you and you are also instilling it in others. You even call those who are not in your party, and mentor and counsel them. That is what she did.I would have said much but a lot has been said. Like I have said, I walked the journey with her from 1993, before we started in 1994, up to today. I would not have been here, if it was not for her mentorship and counsel to me. During my political journey, she would call me aside, including even this time.Lastly, I am in pain. I left the microphone, like today, moved out and she followed me. She asked me, “Daughter of chairman of UPC”. I said, “No. I am now the daughter of the chairman of NRM”. “I am always praying for you”. I said, “I know”. She said, “Let us pray.” She took me aside and held my hands. I was travelling to India; this is my first appearance here since I came back. We prayed and she said, “I wish you well. I know you will make it”. She found me there. I am at pains that she did not come back, after wishing me well to return. She is here before us; she has left a legacy. My female colleagues, let us unite. That is what Hon. Cecilia Ogwal believed in and trusted. (Applause)  These parties we are in are just parties but we are women. At the end of the day, we are women. It hurts me. I always try to reach out to some of my colleagues on the other side. Most of you know I am called Ssenga here, not simply for being a Ssenga , but for a purpose. To those who do not reach out to a fellow woman colleague, let us find our souls and pay back Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. My mentor, you were a source of my strength. You have left me here in the 11th Parliament; I am still growing strong. By God’s grace, I may see myself in the 12th Parliament to carry on. At the end of the day, we are all women. Rest in peace. I know you have gone to join the Lord. Those who die in the Lord will resurrect. Those of you who have not prepared yourselves and want to meet her, prepare yourself, and accept Jesus Christ as your saviour; you will meet her. Thank you very much. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Hon. Anifa Kawooya. Hon. Hellen Asamo, then we will have the minister in charge of children’s affairs and Hon. Peace Mutuuzo.3.39THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (DISABILITY AFFAIRS) (Ms Hellen Asamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to add my voice to support the motion that was moved. First of all, I add my voice to Hon. Anifa Kawooya for thanking you, the Speaker, for the heart you have. I know that even before you became a Speaker, you used to support colleagues a lot. Those of us who were in the 10th Parliament know what you used to do. It is not that you are doing it because you are a Speaker, but it is your character. Unfortunately, you will not be speaking in this House like Hon. Cecilia because I know you would be doing some of those things. However, in terms of supporting people, you are always there and your phone is always on. I am a testimony to this because I have always called to inform you about certain people’s illnesses, and you answer my call and say, “I am going to act.” We also pay tribute to you, the Speaker, for that kind heart. We have lost a voice of reason. Mama  here was a very good person in speaking with reason. She was a Woman Member of Parliament for Dokolo but was very cooperative with her male counterpart. By then, it was only Hon. Okot-Ogong. Whenever there was anything discussed here, you would see Mama  running in the corridor asking, “Why has Hon. Okot-Ogong left the House? Let him go back.” She pushes him back. When I asked her why she was pushing him back, she said, “Do you want Dokolo to miss out? We must all be in the House to listen,” and she used to- the other one was a National Resistance Movement party (NRM) Member [Ms Kawooya]11405THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAMONDAY , 22 JANUARY 2024and she was from the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC). Some of us here as Members from the same constituencies, do not even meet; a Woman Member of Parliament and the male one do not want to meet but for Dokolo, they were a unit. Madam Speaker, can I have one minute just to finish? You realise that Mama  Cecilia would be concerned about everybody, especially the women. When I came here in the Ninth Parliament, she said, “You know, previously, we could not talk to you people. We could talk in the toilet if we have to guide you but now that things have been relaxed, please do not avoid coming to me for guidance because I have been in this House for long.” Through inductions, Mama  Cecilia taught us how to talk, dress, and behave and she would warn us that; “If you are a woman and you come here carelessly, they will use and dump you.” Those were her words. She would warn us and say, “Do not think there is love in this House. If you have come with your burden from somewhere, keep that man, do not dump him.” I remember that voice and I thank her. In conclusion,  Mama  Cecilia loved partying - her family and herself; she enjoyed herself. I witnessed when my daughter wedded, Hon. Cecilia danced with her. I have been in pain for the last three days asking what this is. I thought-  because my daughter has gone to Dokolo, she was going to be the mentor there but unfortunately, she has gone. Rest in peace my would-be sister-in-law. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The Minister of State for Gender, Labour and Social Development (Youth and Children Affairs), Hon. Sarah Mateke. 3.42THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Sarah Mateke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand here to support the motion and bring condolences from the people of Kisoro and Kigezi. In particular, I bring condolences from Dr Philemon Mateke who happens to be my father and worked with Hon. Cecilia for a good period -(Interjection)- former UPC but he is now NRM; he is no longer UPC. I thank God for the life of Hon. Cecilia and I will speak only two things. I met her in the Ninth Parliament and when I got here, she realised I had that name. She told me, “You are our blood, please do the right things; do not shame us.” I did not know what she meant by being their blood. I only got to know the blood when I was appointed as the Minister of State for Children and Youth and then she called me aside and said, “Do you know, my daughter, the task ahead of you is very big. You have come at a time when we have a lot of early marriages, child marriages, defilement cases but I have given you an assignment; before you get out of that docket, can you close the market in Arapai?” Those who know it, know it. Unfortunately, she has gone before we could address that but I pray that we shall have an end to the Arapai market where our girls are being sold and I believe that one-  May her soul rest in peace. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Peace Mutuuzo. 3.45THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GENDER AND CULTURE) (Ms Peace Mutuuzo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.I bring tribute from the Pan-African Women’s Organisation where Hon. Cecilia Ogwal has been serving as a chairperson who opened an office for the Uganda Chapter. First, she is one of those who drafted the National Women’s Council Act but she did not only take it at a local level, she penetrated the international community and recruited all of us. Whoever she would realise can connect with the international organisations, she recruited us; I am one of the members. 11406TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ATIM CECILIA BARBARA OGWALThe first time she ushered me into that organisation, she used her own money to buy an air ticket because I told her that our Ministry does not have the money to fly abroad. She said that there was no way Uganda would not be represented in that organisation when I wanted to lobby that Uganda hosts an office for the East and Horn of Africa. We went to Namibia in 2020 with Grace Kabayo and her, sponsored by herself 100 per cent. At that time, she mobilised the whole- about 150 members were there, others with big delegations, but we were only two from Uganda. She ensured that we managed to win the secretariat, and we now have the Secretary General of the Pan-African Women’s Organisation from Uganda, because she did a thorough mobilisation. She was a mentor and I am happy that I am the fourth person to speak from the Ministry of Gender  Labour and Social Development because whoever came to the Ministry, she would have to mentor you into what you are supposed to do for proper legislation and represent women. However, besides that, she also mentored many others and if she wanted to mentor a woman, she would not come to attack you on the Floor; she would call you aside. I know mentorship goes in here even when our colleagues are attacking us, but, we are paying tribute for the good attributes she had. She would call you aside and tell you what you are supposed to do and how you are expected to behave as a woman. In 2020, there was a time during COVID-19 when she wanted us to host the Pan-African Women’s Club in Uganda. Every place was closed and locked, it was only Hon. Cecelia Ogwal who would convince the President that we should host it here in Uganda at a time of a tight closure and she managed. Many people flew from all over to Uganda even during tight times when everybody and everything was closed and we hosted it. On many occasions when we would not have money to run the office. It is only her- because as a Minister there is no way I would run to the President but if you said, “Hon. Cecilia, please ring your brother”, he had no guts to say no therefore, that office has always been fully funded because Hon. Cecilia stood in the gap. May her soul rest in eternal peace. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Ministers, I am still coming back to you. Please sit, let us balance the House. Hon. Amero, Hon. Okot-Ogong, Hon. Naome, Hon. Elijah Okupa, Hon. Sseggona, Hon. Ruhunda. Let us first have that list. All of you are going to speak. 3.49MS SUZAN AMERO (Independent, Woman Representative, Amuria): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the rest of my colleagues to pay tribute to  Mama  Cecilia Ogwal. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us get information from the people who have been here longer for us to be able to learn and understand the person that we are paying tribute to. I do not think that a person like Hon. Aber would be competent enough to talk a lot about Hon. Cecilia-  Let us first hear from people who have been together with Imat for us to be able to understand the kind of person she was. Yes, Amero-   3.49MS SUSAN AMERO (Independent, Woman Representative, Amuria):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I start by saying that many women here, will stand up and say we are virtuous women. If we want to know a virtuous woman, it is Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Proverbs 31: 10-31 will tell who Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was.  Madam Speaker, in the same vein, I thank you for the way you stand with us whenever we have problems. You have gone out of your way not just to help but to own up to our problems. Thank you so much. We pray for you. May God bless you. [Ms Mutuuzo]11407THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAMONDAY , 22 JANUARY 2024Madam Speaker, we have spoken about Mama Atat – There is a question I ask ourselves. If we go to the Cancer Institute, people are sleeping down. We have the manpower, what don’t we have? Why should we congest all these hospitals in one place where there is no land for expansion? Is it possible for this House to stand up so that we have these hospitals put in different regions so that our people can access treatment? We are talking about medical check-ups; do we all go for medical check-ups? We are here and seated on a time bomb because what we are eating is not very healthy. Are we fair to ourselves? With the nature of the work that we are doing, we need to attend to ourselves very carefully. Mama was able to be flown to India, what about the local woman in Amuria? Why don’t we as a House stand up in recognition of Mama lying before us here and push for the structures, the services that we need to be taken closer to the people so that our people can be able benefit? I thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to raise this. THE SPEAKER : Thank you, Hon. Okot Ogong –3.52MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo):  Madam Speaker, Hon. Imat served as a Member of Parliament for Dokolo District, where I am a Member of Parliament for Dokolo South.Honourable Members of Parliament, Hon. Imat was a special person and very unique. You will agree with me that Hon. Imat was very intelligent. Her intelligence quotient was more than all of us here. She has emotional intelligence also. Imat served us very well. As people of Dokolo, we are mourning her and at the same time, we want to pay tribute to what she did for our district, Dokolo. Madam Speaker, Imat would build houses for old people – THE SPEAKER:  For the elderly, please switch on. MR OKOT OGONG:  She would build these small houses, buy blankets for them, and feed them during Christmas. Now, who will feed these people during Christmas again? THE SPEAKER:  You.MR OKOT OGONG: We have missed her. We were doing it together.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okot Ogong, you need to take over from where Hon. Imat stopped. (Laughter)  MR OKOT OGONG:  That is what I am saying. Madam Speaker, I was saying that now that she is not there, I am going to be alone in performing her duties. I swear before God that I will do it perfectly. Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, Imat loved the women Members of Parliament; Imat loved you so much. She was always talking about women’s emancipation and empowerment.As Members of Parliament for Dokolo, we thank you for what you have done for the decent burial and send-off of Imat. We are deeply grateful to you on behalf of the people of Dokolo. We want to convey our gratitude to the President for the support that he has given. Imat and President Museveni, are one. She would be in the Opposition, but where matters of the country come, him and Imat would be one. That is why we are going to miss her so much. Imat loved the girl child. In Dokolo, after the primary examination results were out, she would buy mattresses for all the girls who got first grades. This is the person we are going to miss as a people of Dokolo District. As a country, Madam Speaker, Imat stood for justice, love, and equality. She wanted everybody to get the benefits of our country. She wanted everyone 11408TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ATIM CECILIA BARBARA OGWALto be at peace. I remember one time when there was Kony and we had recruited 20,000 militias. Imat was one of the commanders putting on a uniform to encourage our young boys and girls. This is the person we are going to miss. Honourable members, allow me on behalf of the people to convey this small message that Imat was sent by God. She was identified before she was born. As you are aware, in Lango culture, in those days, women were not allowed to go to school. They were supposed to remain at home and only wait to be married. During those days, our father noticed something very unique in her and she was sent to school. In school, she was the best in mathematics. There was a mathematics challenge all over the country. Imat emerged as the best in mathematics. That is why I said her IQ was very high. A lady of virtue. At home, she is a lady, a woman, a wife, and a mother. That is what I want women in this Parliament and the country to emulate. As a Member of Parliament, as a lady in Parliament, as a woman MP, take your responsibility seriously and men, we are supposed to love and support our families; that is our role. Madam Speaker, allow me to wind up by saying on behalf of our people- so dearly, her flames and memories will remain indelible in our hearts and our spirits. We will miss her, but we will always remember her. Imat, go in peace, fare thee well. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you so much. That is why I was telling you that we have an extended version of Imat in Dr Rosemary Ogwal. She has left a legacy behind. Yes, Naome –3.59MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (Independent, Rushenyi County, Ntungamo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I bring condolences from Rushenyi to the people of Dokolo, FDC, UPC, and this Parliament and the family. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal is mourned by the whole country. Those people outside, if they had the chance to speak - I think we will spend like a month speaking about Hon. Ogwal just because of her character. Like other people said, I also joined this Parliament when she had come from the Constituency Assembly (CA) in the 6th Parliament. We had an association, which brought us together because there were no parties by then. We decided to form an association called Young Parliamentary Association. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was old. She could not fit but would still be with us. I invited her to Ntungamo by then and she came among other Members. And when the people of Ntungamo saw her, the love that I got because of bringing Hon. Cecilia Ogwal to Ntungamo was beyond. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was very generous. I once met her in the bank; she had about 100 payslips. I asked, “ Mama , what is this you are paying for do you have a school? -” She said, “My daughter, I am paying school fees for those people from my constituency.” I think none of us can afford that. She was paying for children who could not afford school fees from her own money. I to take on the mantle because I do not know who is going to fit in her shoes- that heart of giving all. No wonder, that is why they were electing her in and out. I think even this time; they would have still brought her at that age. I wish we could all emulate her generosity and maybe contribute - (Member timed out)THE SPEAKER : Thank you. In the public gallery, we have Madam Amina Hersi, thank you.4.02MR ELIJAH OKUPA  (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. When the news broke, I woke up, went home and saw Mzee Lameck. He held my hand while I was crying and he said, “Do not cry, our son. When your mother was in Mulago Hospital, [Mr Okot Ogong]11409THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAMONDAY , 22 JANUARY 2024she had the courage to speak to the doctors. Even the doctors told me that they have never seen a patient with such strength despite what was diagnosed.” That was the strength of Mama  Cecilia Ogwal whom I came to know in 1996. We were with Hon. Betty Amongi at Makerere University when they were campaigning with Dr Ssemogerere. I have no regrets that I have roots in the UPC family.” We have learnt a lot from the late Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. One thing is that she never wanted to see animosity between colleagues. That is why she would always reach out. I learnt from her-everybody in this House and those out there knew the rift that was between Hon. Anifa Kawooya unfortunately, she has left- and Hon. Ssekikubo. In India, Hon. Anifa Kawooya was in hospital and we went to see her with the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga. Hon. Kawooya said, “Elijah, you are a friend of Hon. Ssekikubo. I do not want to die with pain in my heart - the grudge between us. Can you go and speak to him?”I came and sat in the other corner with Hon. Ssekikubo and told him, but he laughed at it saying, “No, that friend of yours, I cannot.” The third time I spoke to Hon. Ssekikubo, I said, “Can we meet?” Again, we met in that corner and Hon. Anifa Kawooya joined us. I have that photo. From that day, Hon. Anifa Kawooya and Hon. Ssekikubo have become one. That is what I picked from Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. She never wanted to see us fight.  After we passed a motion of no confidence to His Excellency, the President. There developed a rift between Parliament and the President but she told me that they went to meet the President. The Vice-President, Hon. Ssekandi was there, Rt Hon. Dr Rugunda, the Vice-Chairman NRM and the Rt Hon. Kadaga-The President was fuming. And After speaking to them-she said, “I do not know even how I ended up being crafted because I thought this was an NRM thing.” After that, the President asked the members, all the men kept quiet. She said she raised her hand and said, “Can we pray.” After the prayer, the President’s temper had calmed down and the relationship was normalised. That was Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. She would use the power of prayer and meditation to bring people together. When I was in the Parliamentary Commission – that is why, we need to thank the late. What we are benefiting today, if we did not have Hon. Cecilia Ogwal- when we knew that there were issues of welfare that were hard, we would craft her into the Commission to go and meet His Excellency. When she spoke, His Excellency would say, “Yes.” That is what Parliament will miss -(Applause)- these are some of the things we have to speak about now because of Hon. Cecilia is lying here. Otherwise, we would not be speaking about it. Before the appointment of the Chief Justice, Hon. Owiny-Dollo, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, the Chief Justice and I had a meeting at Speak Apartments. When we left, by coincidence His Excellency called Hon. Cecilia Ogwal and they spoke. Two or three days after that, the Chief Justice was appointed. That was the power in Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Not even those in NRM could do that but Hon. Cecilia would because of the type of politics she practiced. Can we emulate that? I think that is why God decided to take Hon. Cecilia’s life such that we who have failed to behave are able to speak to ourselves, because some of us behave like it is life and death and enmity. It is not enmity. When you are seen speaking to one from the Movement, they say, “Hon. Okupa, you are a mole. You are crossing.” When you are seen from NRM talking to any member of the Opposition, they think you want to join the Opposition. What is wrong with us? That was not Hon. Cecilia Ogwal.11410TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ATIM CECILIA BARBARA OGWALCan we stop this spirit of “calling people moles?”  Why would we? because you have seen Hon. Okupa speaking with Hon. Namuganza? - (Laughter)-Hon. Namuganza here will bear witness; the day Hon. Ogwal came to speak to you for two hours because of the rift you had with the Rt Hon. Kadaga. I am happy about the developments that followed after that meeting -(Applause) - That was Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, the one we are mourning here today. Madam Speaker, we are not mourning an ordinary Member of Parliament from Dokolo, but an international Member of Parliament from Uganda. I travelled with her to a number of fora, internationally. She would speak as a patriot. She would say: “Young man/my son/my last born, when we are here, can we speak for Uganda as one. When we go back home, we shall be able to sort out our differences. When we injure Uganda when outside, when the repercussions come, we all suffer.” We should be able to learn from that.As I conclude, Madam Speaker, she was a prayerful person. We had issues when we were having elections in the FDC between Gen. Mugisha Muntu, Col. Kiiza Besigye and Patrick Amuriat. She said: “Hon. Alaso, come.” She held our hands and asked that we pray. After the prayers, the tensions went down. We were calm. That was our intercessor in FDC and in Parliament. She would give a very powerful prayer. The prayer of the 8th of October last year, at the State House, is something that we shall live to remember. Finally, Madam Speaker, when we were on a flight over the Himalayas – I was there with Hon. Ogwang, Hon. Cecilia, Hon. Nabbanja and Hon. Odonga Otto – we had never had such turbulence in the air: for 30 minutes. She became the pastor – the reverend – in the plane. When we landed, you should have seen the hugs and the praise that everybody was giving her -  because we had survived. We were sure we were going to crash. Hon. Odonga Otto, was sweating from head to toe – we thought he was a courageous person. (Laughter)  We thank God for that. Madam Speaker, I want to end with this verse – Revelations 14:13: “I heard a voice from Heaven, saying, “Write this: happy are the dead who die in the faith of Christ! Henceforth, says the Spirit, “… they take with them the record of their deeds.”  Hon. Cecilia has taken the record of her deeds and we do not doubt that she is seated at the right hand of the almighty God. Thank you, Papa Lameck, my brothers and sisters. May God bless you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Let us have Hon. Ruhunda, Hon. Sseggona and Hon. Odur. 4.13MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Central Division, Fort Portal City):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is a very sad moment that we are witnessing today, but at the same time, for everyone who is living, such testimonies are very rare. The standard which Hon. Cecilia Ogwal has set for this country and for Africa is exceptional. When I joined in the Ninth Parliament, she welcomed me. I told her she reminded me of my late mother, who was a chairman of UPC. My mother was strong - so, she insisted on the liberation of women and girls. I said, Madam, you remind me of my mother. Since then, we become great friends. Out of our friendship, she encouraged me when I shared with her the idea of starting the Pan-African Pyramid, because I had seen that the spirit of Pan-Africanism was dying out, especially among the youth in universities. During our time, we used to have debates – and these had died out. She said: “Young man, go ahead.” At that time, 2011, we moved and started the Pan-African Pyramid, which is very vibrant whenever you watch debates on NBS. This was the effort of Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, who encouraged me, as a young leader, to take the leadership of setting up such an important [Mr Okupa]11411THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAMONDAY , 22 JANUARY 2024organisation for our country – (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Sseggona?4.15MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me an opportunity to speak about somebody I knew and loved this much, Imat/Atat  Cecilia Ogwal. I am sure everybody who knew the late Hon. Cecilia Ogwal knew that she would refer to you either as “daughter” or “son”. I do not know how many others, but at least I know I am one of those who were not a “son” – and the reason was because I fondly referred to her as my granddaughter. I am sure on many occasions, she said here, she would refer to me as her grandfather. I express condolences to my grandson, Mzee  Lameck Ogwal, who, until the death of Hon. Cecilia, I said, had not fully paid for my bride price. I do not want to join colleagues that are mourning Hon. Cecilia. This is because, as Hon. Okupa said, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal knew where she was going and she prepared. Psalms 23:6 reads: “Surely, your goodness and love will follow me all the days of my life, and I will dwell in the house of the Lord forever”.  Anybody who knew that Hon. Cecilia had accepted Christ knows that she has a dwelling place where she has gone. My first encounter, at some considerable distance, with the late was in 1996 when I was trying to follow politics in the country – I was in my Senior Six and she was deputising Dr Paul Ssemogerere in the 1996 campaigns. I wanted to follow, but I was ejected because they thought I was too young to be with them. In the same year, there was a scuffle at Uganda House and I was moving about my business as a young student. I wanted to join that scuffle. Why? It was because I heard that Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was leading one of the teams. As I was moving, I wanted to go and greet her and she said: “Young man, where are you going?”  I told her I wanted to join the war. She said: “You go away. You are too young to be in this. Go away! You are a young man in uniform and you want to join where people are fighting!” I wanted to join where people were fighting, but she threw me out. So, I did not have occasion to get closer to her. Of course, subsequently, when I became of age, I was admitted to the place where people – (Break in recording)-  politics, that was in the Ninth Parliament, when we met here, finally. That is when she became my granddaughter. One thing was clear: she stood for her conscience and she stood for what she believed in, irrespective of what other people said. I want to join voices like the one of my sister Hon. Susan Amero. When I was chairing the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government), one of the revelations that came to that committee, and I did share with you, Madam Speaker – was that there should be a plan, and there was a plan, to decentralise specialised treatment in this country. That would be a strategy to decongest the cancer institute in Mulago. It is a welcome idea and I would encourage the minister to make sure that it happens. However, it is not enough.The second issue, Madam Speaker, is that as I nursed my daughter in India, I met a lady from Rwanda with whom we were sharing a flat. She discussed it with my wife. She said that in Rwanda if somebody is diagnosed with a disease - an ailment that requires referral - the Government of Rwanda would meet the medical bills outside. Once you are referred by a Government specialist, the Government will meet the medical bills. It does not meet accommodation; it does not meet transport but at least medical.In the meantime, as we wait for Lubowa specialised hospital, in the interim, can we think about that? That will bridge the gap 11412TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ATIM CECILIA BARBARA OGWALbetween us, the lucky, and those people that we lead, who are not in a position to go to India.The alternative is: can’t we, as a Parliament - and I am sure you have been championing this Madam Speaker - find out the cost of putting up a specialised hospital in a record time - in the meantime such that we do not have to incur costs of going abroad except in the most compelling cases?  I am sure that would have been this lady’s dream. To her family, condolences but we know that Cecilia made enough friends that will allow you to walk with your heads high and fly with everybody saying that is Cecilia Ogwal’s daughter.I liked Lameck Ogwal when he said people would ask him, “Are you the husband to# Hon. Cecilia Ogwal? He said, “Oh yes! Because she is the woman I love,”. We pray for you as you have lost somebody you love, but she is somewhere in the presence of Lord Almighty. May Cecilia’s soul rest in eternal peace as we all live and prepare to meet her one day. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. We have a condolence message from Henk Jan, the Founder and Executive Director of the Christian Council International in the Netherlands. Thank you so much.4.22MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute South, Lira):  Thank you so much, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to the late Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, fondly referred to as Atat. From the onset, I am going to debate in support of the motion. I wholly adopt the text of the motion and the submissions made by honourable members except for where the records are being set straight.Madam Speaker, I am immensely proud of the late Atat Cecilia Ogwal as a daughter of Lango and as a leader who nurtured many of us into the current politics that we are practicing. In paying tribute to her, I would like to summarise what many of us have submitted here and define Atat as a political architect of our modern contemporary politics. For those reasons, she had the ability to conceive and draw into a plan the direction that this country should take. We have had testimonies about her submissions in the Constituent Assembly and how we have a modern Constitution that we follow today. Atat had the ability to customise her politics anywhere in any constituency in Uganda. If she visited your constituency, she would speak as if she was the elected Member of Parliament of that area because she understood the issues and so, she knew how to play around her politics.  Atat had the ability to fix any complex political matters and that has been attested to here. At the very highest level she did her work. Despite not holding any position, she was a political supervisor of many of the politicians who are holding offices here. For that, I treat her as a political architect. The second point is this name she had as the “Iron Lady”. I spent time to look at what an iron is. Many of us know that the iron is an essential ingredient of our lifestyle. It helps our blood to flow. In our politics in Uganda, Atat being an iron lady was an essential ingredient of the Ugandan politics. Without her, surely, there would be a gap because it is that iron that is responsible for growth and development in our bodies. Therefore, in Uganda, we need iron ladies that are going to be responsible for the growth and development in this country. Where your body lacks iron, then you require urgent medical attention. I invite us, the politicians and the ladies who are here that the country Uganda now may be lacking iron and therefore, we need to take corrective measures to restore the directions that we are going to take.Lastly, I would want to look at her values. She was a mother. She was generous, very friendly, transparent, sincere. I can give you a [Mr Sseggona]11413THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAMONDAY , 22 JANUARY 2024testimony about her sincerity. She believed that at a certain age, you need to rest. She had told her people in Dokolo that, despite the love you have for me, I have now crossed this age limit of 75 and I do not want to come back in the next election.My personal story is that Atat used to sit there and she had a cup of tea. So, she would invite me and say, “Now I need to energise you and give you this drink of mine”. The last time when she was eulogising the late Joyce Mpanga, she had no cup to pour for me. So she said, “You will drink from this cup. You drink my saliva”.  I drank her saliva from there. Since I trusted Atat so much, one time, she led us in Lira in 2017. There was tension in the country and there was a meeting to go and consult. The police had said the meeting would not go on. Atat was a commissioner, she had spoken to the Prime Minister then, Dr Rugunda and spoken to Minister Obiga Kania and then we assembled in our house, that is, with Hon. Okot-Ogong, Hon. Sylvia Akello, the late Angiro Gutumoi and I. We told Atat,  the tension may result in some injuries. We think we should not go for the meeting. She said, “No, I am a commander of Lira Boys, so all of you get in the vehicle and we go”. We trusted in the relationship that Atat had with the brother, the President. Now we sat in the car and said since Atat is a sister to the President, nothing will happen.Upon reaching there, we were met with tear gas, we were met with brutality, and Atat was even assaulted. I asked Atat, what kind of brother does this to you? She said, “Don’t you have younger sisters that you discipline when they are going out? My brother is disciplining me, and that is how it is done. (Laughter)May the soul of Atat Cecilia Ogwal, rest in eternal peace.Madam Speaker, if you will allow me later, I would like to propose a small amendment. Many of you who spoke to Atat knew that she had some claims she was negotiating with the Government about her business and she mentioned I. We it would please you, Madam Speaker, we would include it as the third prayer, that whatever she was pursuing behind the scenes should be admitted and this Government should fulfill because the records are there. I am sure the surviving members of the family can give that record so that the Government compensates because it was so close to the heart of Atat. If it pleases you, Madam Speaker, I will be happy to move that. Thank you very much.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the amendment that is being brought by Hon.  Jonathan Odur - Actually, when Atat was on her hospital bed, she wrote to me on a number of things.I have the letter. She was even able to record herself. If you do not mind, we can even play her recording. Can we have that recording?[A video was played.]Text transcribed as follows:[“The late Hon. Cecilia Ogwal: This particular video today is for my two daughters, Dr Jane Ruth Aceng and my daughter, Anita Among. I just want to appreciate you. I just want to appreciate you and to say that today has been my day two of walking. I have a lot of energy, a lot of smiles on my face. And the smile you see on my face has been put by you two daughters. And I thank God the sons have discovered that I have been hiding powerful daughters behind me that make me do what I normally do. And I want to insist that they must team up with you and make the family strong. You can see if I can leave Uganda when I was helpless; I couldn’t move on my own. Now within just two or three days, I am able to walk, talk and do all those things…”]THE SPEAKER:  We can stop there because the last one is too emotional. Atat, we are amending the motion; bring the amendment.MR ODUR:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, I will move this motion under rule 59, ‘Motion without Notice’.11414TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ATIM CECILIA BARBARA OGWALI beg to move that an amendment be made to the motion paying tribute brought by the Leader of Government Business to include a third prayer that Government fulfils entirely. THE SPEAKER:  That “we urge Government to fulfil...”4.22MR ODUR:  We urge the Government to fulfil entirely the claims that the late Hon. Atat Cecilia Ogwal had with Government. Government is further urged to consider putting a structure in memory of the late Hon. Cecilia Ogwal preferably in Lango but we would be happy anywhere else in the country. I thank you. MR SPEAKER:  Is it seconded? Seconded by Hassan, Muwuma, Zijjan, Kelly - We are first seconding, then you clarify - Then Hon. Sseggona, Aber, Herbert, Dr. Goli, Fadil, UWOPA, by the whole House. What clarification did you want to make? MR BASALIRWA:  Madam Speaker, I want to thank you. Ladit  Jonathan Odur has made a very good proposal.I think in terms of being specific, to be clear on the structure we are talking about. Do we want to establish a road, library, a school or hospital so that the motion is very clear and specific?THE SPEAKER:  Maybe a women’s hospital? MR ODUR: Madam  Speaker, the clarification I would make is that in my mind, I had seen the honourable Minister of Health recently make a statement that the Government is planning to build international specialised hospitals to support the country’s health needs.In honour of the late Barbara Cecilia Atim Ogwal, I would clarify that a befitting structure would be an international, specialised women’s hospital constructed in Dokolo District in her honour. In the alternative, we can consider her passion, her last plea she made here over time of construction of- let me get information from Dokolo, her MP. They were working on something.4.30MR OGWAL GOLI (NRM, Dokolo North County, Lira):  Thank you very much. There are passions which Imat had. One of them was a bridge called Amodo, which she had requested that it be constructed to connect the tourism center, which hopefully, if you give me the opportunity, I will explain some of the things which she advised me on. There is a tourism centre, which has been allocated about $4 billion, which we thank Government for. This is where Kabalega and Mwanga were arrested in Kangai, in Dokolo. But, there is a bridge which connects to that and His Excellency had also agreed. That is one. Alternatively, is a hospital in Dokolo, in Agwata, where she had proposed that we upgrade the Health Centre III to a hospital. Those are the areas. MR SPEAKER: The principle of a structure is agreed. The rest we will discuss. Attorney-General, do you have any problem with what the honourable Member is urging Government?4.35MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA:  Madam Speaker, the way he read it is okay, ‘To urge Government’ . Thank you, I have no objection to it.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Akol? I have some orphans here.4.35MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru District):  Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Kilak North and Acholi Parliamentary group, I pay tribute to the people of Lango, Parliament of Uganda and Uganda at large but in a special way to the family of Cecilia Ogwal Atat.Madam Speaker, you referred to us as “orphans” because myself and Hon. Asuman, always took care of Imat at the corner there and we always made sure that nobody sat in her seat, that is why today, the seat has been open up to now. People were coming to sit there. We said, no, [Mr Odur]11415THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAMONDAY , 22 JANUARY 2024this belonged to Imat Cecilia and we are going to be here as a courtesy MPs.When I came on the 29th, we were in a meeting in the Conference Hall. And then Hon. Silas Aogon raised an issue on one of the speakers asking you to get them a lady or a man, what will you do?Before Hon. Katuntu answered, Imat stood up and said, “This is a no-go area; never talk about it here” - with a lot of authority. And when I got out of the House, I talked to Hon. Lucy Akello and I said, “There  is a problem;  Imat  is not doing well.” And that was the last time I saw her until I got information about her death. But, Madam Speaker, I came in touch with Imat together with you in 2014 when we were doing the by-election in Amoru. In my life, I had never seen a woman commanding big men and women, but that was the first time. Because in the company I had Hon. Norbert Mao, Gen. Mugisa Muntu. Ambassador Dr. Olara Otunu, Amanya Mushega and the Rt. Hon. Anita Annet Among, but the commanding voice and the campaign was moving on, and under command of the lady, that gave me the energy to come back to Parliament. I learned a lot.Madam Speaker, from that time up to now, because I had failed to come to Parliament twice - In 2006 I was a candidate, in 2011 I was a candidate. So, when I came to Parliament, the first thing I did before even swearing in, when I was elected, was to go up to the home and say thank you, because she made me to come to Parliament. I learned a lot about politics from that point. Madam Speaker, when you read John 19:30 it says when Jesus Christ was given the wine, He made a statement: “It is finished” and He gave up His Soul to God. I think He must have done everything. She has done it for us. If you hear what people have been talking and therefore it comes to a question for all of us. I read a book who will – and the book says: “On the day when you were born, you cry when the rest of the people in the world rejoice. There will come a time when you should live your life in such a way that when you die, people will cry as you rejoice.” I think Imat is rejoicing for everything we are saying now. (Applause)Hon. Barbara Atim Ogwal rest in peace.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Alyek. Hon. Basalirwa has spoken.4.40MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank you because the day we heard of the death of Atat you rushed to her home. You were the first to reach there and console the family, the people of Lango and Parliament. I would like to thank you for being with and supporting us. We are paying tribute to a very unique character, an icon and a political consultant. Madam Speaker, the international fora also miss Atat,  but she is dearly missed by this Parliament and the people of Lango.Atat had a very unique brain. Even on her deathbed, she was able to speak eloquently. This is the time we have to eulogise her, remember her and carry forward the legacy of Atat.I grew up in the hands of Atat because she was married in Kole, in my own sub-county. She was an inspiration to me and when I had not joined this Parliament, she could put me down to tell me how- as a good girl. Therefore, I picked it from her. All along, I have been close to Atat and now that we are going to bury her in my constituency and sub-county, I would like to tell this Parliament that we welcome all of you to come and send off Atat in a very decent way.Atat was not a pretender; she was bold in every issue and that is why she has been very close to national development. I would like to thank His Excellency the President for according to Atat a state funeral. This is a sign that she made a –(Interjection)-  yes, an official funeral. This 11416TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ATIM CECILIA BARBARA OGWALis a sign of the contribution that the late Hon. Cecilia Atim made to national development. Thank you for giving me the chance to pay tribute.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Teso affairs, UWOPA – you are going to speak.4.43THE MINISTER OF STATE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (TESO AFFAIRS) (Mr Clement Ongalo-Obote): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to pay my respects to a truly extraordinary woman on behalf of the people of Teso and Kalaki who had connections with Atat; she had special connections with Lwala and Kidetok. I convey the condolences of my people to the people of Kole, Lira and Dokolo whom she served. A lot has been said about her. Permit me only to say this, when you met Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, what you saw was who she was. She lacked duplicity. She was a person committed to truth and honesty. I dealt with her when we had the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline hearing for Gen. Elly Tumwine and she appeared before the committee and that is when I got to know that you could never expect her to coat the truth. She would tell you the way it was. She was an extraordinary woman who joins the league of extraordinary women whom we have known in history. I have heard speaker after speaker lamenting about who will take her place. I am very sure that with competent women in this House, the Speaker can occupy that seat. I have a competent person I know in Hon. Opendi. We will find people to replace her. I just pray that you stand steadfast and committed to the cause for which she fought. May Her Soul Rest in Eternal Peace.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, UWOPA; the voice of the women.4.45MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I bring condolences to you, the family and this Parliament from the people of Tororo and specifically His Grace, the Archbishop, Obbo because Hon. Cecilia, having come from Kamuli on 18 September drove straight to Tororo. She was a lady who stuck to her word. If she told you, I would be here, she would be there. I would like to request colleagues to emulate her on that. Some of us say we shall come and we do not show up.Madam Speaker, Rt Hon. Cecilia, let me call her Right Honourable – THE SPEAKER:  Why do you speak in Jopadhola?MS OPENDI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me go to English. We are here as women and we need to thank, Hon. Cecilia Atim Ogwal together with her colleagues in the Constituency Assembly (CA)who sat together and decided to lobby the men to support the women’s cause and include the women as part of leaders that should be in the political space. We need to appreciate her for that. Some of you may not know where Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) started. That is the journey where UWOPA started because later in 1996, the women who were in Parliament came together and UWOPA was born. We have heard a lot from different people but I would like to state that we all took the Oath of Allegiance to respect and defend the Constitution. I would like to state that Hon. Cecilia did that without hesitation. It is my humble appeal to all the Members of this House that we always speak for the people of this country because that Constitution governs all of us and the people of Uganda. We took allegiance to that and that is why oftentimes she stood here to ensure that whatever we were debating upon; whether there was an impasse, she would say let us go for a win-win. That was her message. Let us go for a win-win so that we can move on for the good of the country.Madam Speaker, I sat there and Hon. Cecilia sat over there. Often times we would consult and whenever I had motions to do with women; [Ms Alyek]11417THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAMONDAY , 22 JANUARY 2024any motion on the girl-child, she would always say I would like to be present and not to bring it when she was not there. At one point she told me let us go to the Speaker so that we can have the motion on the girl-child. She wanted to go on holiday with her husband. She told me that I must always find space and time for myself to relax. That is something we must do, honourable colleagues.She was a family person, a woman who supported the family values, a woman who stood for the girl-child and protected the rights of the women of this country. Madam Speaker, I am not a member of the ACP-EU, but they have a forum where I was included and often times you saw I speak here because at the ACP-EU, there were people who were trying to move rights that were not in tandem with the 1948 Universal Declaration on Human Rights as we all know. The rights that are being fronted today are not rights that are enshrined in that declaration and that UN declaration has never changed.Madam Speaker, the last contribution and call by Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was for the Government of Uganda not to sign the ACP-EU agreement until those things that are included there, the things that we all know about- I do not want to talk about them, are not included in that document. Unfortunately, some African countries have signed but we need- if we were to sign we must sign with reservations.Madam Speaker, I want to end –THE  SPEAKER:  The Attorney-General assured us that they will not sign with those things.MS OPENDI:  Thank you. Madam Speaker, the letter you read from one of the observers- they have always been at the ACP-EU meetings and appreciate her role and what she has been doing there.Madam Speaker, she was very passionate about women and asked me when the marriage Bill would come. It is unfortunate that Mama Cecilia has gone before that Bill has been brought here.The Bill now awaits a certificate of financial implication and I hope the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development together with the Attorney-General can issue the certificate of financial implication- let us pass that marriage Bill in memory of Mama Cecilia Ogwal because she has been passionate, speaking and defending the rights of the women in this country.Madam Speaker, I end with one call. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was a politician. You all know how tasking it is. We have work to do as Members of Parliament. She was a mother but she made sure she found time for her family, can we emulate her and find time for our families? Find time to nurture your children. Do not be in politics and forget about your children and leave them to the maids alone. This is my humble call and take care of your husbands Members of Parliament; love them like Hon. Cecilia Ogwal did. I say all that for God and my Country. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank  you. Hon. Lokeris? Is there a motion?4.52MS LILIAN ABER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you,  Madam Speaker, for according us enough time to debate.Madam Speaker, it is coming to 5.00 p.m. and we have heard very good words and learnt a lot. We risk diluting the message . I, therefore, move a motion that the debate be closed on this matter.I thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, there is a motion. Is it seconded?Honourable members- Who told you to switch on the microphone? Honourable members there is a motion- it has been seconded by the Attorney-General, Minister of Finance, the Government Chief Whip, Hon. Alobo, can I- even Hon. Zijjan has seconded.11418TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ATIM CECILIA BARBARA OGWALCan I ask you something? Honourable members - Hon. Linda, I heard the Chairperson of the Uganda Parliamentary Women Association say that we should take care of ourselves, love - we have been sitting here since midday, it is now 5.00.pm. We have paid tribute to Atat and all of us love her. Are we together - all of us love Atat but she also said we should have time with our children; I want to go and breastfeed.I now put the question that Parliament pays glowing tribute in honour of the late Atim Cecilia Barbra Ogwal, the former Woman Representative of Dokolo District with amendments.(Question put and agreed to.)THE SPEAKER:  I instruct the Clerk to extract the resolution for onward transmission to the bereaved family.Hon. Linda and Hon. Auma, this is the Parliament of Uganda. If you want to speak like that, you can go to the National Theatre - and she is my chairperson.The East African Community Anthem.The National Anthem.(Exit of the late Hon. Atim Cecilia Barbra Ogwal. )THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we adjourn the House, I would like to urge all of you to be present. The body is going to spend a night here. Those who claim they loved Atat, please stay with her body. I also ask that let us go and give Atat her final send off. The President is going to come with the First Lady, Mama, in an hour’s time to pay his last respects. The body will leave here tomorrow at 8.00 a.m. for All Saints Cathedral. I urge all of you to be present. We loved Atat. Let us continue loving her. May her soul rest in eternal peace.I had adjourned the House to 25 January 2024, last time. This was a special sitting, so, resumption still remains on 25 January 2024. I thank all of you for coming for this special sitting. May the good Lord bless all of you and keep praying for ourselves and our Parliament because at this rate, it is too much. We would not have sat on the 25th of January but it is because of the Budget Framework Paper, which has a deadline. Therefore, a team will remain behind and another will go to Kole. The House is adjourned to the 25th of January. (The House rose at 5.01 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 25 January 2024.)[The Speaker]