

Wednesday, 22 January 2020

Parliament met at 3.15 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:

    1. Ms Molly Nawe Kamukama

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kamukama, I welcome you to the 10th Parliament. As a nominated member and a minister, you will sit on this front bench but in descending order of hierarchy. Your colleagues will show you where to sit. 

I would like to hand to you a copy of the Uganda Constitution, which you should study to help you in your work and the Rules of Procedure. I know that you may be coming in to present a number of issues. Those are the rules, which will help you. 

On this side are the Members of the Opposition, on the other side are the Independents and in between is no man’s land. The UPDF and others sit there but everybody here is a friend. Welcome and we wish you well.

Honourable members, we have just welcomed our newest member. In the public gallery, she has been accompanied by a delegation of district leaders and family members from Kazo. Kazo is represented here by hon. Gordon Bafaki. They have come to witness the swearing in. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also welcome 61 students from Agwata Child Development Centre in Dokolo. They are represented by hon. Paul Amoru and hon. Cecilia Ogwal. They are very smart. (Applause)

We also have 68 students from Buhamba Child Development Centre in Hoima District represented by hon. Pius Wakabi and hon. Harriet Mugyenyi. Welcome (Applause)

We also have 29 students from Otatai Child Development Centre in Soroti District represented by hon. Herbert Ariko and hon. Angelline Osegge. Welcome. (Applause)

This is Parliament Week so there will be several delegations from many districts. The whole country is here so you will be seeing very many students in this House. 

Honourable members, we do apologise for the late start, there are a lot of activities going on but as usual, I hope that we shall catch up quickly. 

Let me now invite hon. Abott Ouma. He has a matter of national importance. 

3.25
MR GEORGE ABOTT OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Madam Speaker, last year the Ministry of Health released names of health centre IIs that were supposed to be upgraded to health centre IIIs. The first batch went and they released the second batch. 

The construction was supposed to begin last year. Up to now, there is nothing on ground. One of those health centres in my area is Bukana Health Centre II. 

The public is now asking, since these health centres were mentioned in the newspapers and even the ministry said they were going to be constructed - my plea is that the Ministry of Health comes and tells us when the construction of these health centres will take place.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, I think the issue is not only affecting Bukooli. In my constituency, I have Kyeeya Health Centre which was upgraded to health centre III but up to now there is nothing to show. People were told and they became expectant. Whenever they hear that a health centre is going to be upgraded, they become very demanding.

Therefore, I request that maybe as the minister comes to give a report, she does not only address the issue of the health centre in Bukooli but also report on what is happening to those health centres in Kamuli and other areas.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the Ministry of Health should come and update the country, first, on the issue of health centres that should have been upgraded and nothing has taken place. Secondly, the minister should advise us on Kyeeya, which should have been a health centre III as well and other health centres which have not been fully upgraded. The minister should give us a report within a fortnight.

3.27
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The land transaction process at Kampala Capital City Authority and other regional offices such as Mukono, Wakiso and Mpigi is alarmingly slow and needs urgent attention. There is a breakdown in registration and delays in processing of land titles, which are affecting business in this country because many people use land as collateral.

The information we are given is that there is an ongoing system upgrade at the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. We would like the minister to update this House about the progress of this process and assure us that the ongoing system update will improve land transaction in the different offices countrywide. 

THE SPEAKER: I see the Minister of State in charge of Lands. Are you in position to say anything about Mukono and Wakiso?

3.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (LANDS) (Ms Persis Namuganza): Madam Speaker, it is true, like the honourable member has said, that we have been upgrading the system to install the new technology and this has been going on in the Ministry Zonal Offices including Wakiso, Kampala and Mukono. Wakiso officially reopened yesterday after the installation. Mukono’s installation will be done by the end of this week and I am sure if the system is fully installed, then –(A Member rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you allow the minister to finish? Let her finish first.

MS NAMUGANZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we were doing this, we alerted the public because when this process is taking place, no transaction is supposed to be done. 

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, I have been a member of the committee visiting the same offices in Masaka, Mbarara, and Jinja. The real thing affecting these offices throughout the country is that there is not enough funding – but not that they are upgrading the technology. We found these officers operating without resources and they appealed to Parliament to find a way of rescuing the situation. I think our ministers should take this matter seriously. 

In Masaka, we found out that, that office had the capability of raising more money locally than any other sector can do in the district. We asked our colleague, the Minister of State in charge of Lands – who was with us – to prioritise the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development for the purpose of raising revenues locally and speeding up the process of land titling in the country. That is what I would like to inform the House about.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for sharing that information with us. The rationale for having these regional offices was to make acquisition of land titles easier and affordable. However, there are three major factors which I can talk about confidently as far as the Arua regional office is concerned. 

The first problem is lack of staff. The second major issue is corruption. For a file to move from one table to the next, you have to pay through the nose and that has discouraged many people from even applying. The third issue is that people are being forced to release customary land – customary land is now being forced to be released on lease. 

From whom are you leasing my customary land on which my great grandparents were? Are you telling me that from customary system, it has to be a lease? Even for a place like Kampala, you have mailo land title holders in Kibuli and Old Kampala but you go to places like Arua and enter as deep as Awingiri and Ediofe and tell people that they must have their land leased? 

Those three factors are inhibiting people from acquiring land titles. The charges are very high because of corruption. You need to be on the ground so that people get to appreciate that these regional offices were to ease the acquisition of land titles. Otherwise, they are a myth.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have money or do you need help?

MS NAMUGANZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the concerns of my colleagues. It is true that our budget has been small and when these ministry zonal offices were built –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I have been in this House for a long time. In 2014, when hon. Otafiire was in the lands’ ministry, this Parliament passed a $5 million loan to update and put a new system in the ministry. If you say the system today is not effective, what was the use of that loan? The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development brought the request here and we agreed that because of the corruption and inefficiency in lands, the system in all the regions of Uganda needed to be upgraded. That loan was purposely for upgrading the system. What has happened five years down the road?

MS NAMUGANZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was saying that the new ministry zonal offices which the honourable colleague clearly stated, was for extending services nearer to the people. The technology is being installed but the staffing was supposed to be done by Government. It is the technology that has consumed the loan which hon. Kakooza has talked about. 

On staffing, we have been engaging the Ministry of Public Service and the finance ministry as well. That is why you saw the ministry running the first advert for staffing the m-zones; it is because they were not there with no staff in place.

Next week the ministry is going to run another advert because the ministries of finance and public service have allowed Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to recruit new staff that are going to m-zones and those who have been at the centre have been going through some training to know how this technology works better.

It is an open problem but not deliberate because there was no way they would recruit staff when the m-zones were not yet in place.

The old staff were very few and could not run all the computers. 

Lastly, the issue of corruption-

THE SPEAKER: Why has the minister excited everybody? Yes she has moved from the back to the front. Minister, please conclude.

MS NAMUGANZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of corruption is a concern to all of us and that was the particular reason the ministry had to take another step of ensuring that new technology called the “computerised system” is put in place. It is because the other time there was multiple titling of land, which the new technology cannot allow.

The moment you feed in it will tell you that the land is already titled even when it is a wetland or forest reserve. Corruption needs multiple actions for all of us to fight it using technology, alertness and other means. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the answer to that question is that one office was opened yesterday; another will be opened at the end of the week.

3.38
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of Isimba Dam is almost reaching the climax. I got information that the contractor is laying down tools on Friday, reason being that the ministries of finance and that of energy had promised, after the alarm we raised in Parliament, to get a sub-contractor and that they would pay but up to now the contractor has not received any money.

The rumours circulating is that - we get information, honourable members, from voters - they are worried that maybe because another minister of energy is coming they might not get their money. The good thing is that the Minister of Local Government is here; he can even call the LCV and RDC of Kayunga and Kamuli.

My request to Government is that before the contractor lays down the tools on Friday, can the minister of finance and that of energy tell the country why they have not paid that contractor for the work he did and why they want him to construct abridge when they have not given him the money; because the contractor said that unless he is paid money for the dam he constructed, he would not be able to construct the bridge.

Madam Speaker, I want answers. The ministers of finance, energy and local governments are here; they can consult the LC V Chairperson of Kayunga and the RDC; those are the ones trying to cool down the striking workers. I submit.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before we broke off that issue came on the Table and you instructed the committee to give us a report in 14 days. We are lucky that the chairman of the infrastructure committee is here, he is a neighbour and he uses that road when visiting friends in Kamuli. 

Before the ministers of finance, local governments and the one of works give us a report, isn’t it procedurally right for the chairperson of the committee to update us on whether he has done the work that you instructed him to do, so that we map a way forward?

THE SPEAKER: He might tell us something but there is a looming crisis on Friday, which the ministers of finance and energy should address today. These people said that they are downing their tools the day after tomorrow.

3.42
MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)	(Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, this infrastructure is financed through external financing and we can attend to it this afternoon and make sure that there is no crisis on Friday. Therefore, as we sit, we are going to work with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and see how we can manage it. We do not have the facts now but we are going to check. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: That is tomorrow, 23rd.

MR BAHATI: I will give you an update tomorrow. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Does the chairperson have a progress report?

3.43
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. As you directed that immediately after recess the Committee on Physical Infrastructure carries out an investigation on the circumstances surrounding Isimba Bridge, the committee began the investigations. We listened to the person who raised the matter on the Floor of Parliament; arrangements are being made for the committee. 

Immediately after reporting on the Budget Framework Paper tomorrow, the committee will proceed to the site and begin asking relevant questions. We hope to report back to this House as soon as possible. Thank you, so much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, in the meantime the minister of finance will address us tomorrow on this issue.

3.44
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Madam Speaker, the matter for which I rise is a very sad one. There is a spate of assassinations properly planned and executed very fast and suddenly.

On 19th of this month - which is last Sunday - Mr Bonny Omara, who happens to be a civil servant in the health department in Amolatar District, was called. Time check was eighteen minutes past one but by 2.30 - an hour later - his body was in the mortuary in Lira. The man was found murdered and his body abandoned at Boroboro, approximately six kilometres away from Lira town. 

As if that was not enough, that same evening Mr Ochen Tony who happens to be an NRM registrar of Bata – Bata is a sub-county in Dokolo District – was called. He reported to the people who called him but the following morning, his body was found at Odokomit within the city.

People are worried and their spirits have gone low. We would like the Ministry of Internal Affairs to restore confidence among the people of Lango. We also want investigations on these murders expedited and if possible, an equal measure of security surveillance that is currently being undertaken in Kampala should also be done in the city of Lira.

Madam Speaker, these are our prayers in Lira town.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the Minister of Internal Affairs is here. Hon. Kania, do you have any commitment on this issue?

3.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, it is true those two reported cases which have been mentioned by my colleague are among some of the killings under various circumstances which have occurred and have been reported to us in our regular morning SITREM. These are situation reports which we receive every morning. 

We have asked the police to investigate the circumstances under which those people died and give us the reports. We have confidence in the investigative arms of our organs. They will tell us and we will give a report here as to exactly what happened. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I invite hon. Orot. In the meantime, join me in welcoming a delegation from the East African Court of Justice.

    1. Mr Arnaud Gahimbare
    2. Ms Warugaba Charlotte Arinda
    3. Mr Simon Tweny

You are welcome. (Applause) They are members of staff of the East African Court of Justice. They are here with the Department of Official Report for attachment to improve their work. Thank you.

3.49
MR ISMAEL OROT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of national importance that I am raising concerns Kadami Community Hospital which was started by the community in 2006. When His Excellency, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni came during the 2011 campaigns, this information reached him and he pledged to complete the hospital.

The challenge here is that from Kadami to Ngora, where there is an NGO hospital called Freda Carr, is 114 kilometres away. From Kadami to Mukongoro Health Centre III, which is for Government, is nine kilometres away. Last year alone, we had three maternal deaths of women who failed to give birth as they were being rushed to Ngora and other areas.

Above all, National Medical Stores had started giving medicine to that health centre. The medicine was supplied twice but was returned because it is incomplete.

The Government has done a lot for Kumi, particularly Kanyum County. Therefore, I pray that the President is reminded to complete this community hospital to save the lives of many people who are suffering. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to confirm that I visited Kadami Community Hospital in Kumi. There is a very big structure that simply needs completion. I have informed the Minister of Health about it so he should be assisted. I think the Minister of Health should come and tell us what they plan to do about this structure. We will give you a fortnight.

3.51
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance about the safety of Ugandans working as security guards in Iraq. In 2003, there were 6,000 Ugandans providing security in Iraq. Right now, the number is unknown.

According to Daily Monitor of 3 January 2020, it was reported that at least 500 Ugandan private security guards at the United States of America embassy in Baghdad were involved in running battles with Iraq demonstrators. 

It is not only that. On 29 December 2019, there were also a series of protests and many Ugandans who were guarding there were involved. As a Member of Parliament concerned – because I have my constituents from Rukungiri who are there – [Mr Nambeshe: “Information”]

THE SPEAKER: Please, he has not told us. Let him give us his prayers.

MR MUGUME: Thank you. My prayer is that I would like the Government of Uganda to inform us about the safety of Ugandans who are there and how many they are. Right now as I speak, we do not know the number of the security guards working there.

Two, what plans does the Government have to evacuate those security guards who are working there because the situation in Iraq is not good for our Ugandans? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: It is a complicated one. I do not know who can account for this. Is the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development here? Honourable minister, the export of labour falls under your docket. The honourable members want answers about numbers and then safety of the security guards working in Iraq.

3.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have heard the concern of the honourable member and I accept that it is the duty of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, whose mandate, amongst others, is to ensure that there is employment for everybody and safe and green employment.

At the moment, Madam Speaker, there is a report to be tabled before Parliament. It was meant to be done today from the committee that exhaustively handled the externalisation of labour activities. Even then, tomorrow, I will bring a report to Parliament particularly for the concerns of the Member of Parliament representing the workers. We hope to work together with the Ministry, Office of the President (Security). Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think the question was specific about the security guards in Iraq. It is not the general – He wants to know about the security guards who are in Iraq.

MS NAKIWALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to harmonise with the Minister, Office of the President (Security) so that tomorrow we can give a substantive answer. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: The minister will come and give us an update. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much. The issue of Ugandans who are working as security guards is more of a security nature than externalisation of labour. It is estimated that about 10,000 Ugandans are working as guards in Iraq. They are armed people. It is not just about evacuating them. What plan do you have when you have 10,000 people who have trained nearly as the military returning to Uganda? They can become a security problem.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you are asking hard questions. This was a private arrangement. They were not exported by the Government. I do not know how you can now ask the Government to give you a plan on how they will come back and be managed. I do not think the Government knows –

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, what the other countries have done is to try to extract the information they can get at ports of entry. They would even go to Iraq to find out how many of their people are employed as security guards. It is because when they begin returning at the end of America’s presence in Iraq, you have another army that would descend on Uganda, which you have not planned for. Then, you will have the same stories we have heard here of people being shot by armed robbers –(Interruption)

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you very much for giving way. Actually, we have been told that even the Americans have been recruiting our guards to guard their bases. We have also heard about Iran’s attack on those bases. In my opinion, this is a security matter. Therefore, it would be prudent for us to get clear information on the plight of these Ugandan guards. 

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, when we talk about the security guards abroad, it is important we know who was involved with taking them from here to where they are. Those respective firms, to begin with, should be tasked to come on the Floor of Parliament in Uganda –(Interruption) 

I have lost two of my sons in Afghanistan. They were recruited from Ntinda by a company in Uganda and deployed by the Americans in Afghanistan. That is why I am concerned that if we want to track how these boys got to that place, we need to get information from those who are employing them so that we know we can ask the country concern to give us a brief about the situation on the ground. If we ignore it down here, we will not be able to get the true picture about the Ugandan sons and daughters abroad. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you are going to be unfair to the Government. First of all, these people went to work, and signed a contract. The Government did not send them. 

I think let us concentrate on the safety of the Ugandan guards in Iraq, which the minister is going to answer. If you need any other information, you can come back and ask the question properly on what you really want. You cannot have a censor just –

MR GODFREY ONZIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very sad to notice that Ugandans can be recruited privately and also deployed without the concern of the Government. In other countries like Philippines, it is the Government that follows the recruitment and even vets the companies. When its citizens are being taken abroad, it also makes sure that it follows them. 

How do we leave our citizens to the hand of private companies? Some of these companies are owned by top people in Government who take these people.

Madam Speaker, I interacted with Ugandans who are in China. Some of them even said there are people who recruited Ugandans from here and asked them for Shs 18 million. They gave them contacts to call when they reached China but those numbers do not exist. 

This is a serious issue that Government should own. It should not be taken up by individual companies. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for Government to come here and give reports on these people including the companies as demanded by my colleague? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, exporting labour in the Philippines is an official activity of the Government and it is not private. That is why when they are returning, they have their own queue at the airport. They do not mix with everybody. It is different here though. Honourable minister, you will give us answers about the safety of the people who are in Iraq. Let us go to Item No.07. 

4.02
MS ROBINA SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Madam Speaker, I rise on a concern about Kyapa-Kasensero Road. It is good the Minister of Works and Transport and the Chairperson for the Physical Infrastructure Committee are here as I speak. 

I went to them on the same issue but it was before this tragedy happened. I have reported several times that the Kyapa-Kasensero Road breaks up every rainy season. As I speak now, about three miles around Tomi are totally impassable. Small boats are used to transport people to cross over those three miles.  

What happened is that we lost two mothers and two children. A mother called Nabuuma Sephania of Kyebe was being transported with her child to cross over Tomi in a boat. Unfortunately, both of them died in that boat. 

Another mother called Nampijja Madde of Bugera in Kyebe Sub-county also lost a baby in the boat. Not mentioning the other tragedies - Another problem is that people are closing businesses. 

Madam Speaker, I talked with Ms Kagina and Gen. Katumba and they said the road is under routine maintenance and they cannot do anything until the rain –(Interjections)- as I conclude, we cannot just look on and see our people dying in the disguise of routine road maintenance and waiting for the rain to stop because this happens every rainy season. 

My prayer is that – at least the minister is here – they give us a definite solution to Kyapa-Kasensero because I have talked about this several times here. Every rainy season there are some patients who die before they cross over. Two mothers have already died. I would wish to know a long term solution for Kyapa-Kasensero road. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately the Minister of Works and Transport is here. Do you have anything to say about Kyapa-Kasensero and the perennial destruction of the road?

4.05
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that these rains were very devastating beyond the normal rains. I also received a letter from the honourable Member of Parliament on 16 January 2020 and UNRA is already on site trying to address the problem.

The road has been identified as one of the major roads to be upgraded from gravel to bitumen. When we do that, the road level will be raised to address the issues of the waters, which normally sweep over the road. As I speak, the UNRA unit is on the ground and they will be there for the next three months to ensure that we alleviate the problem.

However, again in some cases, we have to wait for the water to subside because you cannot do any road repair when the water is still running very swiftly. Otherwise, the road is under attention and it is among the roads, which have been identified for upgrade. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I will be amending the Order Paper to allow the Leader of the Opposition to table the alternative Budget Framework Paper. The clerk will be calling her. Should we take the present No.4 first?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE EXPORTATION OF FISH MAWS AND OTHER FISH PRODUCTS BY CHINESE AND INDIAN INVESTORS TO THE DETRIMENT OF LOCAL FISHING COMMUNITIES

4.08
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we would like to seek your permission to present this statement next week because we would like to work with the new Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (Fisheries) to do some little work and then come back to the House.

THE SPEAKER: Is Tuesday okay for presentation?

MR BAHATI: Tuesday next week.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PARLIAMENTARY RESOLUTION TO SUSPEND ALL OPERATIONS OF THE UGANDA PEOPLES’ DEFENCE FORCES [UPDF] FISHERIES PROTECTION UNIT ON MAJOR WATER BODIES IN UGANDA

4.10
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Col Charles Okello Engola): Madam Speaker, first of all I would like to thank you for the ruling you made that day regarding withdrawal of the troops from the waters. 

However, the statements are not ready because I am making consultations and preparing to remove them. Good enough we now have the Minister of Fisheries who should also come and give us a report on how the fish is now so that when we are leaving, we leave when things are okay for the nation. I request for 30 days -

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying that you have defied the resolution of this House?

COL OKELLO: I am requesting for 30 days to come back with a good statement on withdrawal of soldiers. You know withdrawing of soldiers is not a duty, which you can do in a day or two. It needs preparation and planning.

4.12
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am surprised that the minister is thanking you for the resolution we made that day, which they have defied. I spoke to the same minister just before Christmas and I informed him that the UPDF were still doing their operations despite the directive by the Parliament of Uganda.

As I speak, from November to January, 25 vehicles of fish have been impounded in a market in Pakwach District. This is a town council that does not receive any grant from the Central Government; we depend on market dues to deliver services to our people.

These vehicles have never been returned and yet women borrowed money for this business and some are young mothers. This is so disheartening for our people in Pakwach and Arua. The market is on the verge of collapsing because the people from Congo are trying to shift the market to their side - (Interruption)

MR OUMA: Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me way. We made a recommendation as a Parliament and the minister is here with us. The very day we made that recommendation, we knew it was not a directive but a recommendation.

However, immediately that recommendation was made, those commanders also came up to make their statements. The first statement was, “We are not about to go, Parliament has no powers to make us leave the waters”.

Parliament is a respectable institution so I would like to ask the minister; where do these people get the authority to demean Parliament? The other time they were in Jinja and they went over the radios to demean Parliament. I would like you to tell us whether you are the spokesperson or it is them. This is because it is becoming a problem. Yesterday we were talking about assassination threats. For those of us from the lakes, people are now saying, “You cannot move because you are talking about us.” Do you have powers over this people or they have powers over you?

MS AVUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. During the Christmas holidays, I was with the people of Pakwach, particularly Panyimur and this is what they are saying. One, they thank you for your good ruling. Two, we are demanding that all the 25 trucks that were impounded be returned to these struggling businessmen from Arua and Pakwach. Three, this is killing the livelihood of our people and not only the town council.

Madam Speaker, these are women who are struggling with loans from financial institutions and a directive was taken. When I talked to the minister, he sounded totally helpless. I told him, the people cannot celebrate Christmas. Now he is here thanking you for your good ruling and saying they are not ready. 

We have our children at home and we cannot send them back to school. Something must be done and we demand for immediate sensitisation of the fishmongers because these women buy from the market, they do not know the recommended fish sizes. If the UPDF want to continue with their operation, let them stop the young fish from being removed from the waters at the landing sites instead of attacking our people on the roadside.

Pakwach does not have rich businessmen; we have few people who can afford trucks. So for 25 of them to be impounded is too much for us.  Thank you.

Mr kasibante: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has defied this Parliament in two ways: First, he was supposed to have come with a statement but he has not. Secondly, he was supposed to have implemented the decisions of this Parliament but it is clear that he has not done it either.

A minister is a representative of Government. Parliament sits every day and comes up with decisions for the Executive to implement. It is now very clear that the Executive is not willing and is in defiance of the decisions of this Parliament.

My procedural matter is whether we should not suspend this sitting until Government commits itself to implementing decisions made by this House.  Thank you.

4.16
Mr Abraham byandala (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I genuinely respect the decision that was taken by this august House. At the same time, we have never intended to have disagreements between this House and the Executive.

I would be very grateful if this House agreed with me that we endorse and give you ammunition on all these issues to go and discuss it with the President - the two of you. (Interjections) 

The Speaker: Members, order.

Mr byandala: Some of these things are very easy. For us to be here and remove Major so-and-so can be very difficult. However, if you sat with the President, that would be a simple issue.

The issue of fish which the honourable member is talking about would be easy to solve. Let us give you ammunition and when you meet the President, this issue will be solved easily and quickly.  Thank you.

4.17
Mr geoffrey macho (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, we are like people who are running a journey while going backwards. I believe the decision of Parliament might have been communicated to the Executive, which is chaired by the Commander-in-Chief.

Therefore, I do not agree with the decision of a one-time person in the Executive. Parliament should be given its autonomy to make decisions so that we do not mix roles of Government.

I suggest that the minister should make a declaration now that the soldiers should leave the water because that was the decision of this august House.

As it was already articulated by my colleague, the Minister of Defence truly seems to have no powers and control over Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF). The ministers in charge of the defence of this country need to be helped by the Prime Minister to be told what they are supposed to do because they have no control and command over the forces at all. That is why you see that even in the areas where they are, the soldiers command them rather than they commanding the soldiers.

Today, if the minister has powers, he should declare that the soldiers on the water should be removed as Parliament passed. In fact, let them go and protect our people in Karamoja –(Member timed out)

Mr kibalya: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The day we extensively discussed and debated the issue of the operations of the forces on water, I was here full time. The minister presented a report that we rubbished. 

We took a decision to have the soldiers leave the water bodies. The minister and his colleagues were requesting for time to go and meet and discuss but we refused because it had taken all the time to the extent that you, the head of this institution met the Commander-in-Chief, Commander of the Armed Forces; the Commander of Defence Forces (CDF) and discussed. You thought that they were going to implement what you discussed but they did not.

It came to the institution that is supposed to make laws. We took a decision - unless there is another institution that is responsible for making laws in this country that can make UPDF to have powers to say, “We can’t leave the water bodies.”

The minister who was here is the same one who has come with his written things that we do not understand. There is a substantive Minister of Defence who, if there was anything, would have come and told us, “We met and this is what we agreed upon.”

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right if you used your office and said, “If the ministers cannot have this implemented by tomorrow, we should come here with a motion”? We have our motion ready. We shall come here –(Member timed out.)

Mr mukitale: Madam Speaker, this matter that has been on for close to two years gives an impression of uncoordinated troop movements. In the debate last time, I remember that you gave two rulings. One of which was to the effect that Parliament takes a decision that the army is withdrawn from the fisheries sector.

The second one, which I think is not coming out clearly, is that you had also guided – to the best of my recollection - that the Commander-in-Chief, the constitutional Minister of Defence – what you are calling “substantive” is a delegated function. For defence, foreign policy and finance - as far as I know - the President remains the minister.

The President was expected at the beginning of the year - because the concern then was that we were going for Christmas – that when we come back, the Commander-in-Chief, His Excellency, the President, finds time to come and address Parliament. You referred to the time he addressed us on the security matters. We are not discussing that matter because he is the one who deployed the soldiers.

I would like to plead with colleagues; we do not have – it is an Executive function. It is a presidential prerogative to deploy the army. I would like to repeat that it is a presidential prerogative to deploy the army. 

We can only order the army out if by choice we are saying –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, the point of order I am raising - the army is not an army of the President. That is why deployment outside Uganda must be after Parliament has authorised it. If you say that it is the prerogative of the President to deploy the army as if we are talking about shamba boys - the army can only be deployed in accordance with the law not on the wishes of someone who is holding an office.

Is the honourable member, who has been in the Parliament for a very long time and has participated in not only debating but also authorising deployment of the army, in order now to tell Parliament that the Constitution has changed and that now the army is deployed at the prerogative of someone? 

THE SPEAKER: I think he had forgotten the powers of Parliament.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As, I conclude, you know I am for national dialogue and how the army should be controlled in this country will be solved by national dialogue; you know that.

Madam Speaker, I am only being diplomatic. You know very well, none of these ministers has powers on those soldiers deployed on the lakes. For me, I do not bite my tongue. None of these ministers has powers on those soldiers deployed on the lakes.

Can we therefore, diplomatically seek an engagement with the Commander-in-Chief to address us in a closed session without cameras and he tells us why in his wisdom, he has decided that the lake should be treated that way with soldiers’ misconduct on the lakes?

Madam Speaker, we raised the issue of Government funding the right gears on the lakes. We raised issue of affordable financing for fishermen, Operation Wealth Creation, NAADS never going to the fisheries sectors and so on. 

There are much bigger issues than the misconduct of a few armed officers. Madam Speaker, I request we get that audience with the President.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, the matter which hon. Mukitale is talking about, we took a decision. We said we should have a meeting with the President - that is nothing new.

However, honourable minister, I want to tell you that we shall not give you one month. We want a serious answer from the Government; we cannot give you one month. This kind of thing cannot continue.

COL (RTD) ENGOLA: Madam Speaker, I pray that you give me two weeks.

THE SPEAKER: There is someone called the Leader of Government Business. Can I direct the Prime Minister to come and address this House on this issue? 

4.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, a resolution of Parliament was made by this House and it is a serious resolution.

The deployment was made by the Commander-in-Chief. We are going to make sure that the Leader of Government Business in Parliament comes here on Tuesday to make a final statement regarding this matter. Thank you.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, true it is the Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces who deployed them but the people of Uganda, through Parliament, have expressed concern on the brutality of the same army on them yet they are actually principally our voters.

Therefore, is the Ag. Prime Minister implying that the Commander-in-Chief is aware of the brutality and the criminal acts committed by the army and therefore, he would prefer that those criminal acts continue? I need clarification on this.

Sometimes, you people put the blame on the Commander-in-Chief when actually it is your own weaknesses. What have you done, on your part, before you appeal to the Commander-in-Chief?

Madam Speaker, I would like to remind the Prime Minister about Rule 221. He has been in this House long and knows what Rule 221 means. Anyhow, it says that an act of omission, which obstructs or impedes Parliament in the performance of its functions or which obstructs or impedes a member or officer of Parliament in the discharge of his duties or affronts the dignity of Parliament, tantamount to contempt of Parliament. It is in black and white and all of us have got these books and the Ag. Prime Minister is very acquainted with –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have already decided that the Prime Minister should come here on Tuesday and address this House and the country on this issue.
We have talked long enough - I do not want to believe that the Commander-in-Chief does not know; he knows.

4.31
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, this is a test to Parliament. This Parliament has a duty to defend its territory. The reason we are being held in contempt is because we are not excising all the powers we have. You already have the Leader of Government Business, the Prime Minister but who is not here. All his deputies are not here but you have a junior minister in finance now heading and struggling –(Interjection)– because we approved you as a state minister –(Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I expect that the hon. Ssemujju should learn how systems work. I am in this House as the Ag. Government Chief Whip and I am communicating in that capacity.

I think it is also good to have courtesy and debate with respect to each other. You do not earn anything than trying to demonize a system, which is not –(Interjections)– you do not earn. We want to solve problems on the lake - that is the issue. 

Is the member really in order to continue - and I think this is not the fir8st time - to try to trivialize issues of governance when there is Government in place doing serious business?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is well known that hon. Bahati is a Deputy Government Chief Whip. Now honourable members, join me in welcoming a delegation of citizens from Wankole Sub-county in Kamuli District. 

These are parish and village chairpersons, women council and youth leaders. They have come to visit Parliament during the Parliamentary Week. We are happy to see you. You are welcome. (Applause)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have a small procedural issue. In Civil/Public Service, somebody can only delegate to the next senior. I am sure even in Government, where there is a Cabinet, there must be a senior. 

I have seen the chart of leadership where it states the President is number one. I have also seen it state that a Cabinet minister is above a minister of state. 

The procedural issue is that, I have seen Cabinet ministers and state ministers on the front bench. For example, hon. Betty Kamya is a Cabinet minister. 

The procedural issue I am raising is, in cabinet – there is a certain funny lady making noise here as if she does not know that she is a minister. Maybe we should help her –

THE SPEAKER: Please - 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for a minister of state to take up the responsibility of a Prime Minister, yet the House is full of Cabinet ministers who should have taken charge? Or is it that there are some state ministers, who are just ministers of state by name, but are above Cabinet ministers? 

THE SPEAKER: When you see the Prime Minister, ask him to answer that question. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE SPIKE IN CATTLE RAIDS AND THEFTS IN THE KARAMOJA SUB REGION AND THE DEMISE OF THE LC III CHAIRMAN RUPA SUB COUNTY, MR APOLLO DAN MARJERY LOYOMO, WHO WAS GUNNED DOWN IN THE BARRACKS

4.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Col (Rtd) Charles Engola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I now pray that item 4 (c) should also be handled tomorrow together with item 4 (d) because it is a matter on handling issues of UPDF. They should be handled by the Prime Minister, as you rule.

THE SPEAKER: These matters are under your docket. Why should they go to the Prime Minister? What I would like the Prime Minister to explain is the hierarchy of his Cabinet. That is his business.

MR ENGOLA: Madam Speaker, concerning the deployment in Karamoja, we have tasked the Third Division Commander to assess the situation, see all the problems prevailing in Karamoja and he gives us a report. Then, I will bring the statement on Tuesday. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this matter was raised before we went for the Christmas recess. Did the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs also go on recess? 

MR ENGOLA: The Minister for Karamoja is here and – 

THE SPEAKER: Does the Minister of Karamoja have anything to say about this issue? 

4.39
THE MINISTER FOR KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (Mr John Byabagambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question was raised in this House concerning the cattle raids and thefts in the Karamoja sub region and the demise of the LC 3 Chairperson, Rupa Sub County, Mr Dan Loyomo, who was gunned down in the barracks. 

Maybe I will break it down. I will first talk about the demise of our LC 3 Chairperson, Mr Apollo Dan. This, of course, is a regrettable incident that happened and was occasioned by the theft of cattle in Karamoja, whereby the soldiers were following the footsteps of the cattle that were stolen. 

When they reached a certain place in Rupa, particularly Kidepo, the population resisted the usual practise of the soldiers rounding up the cattle, taking it to barracks and then calling the people to scrutinise the cattle that belongs to them and that which does not belong to them –(Interruption)

MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. According to the Order Paper, you had guided that the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs should handle the matter.

We would have not had any problem with the Minister for Karamoja Affairs making a comment. I have tried to watch him but he is trying to swing around a paper, purportedly to be a report, but it is actually a copy of the Order Paper. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, according to how he is stating and the sensitivity of the matter, are we proceeding right? The real minister seemed not to be informed, as if he has just heard of the matter. Then, the other minister who had come in to rescue the situation was actually pausing around with the Order Paper. Are we proceeding right in light of the sensitivity of this matter? If so, let him lay on Table the report he is reading. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you actually have a statement? 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, first and foremost, when I am to answer the question, I must consult the question itself; it is very clear. On this paper, there is nothing like Kidepo. In other words, the facts are in my head and I have got all the facts about Karamoja. (Laughter)
If it is the wish of this House that I bring a written statement, I will do so. Otherwise, I have got all the answers. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I draw your attention to Rule 51 of the Rules of Procedure. It reads, “A minister may make a statement at the appropriate time when the sequence of business…” It also states that statements should actually be in writing. You should have sent it to us to upload for the members.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, therefore, I will comply with the rule and bring the written statement but I beg to bring it on Tuesday. I thank you, Madam Speaker. I have got the reasons why this question went to the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and didn’t come to OPM’s office. I learnt this morning when I was in the Committee on the Presidential Affairs that this question is coming on the Floor of Parliament today. 

I am ready to give all the facts about this matter in writing on Tuesday. 

4.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Col Charles Engola Okello): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A body of inquiry which was constituted on this matter – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, where is your statement?

COL ENGOLA: I do not have the statement here and now because the board of inquiry has not yet finished their work. 

THE SPEAKER: Even that should have been written down and sent to the members. You are not taking this House seriously.

COL ENGOLA: Madam Speaker, I am waiting for the board of inquiry to come up with a report and I lay it on the Table –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is something called Article 118. This House is not a market. The matter has been on the Order Paper. You are supposed to send a statement to the Clerk early, to distribute to the members. You cannot say that the things are in your head.

MR ENGOLA: Madam Speaker, the board of inquiry is going on – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, take your seat.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of order on the Minister of State for Defence. 

On 19 December 2019, we heard a commitment by the Minister of State for Defence on the Floor of this Parliament to this effect – I would like to read verbatim from the Hansard – he state: “What we have to do now is to first bring back the culprit to police, then arrest even those who went and picked the culprit from police and also bring them to book.” He continued to say: “If it is true that they removed the culprit from police by force, then they should also be arrested. I will report back to Parliament.” 

These are the records of what the minister of defence stated. Today, the minister is talking about a board of inquiry: a completely different subject matter from what he committed to this august House. 

I am wondering whether the minister is in order to report to this House, something different from his personal commitment. Isn’t he trying to be evasive as always?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you were here on the 19th, sober – I hope – you made undertakings and you are supposed to report as soon as we returned, as he has read from the Hansard.

COL. ENGOLA: Madam Speaker, I expected the board to have finished the report because this is a joint board of UPDF and Police. 

However, at the moment, the report is not yet finished. I pray I bring this report on Tuesday because I know by then the board will have finished. 

THE SPEAKER: What is the board doing?

COL. ENGOLA: The board is making inquiries on what happened. 

MR AYEPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In every district, we have the RDCs, the DISO’s office and the police. What kind of inquiry is the minister talking about? Is he trying to tell us that the office of the RDCs, the DISOs and the police are not working in those districts? What is he telling us?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, this is a criminal matter and we have systems of Government that deal with criminal matters. I am surprised that the minister is telling us about a board to handle a criminal matter. What is the board for?

The minister committed on the Floor of this Parliament. I think he should restrict his response to the commitment that he made to this august House – 

MS ANYAKUN: Madam Speaker, my colleague has just given you some pictures showing you how the people of Karamoja are dying on a daily basis. As we are speaking, the people of Karamoja are watching what is happening in this House today. 

When the Government came and disarmed the Karimojong, they promised to protect them. From December 19th when the minister promised to come and help us and bring a report to this House up to today, we have lost so many lives and properties. 

It is very painful to be seated here when there is no report up to today and we are coming to the end of January -(Interjection)- if he has it in his head, let him lay the head on the Table. It is very painful. 

We are lacking information and the kind of pictures they have just given you are a true depiction of what is going on. People are dying daily. Even the other day they shot at one of our Members of Parliament in an ambush. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you for the information. I wish to call upon the minister to honour - (Interruption)

MR SSENYONGA: Madam Speaker, we were here on 19th and since then, not even once has the minister or the minister of state bothered to go to Karamoja. They are just seated here in Kampala. That is why they cannot come up with reports. 

Therefore, I do not see why we do not come up with a motion to censure the two ministers because this is putting Government in bad light, as if they are not performing. 

They are here without any report. They cannot tell us that we went to this area of Karamoja at this time on this day so that the whole House can be convinced. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, this is a very serious matter. My only appeal to you is that these ministers need to take this House seriously because sometimes their behaviour to this House is deliberate. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is time that this House took action. I would like to instruct the Rules Committee to proceed against the Minister of State for Defence and Veteran Affairs under Rule 221 for contempt of this House.  

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN III (2020-2021 to 2024-2025)

4.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the third National Development Plan (NDP III) 2020/2021-2024/2025 for consideration.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Anthony Akol raised this matter yesterday and the minister agreed to come back and present the NDP III today. I now commit it to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back.

Minister of State for Internal Affairs, you seem uncomfortable. 

4.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): I seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker. The matter I was rising on is the ruling that you have made. I wanted to comment on it but you have already made a ruling. With your indulgence, I wish to make a comment. 

My concern is about the investigations on contempt of Parliament, which is alright. However, I think Parliament should have taken cognisance of the fact that a board of inquiry –(Interjection)– Well, I have sought the permission of the Speaker and none of you is the Speaker [HON. MEMBER: “Order!”]I am not sitting down –(Interjection)– I am waiting for guidance from the Speaker, not from you – (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, you called the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs to come and present a statement to Parliament on whether he has implemented the resolution of Parliament on suspending the operations of the UPDF in the fishing sector. The minister stood here, looked at all sides and said, “Karamoja, help me.” (Laughter) Karamoja stood and he was waving the Order Paper. 

Now, another minister, who is responsible for internal affairs, is asking, “Can I make a comment?” The Speaker has said this Parliament is not a market.

Madam Speaker, is the Minister of State for Internal Affairs in order to turn this Parliament into a market? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: He is not. Honourable members, you recall that when this matter was raised, there was an allegation that the culprit had been taken to the police station. We sent you, hon. Kania, to go and check whether the person was at the police station and you came back and said he was not at the police station. You told us that the soldiers had taken him away. 

This minister, hon. Okello, said he was going to ensure that this person is taken to court. Now he says that it is a board of inquiry. Even if there is a board of inquiry, he had an obligation to write a statement about that matter and bring it to the House. On the 19th, he said something different and today he is saying something different. You can speak, hon. Kania.

MR KANIA: Madam Speaker, it is exactly on that issue that I wanted your guidance. The minister has said that there is a board of inquiry, which has not completed its work and you have correctly said, they must write a statement on the board of inquiry.

Therefore, I thought the best thing would be to say, you must bring a statement on the board of inquiry and if it is inadequate, then the issue of contempt of this Parliament would arise from the inadequacy of that statement. That is the guidance I Would like to seek from you, Madam Speaker, and not from the chorus of our friends on the other side.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have made my ruling.

5.00
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Regarding the National Development Plan, I would like to request that you direct the ministry to avail at least 100 copies of the document to enable us peruse the document more effectively. That must be done not later than tomorrow because we must report to this House latest on Tuesday next week, as we have a legal provision to comply with.

Madam Speaker, I also would like to suggest that you allow us to come up with a preliminary report for the purpose of completing the exercise on the Budget Framework Paper. Subsequently, we can come up with a detailed report about the NDP, after we have had enough consultations with all the sectors within Parliament and Government.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, how many copies do you have?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I have an electronic version, which we can send immediately. I also have 50 copies that I can send to the House. 

THE SPEAKER: Start with the electronic copies.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, allow me to thank the minister for executing the requirement for the NDP III. My plea and amendment in support of the Budget Committee Chairperson is that there should be a copy provided for every Member of Parliament because this National Development Plan III is very critical, after we had challenges with NDPs I and II.

Madam Speaker, as we struggle to beat the budget deadline, we should not miss the bigger picture that the NDP is more important than the budget. I would like to seek your indulgence that whereas this matter goes to one committee, you seal a day in the Conference Hall so that NDP II challenges are presented to all members of Parliament because all Members need to understand what we have been financing for the last five budgets as a way of transiting to the next NDP.

If only one committee internalises the NDP, we are going to have a problem. Other regions will be left out yet all committees of Parliament must understand the NDP III. My prayer is that you commit a day or two, as the committee is trying to catch up with the budget deadline – of course it is the Executive, which erred; they should have come here one month ago with a fully detailed programme on how they are bringing Parliament on board in as far as the NDP III is concerned.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am alive to that issue. Yesterday, I told the minister that the NDP III requires the approval of this House and not just of the committee. I told him that he should have brought it before he brought the Budget Framework Paper. The House must study and approve it but for purposes of this paper, it has gone to the Committee on Budget. 

Yes, the House must study it and give approval but for purposes of this paper, that is why it has gone to the budget committee.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether you have answered the question I wanted to raise but that was on the Budget Framework Paper and our Budget Finance Act, Section 9(iii) says, “The minister shall, for each financial year, prepare a Budget Framework Paper which shall be consistent with the National Development Plan and with the charter for fiscal responsibility.”

We received the Budget Framework Paper a long time ago and today, the National Development Plan is being submitted after. How do we reconcile this because the Budget Framework Paper was supposed to fit into the National Development Plan III?

Now we have received the NDP III and we want to fit it into the Budget Framework Paper. The Minister of Finance has not even apologised for this illegality they have caused.

THE SPEAKER: He apologised yesterday.

MR OKUPA: I do not know how we are going to reconcile these two things.

THE SPEAKER: We addressed that matter yesterday; please let us go to the next time. 

THE OPPOSITION RESPONSE TO THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER 2020/2021 TO 2024/2025

5.05
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In accordance with Section 6 (e) (ii) and sub-section (iv) on the Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 2006 as well as rule 52 of the Rules of Procedure, the Opposition in Parliament presents a response to the National Budget Framework Paper 2020/2021 to 2024/2025.

I am going to give highlights; otherwise, I will lay on the Table the Opposition response to the National Budget Framework Paper 2020/2021 to 2024/2025. 

Economy Overview

It is reported that the size of the economy grew to Shs 128.5 trillion in Financial Year 2018/2019 from Shs 120 trillion in the Financial Year 2017/2018. This is from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

Unfortunately, the growth cannot be felt by Ugandans because it is in the hands of few people. Several Ugandans struggle to meet the average household monthly expenditures estimated at Shs 325,800 translating into Shs 3.9 million annually as reported in the Uganda National Household Survey of 2016/2017.

According to the World Bank Report 2019 on economic development and human capital in Uganda, the growth is driven by an escalating debt portfolio which invested into public investments characterised by diminishing returns.

With Uganda’s population estimated at 40 million and total public debt of Shs 46.3 trillion, each Ugandan shares a debt burden of Shs 1.15 million. 

This debt burden is largely driven by the fact that the country cannot support its development agenda based on domestic revenue. For instance, in the financial year 2020/2021, domestic revenues - that is Uganda Revenue Authority and Local Government collections - are projected to only raise Shs 21.74 trillion of the total projected budget of Shs 39.64 trillion.

This means that domestic revenues will finance only 55 per cent of the projected national budget. This is an indication that the country is heavily reliant on debt. In the absence of debt, the country would struggle - (Interruption)

MR GAFABUSA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister on the Government side laid on the Table the Budget Framework Paper and did not make a presentation. I wonder why the Leader of the Opposition is presenting instead of also laying on the Table or wait for the report and refer to it.

Are we proceeding right by the Leader of the Opposition presenting the side of the Opposition for the Budget Framework Paper when ours was just laid on the Table and that is what the committees are working on? Thank you

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, you said that you were giving highlights and I thought you would say that you have talked about interest rates, roads etc but now you are going into the details. Please lay it and let it go to the committees; they will come back and report to the House.

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. I have the paper here; the Opposition Response to the National Budget Framework Paper for Financial Year 2020/2021 to 2024/2025. I beg to lay.

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, I understand that the Opposition has got a Shadow Minister of Finance and I wonder why a full Leader of the Opposition is the one laying the report on the Table; is it procedurally right?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, she is the Leader of the Opposition; so, it is okay if she presents. The paper is sent to the budget committee and all the sessional committees so that they can peruse and use the information to complete their reports. Thank you. Item No.6.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

5.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)	(Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, our understanding is that the report was presented and the Bill is ready for debate. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report was presented and it was due for debate; so, I do not know whether the Members are ready to debate. Go and refresh your memories; we can put it back on the Order Paper tomorrow. Item No.7

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE TRAFFIC AND ROAD SAFETY ACTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

THE SPEAKER: Minister, second reading?

5.13
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Traffic and Road Safety Act (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded. Can you give the justification?

GEN. WAMALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The objectives of the Bill are to:

    1. Strengthen the road transport regulation and road safety management;
    2. Repeal sections relating to road licences;
    3. Amend the grouping of motor vehicles to conform to international standards;
    4. Provide for licensing of driving schools and instructors;
    5. Provide for the drivers’ licences validity period of five years and also revise the fees and penalties under the principal Act; and 
    6. Consolidate the functions and powers of the Chief Licensing Officer and the Department of Transport Regulation and Safety as a competent authority.

THE SPEAKER: I believe the committee has had the occasion to study the Bill. It should report.

5.15
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Robert Kafeero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Indeed, the committee has examined the Bill and –

THE SPEAKER: Wait a bit. I think there are some children I have not introduced. There is a group of children from Tubur Child Development Centre. Is that you from Tubur? Please stand up. They are from Dakabela County in Soroti, represented by hon. Cosmas Elotu and hon. Osegge. You are welcome.
You can now proceed.

MR KAFEERO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the Traffic and Road Safety Act 1998 (Amendment) Bill, 2019. However, before I proceed, allow me to lay on the Table, the report and the minutes of the meetings in which the committee considered the Bill. 

The report is already uploaded on the Members’ iPads and the introduction is as follows:

The Traffic and Road Safety (Amendment) Bill, 2019 was read for the first time on 17 July 2019 and referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure for scrutiny and report back in accordance with rule 128 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. The committee considered the Bill and hereby reports.

Madam Speaker, I will try not to read everything but since it is an amendment, for purposes of flowing, please allow me to read some details.

Road transport remains the predominant means of transport in Uganda, accounting for approximately 90 per cent of passenger and cargo traffic in the country. Road traffic and safety is governed by the Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1998 and regulations made thereunder by the Minister of Works and Transport by Statutory Instrument. 

The Act inter-alia provides for the registration and licensing of motor vehicles, establishes the National Road Safety Council and the Transport Licensing Board as administrative structures for transport regulation and road safety and stipulates penalties for road traffic offences.

However, the current law is out-dated and incapable of contending with the contemporary challenges of the road transport sub-sector, such as the increased number of road users on Uganda’s road networks including motorcycles, popularly known as boda-bodas and the increased cases of road accidents. Members, you can continue reading the text as we proceed to page 5.

Additionally, emerging trends in the transport sector, such as the market entry of operators offering public transport services using online digital platforms, coupled with the need to conform to international and regional best practices on traffic and road safety management as stipulated in agreements to which Uganda is a signatory, necessitate urgent reforms in the current legal framework.

It is against this backdrop that Government has proposed an amendment to the law to address the existing gaps and strengthen road transport regulations and road safety management, in order to facilitate the safe and orderly movement of passengers and goods for the socio-economic development of the country. The objects of the Bill are written in paragraph 3. 

Defects in the existing law

The Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1998 was enacted over 20 years ago and since then, there have been emerging trends in road transport regulations and road safety management, which are not adequately addressed by the Act including:

    i) Regulation of transport companies using online digital platforms; 
    ii) Organisation of public transport by requiring public transport providers to form Savings and Credit Cooperative Societies and prescribing conditions of market entry and exit in public transport services;
    iii) Enhanced penalties for traffic offenders to curb the rampant road accidents and introduction of the demerit point system for traffic offences;
    iv) Prescribing the duties of other road users and communities near accident scenes;
    v) Legal protection of first responders who make efforts to save accident victims; and
    vi) Provisions for safer vehicles, modification of vehicles and inspection of vehicles, among others.

In addition, a number of challenges have been encountered in the implementation of the law, arising from inherent defects and ambiguities in the Act. Some of the defects include:

    i) Lack of a definition for careless, reckless and dangerous driving to guide the police in their application; 
    ii) Ambiguity and contradictions in the provisions relating to drunk driving among others; and 
    iii) The law is not aligned to changes in Government policies, since it provides for annual road licence, which has since been abolished, rendering some of the provisions of the law redundant.

How the Bill addresses the defects in the law

The Bill seeks to:

a) 	Repeal sections relating to road licenses;
b) 	Require drivers to be in physical possession of a valid driving licence and a copy of a registration book while driving or in charge of a vehicle;
c) 	Amend the grouping of motor vehicles to conform to international standards;
d) 	Provide for licencing of driving schools and instructors;
e) 	Provide for a graduated driver licence system;
f) 	Provide for a driver’s licence valid for a period of five years;
g) 	Provide for a new lapsing period for driving licences;
h) 	Provide for the licencing of regulation of a special category of transport network companies using online digital platforms for provision of passenger and goods services;
i) 	Empower the minister to organise public transport;
j) 	Provide for conditions of market entry, oversight and exit in public transport services;
k) 	Provide for a demerit point system;
l) 	Harmonise the provisions relating to driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs so as to remove ambiguities;
m) 	To provide for duties of drivers, other road users, communities and the first responders in case of accidents; and
n) 	Revise offences and penalties to take into account inflation and provide for related matters.

Madam Speaker, paragraph 6 is the methodology. The committee met with and enlisted views from all those listed stakeholders as you may see. On the next page, in (b), we also received written submissions from those listed ministries and entities.

Held a public hearing on 7 November 2019 where it received submissions from 32 witnesses. A list has been attached herewith as Annex A.

We also received relevant literature including the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, the Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1998 and relevant international and regional agreements to which Uganda is a party such as the Convention on Road Traffic of 1949, the Protocol on Road Signs and Signals 1949 and the Global Plan for the Decade of Action for Road Safety 2011-2020 among others.

In line with the compliance with the human rights, Madam Speaker, Members will realise, just like we wrote in Paragraph 7, that the Bill is in compliance with the human rights. The same applies to paragraph 8 in line with the Sustainable Development Goals. The Bill is indeed consistent with particularly SDG 11, Target 112 and that makes me go to Page 10.

Observations and Recommendations

9.1. Streamlining the Functions of the Chief Licencing Officer

Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend section 3 of the principal Act to streamline the functions and powers of the Chief Licencing Officer. Currently, the functions of the Chief Licensing Officer are scattered in various Sections in the Act and there is the need to consolidate them for better clarity and ease reference.

The committee further observes that while section 4(2) of the principle Act provides that licensing officers and all vehicle inspectors shall be under the direction of the Chief Licensing Officer, the Act goes ahead to assign some of the licensing functions such as issuance of motor vehicle number plates, directly to the licensing officers, rendering it difficult for the Chief Licencing Officer to exercise effective supervisory oversight over the motor vehicle registration and licensing function.

The committee notes the concerns raised by some stakeholders that vesting the Chief Licencing Officer with so many duties and responsibilities that could be effectively performed by lower ranking officers is likely to affect effective service delivery and is a recipe for corruption since a lot of power will be concentrated in the hands of one individual.

However, the committee is cognisant of the challenges that have characterised the motor vehicle registration system which is currently administered by Uganda Revenue Authority on behalf of the Ministry of Works and Transport. These include discrepancies on registration/log books, lack of a credible and reliable database of motor vehicles and lack of quality assurance mechanisms. 

The committee, therefore, concurs with the proposed amendments as it will ensure effective supervision and accountability in the management and administration of motor vehicle registration.

Joint Ownership and Registration of Third-Party Rights in Motor Vehicles

Clause 9(a) of the Bill seeks to amend Section 13 of the principle Act to provide for joint ownership of motor vehicles. It proposes that where a motor vehicle, trailer or engineering plant is owned by more than one person, the registration shall be effected in the names of all the owners. The principle Act only allows registration of one of the owners nominated by all of the owners.

The committee agrees with the proposed amendment since it is aimed at safeguarding the property rights of persons as guaranteed by Article 26 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

Clause 9(b) of the Bill seeks to require a person who has an interest in a motor vehicle through a lease, security or loan to register the interest under the Security Interest in Movable Property Act, 2019. In addition, the Bill mandates the Registrar under the Security Interest in Movable Property Act, 2019 to submit to the Chief Licensing Officer returns of all registered interests for entry in the relevant registration books.

Madam Speaker, the committee agrees with the proposed amendment, which aims at aligning the law with the Security Interest in Movable Property Act, 2019.

The Bill further proposes the endorsement of the words, "tax free" by the Chief Registrar on the registration books of motor vehicles brought into the country duty free.

As a committee, we concur with the proposed amendment which is aimed at enhancing tax compliance by ensuring that taxes are paid for duty free vehicles upon resale to un-exempted persons.

Madam Speaker, repeal of provisions relating to road licences; clauses 11,12,13,15,16,19, seek to amend sections 15,16,17,20,23 and 33 of the Principal Act to repeal provisions relating to road licences.

The committee has no objection to the proposed amendments since they are aimed at harmonising the law with the Finance Act, 2007 which abolished road licences and replaced the same with a fuel levy.

Madam Speaker on licencing of repair facilities, manufacturers and dealers in reconditioned motor vehicles; clause 17 of the Bill seeks to amend section 29 of the principle Act to introduce the requirement for persons engaged in the repair of motor vehicles, manufacturers or dealers in new, second hand or reconditioned motor vehicles to be licensed by the Chief Licencing Officer.

According to some stakeholders in the motor vehicle repair industry, the proposed amendment is unfair, discriminatory and an attempt at double taxation of service providers in the industry since repair facilities and other motor vehicle dealers are issued with trading licenses by their respective local authorities annually as a precondition for their operation.

The committee, however, concurs with the proposed amendment since it is aimed ensuring that repair facilities, manufacturers or dealers in new, second hand or reconditioned motor vehicles are regulated for enhanced road safety. In addition, this will enable Government to curb the rampant theft and sale of stolen motor vehicles in the country.

There is a requirement for physical possession of driving licence and a registration book while driving. Clauses 20(a) and 72 of the Bill seek to amend sections 35 and 146 of the principle Act to require a driver of a motor vehicle, trailer or engineering plant to be in physical possession of a valid driving licence while driving. 

The committee observes that while the requirement for physical possession of a driving licence is aimed at easing enforcement, it is untenable in the current era of technological advancements where driving licences are electronically accessible. In addition, it is risky for drivers to carry their original copies of driving licences at all times as they may easily get lost, damaged or stolen.

The committee accordingly proposes amendments to clauses 20(a) and 72 to allow a driver to be in possession of a copy of his or her driving licence while driving and to produce an original driving licence when required within 72 hours. 

Relatedly, clause 14(b) and (c) seek to require a driver of a motor vehicle, trailer or engineering plant to be in possession of a copy of the registration book in respect of the motor vehicle, trailer or engineering plant and whenever required by a police officer to produce an original copy thereof within 48 hours. The committee is generally in agreement with the proposed amendment since it is aimed at curbing the rising cases of motor vehicle theft in the country.

However, the committee observes that the period of 48 hours within which to produce an original of the registration book whenever required is inadequate since the registration book is often in the custody of motor vehicle owners who may not be driving the vehicle at the material time.

Accordingly, the committee proposes that the period for production of an original of the registration book should be increased from 48 hours to one 120 hours to allow the person adequate time within which to produce the registration book.  

On grouping of motor vehicles for issuance of driving licences, clause 2l of the Bill seeks to amend section 36 of the Principal Act to revise the grouping of motor vehicles for the purpose of issuance of driving licences. Under the principle Act, vehicles are categorised into 12 groups compared to the 15 groups proposed by the Bill.

The committee concurs with the proposed categorisation of motor vehicles since it aimed at ensuring compliance with international standards as stipulated in the International Convention on Road Traffic, 1968. This will pave way for international recognition of driving licences issued under Uganda’s licensing regime.

In line with licencing of driving schools and instructors; clause 22(a), (b) and (c) of the Bill seek to amend section 37 of the principle Act to; substitute the title “director transport and communications” wherever it appears with the title “director transport” and to enhance the penalty for operating a driving school without a licence from the current maximum of 50 currency points to 100 currency points. The committee concurs with the proposed change of title since it is aimed at aligning the law with the current Government structure.

The committee further agrees with the proposed enhancement of the penalty for operating a driving school without a licence to ensure that drivers train from only approved driving schools. 

Clause 22(d) seeks to empower the minister to make regulations to prescribe procedures and conditions for persons to undergo private driving instructions without going to licensed driving schools. 

Proponents of the Bill noted that the proposal is intended to allow specialised instructors to train persons in circumstances where the licensed driving schools lack capacity to do so; for instance, in the case of heavy goods vehicles, buses and engineering plants. The committee strongly objects to the proposed amendments since it is susceptible to abuse and defeats the essence of licensing of driving schools, which is to ensure standardisation. 

Amendment of Provisions Relating to Driving Permits

Clause 77 of the Bill seeks to substitute the words, "driving permits" with the words, "driving licences" wherever the words appear in the principal Act.

The committee concurs with the proposed change in nomenclature to harmonise the law with international standards for uniformity. In any case, most countries within the East African region such as Kenya, Tanzania and Rwanda use the same nomenclature.

Clause 24(a) of the Bill seeks to amend Section 42 of the principal Act to introduce the validity period of five years for a driving licence in addition to the already existing validity periods of one and three years respectively. 

The committee concurs with the proposed introduction of a longer validity period of five years for driving licences.

Clause 24(b) seeks to empower the minister to prescribe other validity periods for driving permits, whether shorter or longer periods, by statutory instrument. 

The committee objects to the amendment since it seeks to grant the minister wide discretionary powers which are likely to be abused. 

In addition, the provision is unnecessary since the proposed subsection (3) clearly stipulates the validity periods of 12 months, three years or five years at any time as the case may be.

Clause 24(b) proposes that persons applying for renewal of driving licences for the first time should undergo re-testing for competence before the licence is renewed.

The committee objects to the proposed amendment since it is unfair to subject a driver to another competence test yet he or she would have been tested before being issued with a driving licence.

Clause 24(c) requires a person whose driving permit has not been renewed within two years from the date of expiry to undergo theory and practical tests before the licence is renewed.

The committee concurs with the proposed amendment since it is aimed at improving driver quality for enhanced road safety. This will go a long way in streamlining the high levels and cost of road carnage in the country. 

In addition, the proposed amendment will save permit holders the inconvenience of having to start the process of securing a driving licence afresh as is the case under the current law.

Designation of the Department of Transport Regulation and Safety as a Competent Authority

Clauses 29 and 74 of the Bill seek to amend Section 61 and Part IX of the principal Act respectively, to designate the Department of Transport Regulation and Safety under the Ministry of Works and Transport as a competent authority to replace the Transport Licencing Board and the National Road Safety Council. The roles and functions of the two institutions are to be taken over by the competent authority. 

The committee was informed that the purpose of the proposed amendment is to give effect to the Cabinet directive on rationalisation of Government Ministries, Agencies and Departments (MDAs) with the objective of reducing public expenditure for effective and efficient service delivery.

Stakeholders, however, raised concerns that vesting the responsibilities of the Transport Licencing Board and the National Road Safety Council in a department under the Ministry of Works and Transport is a departure from recommended international best practices on road safety. 

It is worthy to note that the United Nations (UN) has, through its various resolutions, called upon Member States to establish a lead agency on road safety at national level that is autonomous and fully funded to oversee and coordinate road safety programmes. In line with the UN recommendation, Government of Uganda made a commitment in the National Development Plan II as well as the National Road Safety Policy to establish the National Road Safety Authority as a lead agency for road safety matters in the country.

Stakeholders therefore cautioned that the Department of Transport Regulations and Safety, under the Ministry of Works and Transport, will not have the requisite capacity and autonomy to effectively discharge the mandates of both the National Road Safety Council and the Road and Transport Licencing Board and is likely to suffer similar challenges that have constrained the two bodies from operating effectively, such as inadequate funding and understaffing.

The committee however observes that the proposed amendment is timely since it is aimed at strengthening the ministry's regulatory and oversight role in the transport sector. This will address the existing overlaps and duplication of roles and responsibilities in the sector, for proper coordination, enhanced accountability and effective and efficient service delivery.

The committee further notes that the proposed amendment will not have serious financial implications on the budget of the Ministry of Works and Transport since the technical staff of the National Road Safety Council and the Transport Licencing Board are already part of the Department of Transport Regulation under the ministry.

Classification of Vehicle Operator's Licence

Clause 35 of the Bill seeks to amend Section 70 of the principal Act to provide for classification of vehicle operator's licence issued by a competent authority. 

The Bill seeks to introduce new classes of licences for commercial motorcycles, tricycles and tourist vehicles, remove redundant licences, and merge licences that serve the same purpose. For instance, special and basic licences are to be removed while town taxicab licences have been merged with rental vehicle operator licences.

The committee concurs with the proposed amendment since it is aimed at mitigating the current spate of road carnage in the country, given that passengers and cyclists of commercial motorcycles (boda bodas) account for the second highest number of the road users killed in fatal accidents in Uganda.

In addition, the proposed amendment will facilitate the creation of a reliable database for commercial motorcycles to aid proper planning and organisation of the public transport sector as well as enable Government to curb the current wave of crime in the motorcycle industry.

Licensing and Regulation of Special Networks Using Online Digital Application 

The public transport sector in Uganda has, in the recent past, witnessed the proliferation of online digital applications such as Uber, SafeBoda, Bolt (formerly Taxify) and little cabs, among others. However, provision of public transport using online digital applications does not fit within the current regulatory regime, which has given digital transport service providers an unfair advantage over other service providers in the public transport sector.

Accordingly, clause 36 of the Bill seeks to require a person who wishes to provide public transport using online digital application to apply to the competent authority for authorisation to operate the online digital network. 

The Bill requires an applicant for a licence to submit a tax clearance certificate from Uganda Revenue Authority, obtain the relevant insurance, and submit periodic reports and information to a competent authority. It further requires that drivers to be hosted on the digital platform be accredited and issued with badges just like the drivers of any other public service vehicle, among other requirements. Clause 36 (3) specifically seeks to require a person who wishes to carry passengers or goods for reward through an online digital network to apply for an operator's licence.

The committee notes that the proposed regulation of public transport providers using online applications is the first of its kind in the East African region and will go a long way in streamlining public transport services and ensuring fair competition among the sector players for the sustainable growth of the industry. In addition, it will enhance road safety, ensure the personal safety and security of the passengers and drivers, as well as enable Government to exercise effective control and supervision of the public transport sector for enhanced service delivery.

Mandate of the Minister to Organise Public Transport
Clause 37 of the Bill seeks to amend Section 7l of the principal Act, which mandates the minister to organise public transport by requiring public transport providers to form companies, registered associations, partnerships and cooperatives, or savings and credit societies as a precondition for issuance of a licence under the Act.

Stakeholders in the commuter transport industry strongly objected to the proposed amendment, noting that it will escalate the current power struggles in the commuter transport business, cause more chaos and confusion in the public transport sector and ultimately result into unemployment, since most of the commuter taxis are owned by individuals. However, at its interface with the proponents of the Bill, the committee was informed that the spirit behind the proposed amendment is not to phase out sole ownership of public service vehicles but instead to require individuals to join groups for better management of the sector and effective service delivery.

The committee, however, notes that consolidating public transport providers in groups is an international best practice that has worked effectively in countries like Kenya to ensure orderliness and sustainable growth of the public transport sector. 

The public transport sector in Uganda is highly fragmented, characterised by fierce competition and unsafe driving behaviours such as over speeding, overtaking, random drop-off and pick-up stops, among others, exposing passengers to the risk of accidents. The committee further observes that consolidating public transport providers in groups will enable Government to effectively regulate the public transport sector in an organised environment and to enforce discipline on the road, which will ultimately result in the reduction of road accidents in the country. 

In addition, transport providers will be able to formalise their business practices for improved profitability and enhanced service delivery. Ultimately, this will reduce traffic congestion, especially in the cities, since public transport will be more attractive to the population than private transport.

Accordingly, the committee concurs with the proposed amendment since it is geared towards improving regulation and management of public service vehicles for an efficient and sustainable public transport sector.

Clause 38 of the Bill seeks to amend Section 7l of the principal Act to provide for the regulation of entry into the transport sector. The Bill seeks to empower the minister to specify the conditions for market entry into the transport sector; prescribe the requirements for entry into the sector, including management, financial capacity and size of the fleet; prescribe operational standards to be followed by entrants; provide a procedure for exiting the industry; and prescribe the conditions under which a driving licence may be cancelled.

A section of stakeholders noted that the proposed amendment will discourage investment in the public transport sector since the sector is to be ring-fenced and monopolised by large scale investors at the expense of the small transport providers who have for several years depended on the industry for their livelihoods.

The committee, however, observes that the proposed amendment will go a long way in streamlining public transport operation by ensuring that only companies and individuals with quality fleets and adequate financial and human resource are allowed to operate public service vehicles. This will enhance road safety and mitigate the current high levels and cost of road carnage involving public service vehicles.

Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol and Drugs

Clauses 53, 54 and 55 of the Bill seek to substitute sections 111, 112 and 113 of the principal Act respectively, to streamline provisions relating to driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, in order to remove the existing overlaps and contradictions for clarity and ease of enforcement. Clause 53 specifically prohibits a person from driving a motor vehicle under the influence of alcohol above the prescribed limit. 

Clause 54 seeks to prohibit drivers from driving under the influence of drugs prohibited under the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Control Act, 2016 and the National Drug Policy and Authority Act.

The Bill further seeks to empower a police officer to require any person to provide a specimen of blood for a laboratory test where a person is suspected of having alcohol or drugs in his or her body system, or subject him or her to a breath analyser test in accordance with the proposed Section 113.

The committee generally agrees with the proposed amendments, which are aimed at curbing the high levels of road carnage in the country. The committee, however, notes that police officers are not competent to extract blood samples for alcohol or drugs tests from drivers. The samples can only be collected by a qualified health professional.

The committee further objects to the proposed Section 111(3), which seeks to require the drivers of public service and Government vehicles to have zero alcohol limits at all times while driving. The proposed amendment is discriminatory since it is applicable only to a specific category of drivers, yet the proposed Section 111 (1) provides for a prescribed limit of alcohol for other drivers. 

Assignment of Demerit Points for Certain Offences

Clause 61 of the Bill seeks to empower the minister to prescribe, by regulation, a demerit point system for purposes of the Act. A demerit point system is a method by which numerical values are assigned to traffic offences in proportion to the seriousness of the offence. The Bill requires the regulations made by the minister to provide for, among others, the categorisation of offences according to the degree of severity, a schedule of offences and number of points deductible for each, demerit points to be recorded against a licence held by a person, and the manner of calculating demerit points to be deducted.

The committee notes that the demerit point system for traffic offences is an international best practice, which has been adopted by several countries such as South Africa and Kenya to monitor driver behaviour and foster compliance with traffic rules and regulations. 

The committee, therefore, agrees to the proposed amendment aimed at improving driver behaviour and enhancing road safety.

Right of Way for Emergency Motor Vehicles

Clause 62 of the Bill seeks to amend Section 123 of the principal Act to enhance the penalty for failure to give way to an emergency motor vehicle. 

The committee agrees to the proposed amendment since it is aimed at improving mobility for emergency motor vehicles.

The committee, however, notes that the term “emergency” is not clearly defined, and this has given some motorists leeway to misuse it. The committee proposes that the word "emergency" should be defined for clarity and ease of reference by the relevant authorities.

Assistance to Accident Victims

Clause 63 of the Bill seeks to amend Section 125 of the principal Act to require road users to render assistance to accident victims, including calling for help and contacting emergency services, securing the accident scene, organising resources to enable first responders to conduct rescue operations, administering first aid and transporting the injured persons to a hospital if no ambulance is available. Currently, the law imposes an obligation to render assistance to accident victims on drivers only.

The committee notes that the proposed amendment seeks to absolve the state of its responsibility of saving the lives of accident victims and instead shifts the burden to bystanders. In addition, the provision is difficult to enforce and is likely to discourage good Samaritans from rendering the required assistance to the victims. Accordingly, the committee recommends that the clause should be amended to allow road users the discretion to render assistance to accident victims.

Clause 64 of the Bill seeks to insert a new Section l25A to the principal Act to make it obligatory for a hospital, clinic or any other health facility to provide medical treatment to an accident victim without proof of financial ability to pay, until he or she has been stabilised.

The committee observes that health facilities are often reluctant to treat accident victims who are unable to pay their medical bills. The proposed amendment will ensure that the lives of accident victims are safeguarded, irrespective of their socio-economic status.

Provisions Relating to Safer Vehicles

Clause 70 of the Bill seeks to introduce Part VIA relating to safer vehicles. It seeks to empower the minister to set standards for safe, environmentally friendly motor vehicles, trailers and engineering plants; prescribe procedures for testing and inspection for road worthiness of vehicles and vehicle components, inspection procedures followed in the manufacture of vehicles or vehicle components, testing and inspection of materials and machinery or facilities used in the manufacture of motor vehicles; operation of facilities used in carrying out testing and inspection of vehicles, among others

The Bill further seeks to ensure that motor vehicles imported into Uganda comply with standards prescribed by the Uganda National Bureau of Standards; empower the minister to prescribe the maximum age of vehicles to be imported into Uganda; and to provide for periodic inspection of motor vehicles for environmental and road safety compliance.

The committee observes that motor vehicle testing and inspection is embraced as a global best practice for improving the condition of motor vehicles to mitigate road carnage. However, since the abolition of road licences in 2007, motor vehicle inspection for road safety compliance has not been effectively streamlined within the country's legal framework.

The committee concurs with the proposed amendments, which are aimed at improving the quality of vehicles on the road for enhanced road safety and improved air quality.

Offences and Penalties 

The Bill seeks to create new offences and to enhance the penalties for various offences including possession of a motor vehicle without registration, failure to notify the chief licencing officer of change in ownership of a motor vehicle within 14 days, operating a driving school without a licence, instructing a person to drive without an instructor's licence, suspension of road services by a holder of an operator's licence without permission, failure by a holder of an operator’s licence to comply with the conditions of the licence, damaging a public service vehicle, touting, overloading of goods vehicles, false information when applying for a licence, driving a motor vehicle in dangerous mechanical condition, causing bodily injury through reckless driving, driving with blood alcohol concentration above the prescribed limit, driving under the influence of drugs, careless or inconsiderate use of a motor vehicle, among others. 

The committee notes that while the proposed penalties are aimed at shaping driver behaviour in a bid to reduce road carnage, some penalties are excessive and unreasonable. The committee therefore proposes that the penalties should be apportioned according to the severity of the offences.

Recommendation 

The committee recommends that the Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1998 (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be passed into law subject to the following proposed amendments.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair and the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, for that very elaborate report. 

Honourable members, the Bill may not be very big but this sector touches so many people, both public and private. Therefore, I would like to give Members an opportunity to look at the old law overnight and compare it with the new proposals. We can start the debate tomorrow. Thank you very much.

MS SANTA ALUM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a very important law that we are handling, given the magnitude of the problem at hand. Sometimes, when we give too much time, when you call for debate, Members do not remember what it is about. 

I, therefore, propose that we debate this one tomorrow so that it is still fresh in our minds. Additionally, when the report is called, the chairperson should come and give some highlights for the Members who are not in here. 

THE SPEAKER: The Members who are not here should have been here because they know that we are here. 

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, I would have preferred to debate it today because we have been waiting for this Bill for a very long time. Now that it is delivered, we should not have any excuse. Let us come and debate it tomorrow. 

MR SSENGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a very important Bill. For us to understand the Bill very well, we need to look at the old Bill which is being amended. We only have tonight. We have to look for the old Bill, look at it and compare it with this one that has been brought forward to be able to debate it effectively. I would, therefore, propose that we handle this Bill on Tuesday next week; otherwise, we are going to do a shoddy job. 

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the excellent presentation and a very good report. 

As you stated, Madam Speaker, this Bill is very important to all of us. It affects various sectors of our country and therefore we need to debate it with knowledge. One day is enough. We are ready to debate this Bill tomorrow. (Applause) I would like to appeal to Members, let us come back tomorrow when the report is still fresh in our minds. 

I would also like to appeal to you, Madam Speaker, that if there are other issues that we need to debate tomorrow, let us suspend them and we concentrate on this Bill. (Applause)

THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is a pleasure for me to make my maiden speech in my new capacity (Laughter)

The chair of the committee has guided us, almost word by word, through the report and we have listen very carefully and taken notes. The old law is on our iPads. We are not going into libraries to begin searching. I believe that even tonight, a Member should be able to go through the old law, compare with the notes he or she has made and tomorrow, we come and do the job. 

Let us adopt the habit of quickly disposing of these laws instead of procrastinating. I beg to submit and to support the proposal that we handle this tomorrow. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are well equipped. The iPads are available and the information is available at the touch of a button. You can access the old Bill and the amendments at the touch of a button. Let us do it tomorrow, please. 

MR OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, I appreciate your guidance and I appreciate what the Members have said. I would like to add one thing.

Tomorrow, with your indulgence, when we start the debate on this matter, the Members who are here should be given the first priority because they are the ones who have followed the proceedings and know the gist of the report. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I invite the clerk to write down the names of Members who are here.

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, indeed, I concur with my colleague, but my view would differ. This report has been very elaborate and the few of us who are here could commence the debate today and we conclude it tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I also want to read. 

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, I thank my chairman. I think let us use this night to study this Bill and come back tomorrow to debate it. However, I propose that we should start thinking about starting with Bills and other things and handle matters of national importance at the end.

THE SPEAKER: There is no problem. Sometimes there are things which are really urgent and have to be addressed early but we shall judge from time to time.

MS JALIA BINTU: Madam Speaker, I know the Parliament of Uganda is an e-Parliament. I believe the cameras have taken the pictures of people who are here. Is it procedurally right for us to sit here and look at the clerk writing our names when the cameras are installed everywhere and they are taking our pictures left, right and centre? 

THE SPEAKER: Although the cameras are there, it is also not bad to have backup from the clerk. We shall see the Members tomorrow. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.27 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 23 January 2020 at 2.00 p.m.) 

