

Tuesday, 15 January 2019

Parliament met at 2.02 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you can see, we have Bills that we need to finish. At least today, we should finish with the Human Rights Enforcement Bill, 2015; that is something we have to do today.

There are other items that we need to deal with but there is something that happened that we need to correct. Honourable members, you will recall that this House, during the sitting of Wednesday, 6 April 2016, while considering the addendum to the Supplementary Schedules No. 1, 2 and 3 for the financial year referred payments totalling to Shs 78 billion that was paid to various persons, to the Auditor-General for investigation and to report back within three days.

On 14 April 2016, the Auditor-General submitted to Parliament the special audit report on mandamus payments, which formed the basis for the contravention of Treasury Memorandum of Vote 130. The House resolved to pass the supplementary schedule on condition that the special audit report is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts to investigate the expenditure of public funds. 

The Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) conducted the investigation and reported to the House in November 2018. In the meantime, one Mr Wilberforce Walusimbi, being aggrieved by the debate on the special audit report on mandamus payments by the House, filed a suit in the High Court vide Miscellaneous Application No. 53 of 2016 Walusimbi Wilberforce and others against the Attorney-General and others, against the continued consideration of the audit report. 

The High Court ruled that the special audit report was premature, ultra vires and was accordingly quashed by the Court and withdrawn from the public record. At the time Parliament adopted the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) on the report of the Auditor-General for the Financial Year 2014/2015, which was done on 27 November 2018, the special audit report on mandamus payments had apparently been quashed by the Court and expunged from the public record on 13 June 2016. 

A communication from the Auditor-General was sent to the Speaker dated 17 August 2016 and duly received by the Office of the Speaker saying that, that report had been withdrawn from the public record.

Honourable members, when a public document is expunged by Court from the public record, such document is taken to have no legal effect whatsoever and it is taken not to have existed. In fact, they even say it should be treated as if the space it occupied was empty.

Since the special audit report on mandamus payment was non-existent at the time of the adoption of the report of the Public Accounts committee in November 2018, no person, including Parliament, could take action based on it since in the eyes of the law, no such report existed. 

Honourable members, in light of the above, I now make the following orders:

Resolution on the special audit report on mandamus payments adopted by the House and contained in the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) on the report of the Auditor-General for the Financial Year 2014/2015, adopted by the House on 27 November 2018, are hereby expunged from the record of the House. 

These are:

    1. The accounting treatment of mandamus payment

The Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, Mr Keith Muhakanizi be sanctioned in accordance with Sections 11(2)(g) and 79(1)(d) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. Court awards should be recognised as payable in the financial statements.

    2. Payment categorised as mandamus without evidence

The Inspector General of Government investigates the irregularities in mandamus payment with a view to prosecute the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury. The Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury sets up a robust system of payment of court wards that ensures fairness and transparency. 

    3. Unsustainable payment of mandamus

The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs ensures that court awards are minimised through effective and efficient management of court cases. The Attorney-General be held accountable for management of court cases. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development takes adequate provision in the Budget to promptly discharge court awards. 

I hereby direct the Clerk to withdraw all communications made to all Government ministries, departments or agencies on the resolution made by the House in respect of this special audit report on mandamus payments contained in the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government), on the report of the Auditor-General for Financial Year 2014/2015. 

I thought that I should make this correction because we adopted this report in error. There was a communication that this particular report had been withdrawn by the author who was the Auditor-General. Please take heed that the Clerk withdraws those letters that had been submitted to those agencies. Thank you.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You have made a very pertinent directive to this institution and we are going to debate more serious issues. As I look majorly on the Front Bench of the Government - the implementing arm and the owners of the business - it is empty. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right to know whether they will come in soon or we can hold on for a while for them to come in? Members are going to raise pertinent issues but even the shadow Cabinet side has only one member. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You said we should find out but from whom?

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, you are now the authority. Probably, we would have –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am here; so, how do I find out and from whom?

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, I thought that probably they have asked for permission to be delayed and are about to come and report. If not, we should not proceed when the entire Cabinet is not there. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right then to suspend the House for five minutes or you ask the Whips - so that we can have a befitting discussion today.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, for as long as I remember, this House was adjourned on Thursday to today at 2 O’clock. My watch tells me it is slightly after 2 o’clock. Therefore, we will proceed like that.

Honourable members, in the Distinguished Stranger’s Gallery this afternoon, we have hon. Onapito Ekomoloit, former Member of Parliament for Amuria County, Amuria District. He has come here to observe the proceedings of the House. Thank you. 

How do we proceed, honourable members? There are Members who have urgent matters to raise to the House. What we are going to do is to stay the urgent matters and wait for when the ministers are here and then they will deal with them. Let us go to the Order Paper.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House is suspended for 10 minutes.

(The House was suspended at 2.14 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.23 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE PETROLEUM FUND FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018

2.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the annual report of the Petroleum Fund for the Financial Year 2017/2018.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Natural Resources to handle and report to us.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE TREASURY MEMORANDUM ON THE PARLIAMENTARY RESOLUTIONS ON THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT ON PUBLIC SECTOR MANAGEMENT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

2.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Treasury Memorandum on the parliamentary resolutions on the report of the Committee on Public Accounts on the Auditor-General’s report on public sector management for the Financial Year 2014/2015, Ministry of Local Government, Office of the Prime Minister and Ministry of Public Service. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the records capture that. It is accordingly referred to the Committee of Public Accounts and the sectoral committees to look at those responses to what had been decided by this House and what the Government has done about them. Thank you. 

RESPONSES BY MINISTERS TO QUESTIONS

RESPONSE TO QUESTION RAISED BY HON. EDWARD MAKMOT OTTO ON INSECURITY IN AGAGO DISTRICT, OCCASIONED BY INCURSIONS OF KARIMOJONG HERDSMEN

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Internal Affairs?

2.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (KARAMOJA) (Mr Moses Kizige): Mr Speaker, we have information about what has happened in Adilang Sub-County between the people of Agago and the Karimojong herdsmen. We are planning a visit with my colleague, the Minister for Northern Uganda Affairs, later this week to establish the facts and then we shall be able to report to the House more appropriately. Thank you, sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not supposed to be a statement; it is a response. Is that response sufficient, hon. Otto? Where is hon. Otto? He is entitled to a supplementary question.

2.26
MR OJARA OKIN (Independent, Chua County West, Kitgum): Mr Speaker, I think the House can see for itself that the response from the minister is insufficient yet the condition of the people in Agago is actually appalling. We need a concrete response with action points that the Government would like to take to address the plight of the people in Agago who are suffering because of the Karimojong.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, did you have to wait for today to say that? This matter was raised last week and four days have passed. Did you have to wait for a parliamentary sitting to be able to say what you have just said?

2.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we are seeking permission to give our responses for items 4.1 and 4.2 tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why do you seek this? Justify it for me.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, our two colleagues have not arrived in the House. If they do arrive, we can but we think that we should not waste Parliament’s time. If we can handle other items instead of this – (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Our rules require that ministers attend the House to respond to questions raised. The rules are clear to the effect that when a minister is not in position to attend the House, he can delegate a Member to perform the function which the minister should have performed.

Is it procedurally right for hon. Bahati, the State Minister FOR Finance, to stand on the Floor and raise matters in a casual way?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules are clear and our obligations are known. We seem to be renegading on them and that is not fair to the people we represent here. This issue of the problem in Agago, the crisis that is there and the way the people are tormented, was raised last week. I do not think we should take these matters lightly, especially when they affect the lives of people. 

The next issue raised by the Member for West Budama North on the issue of employment of one Joyce Nyeko Ikwaput was a simple issue. According to the honourable member, she passed the interviews but has not been appointed over a period of time. Why would this take five days to be responded to? Does it make sense? Are we just avoiding business of the House?

I would like to ask the acting Government Chief Whip to please make phone calls to these ministers so that they can come this afternoon and bring us reports on this.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH TO THE URGENT QUESTION RAISED BY HON. PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI ON THE PREVALENCE OF HEPATITIS B IN NAKASEKE AND THE NEED FOR ITS MITIGATION

2.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and happy new year to all the Members. On Wednesday, 9 December, hon. Luttamaguzi, a Member of Parliament for Nakaseke South raised a concern on the prevalence of Hepatitis B in Nakaseke District and the need for its mitigation.

Mr  Speaker, as you are aware, we have been having this challenge and right from 2015, we commenced interventions to try and mitigate this challenge in the entire country. We conducted a survey, which gave us the prevalence, by region, of Hepatitis B in the country with the northern region having the highest prevalence at 4.6 per cent, mid-northern 4.4 per cent, 3.8 per cent in West Nile, the eastern region with 2.7 per cent, the south-west region stands at 2 per cent, central region at 2 per cent while the lowest, which is the western region, with 0.8 per cent.

Mr Speaker, our interventions, from that time, were based on the prevalence of Hepatitis B in the country and we commenced from the northern part of the country. We moved to West Nile, Teso and Karamoja. We are now in the Busoga and Bugisu-Bukedi region and we selected a few districts in the Central region, which include Buvuma, Masindi, Nakasongola, Mubende and we are moving to the other parts of the country.

I have a written statement but I will not go verbatim. Phases 3 and 4 of our intervention will cover the remaining central and western regions and these will cover 58 districts. With these remaining two phases, we shall have completed vaccination in the entire country.

Nakaseke District falls in Phase 3, which will combine with Phase 4 and that will be beginning July 2019. Just for information to the Members, the districts that will be covered will be Buikwe, Kayunga, Kiboga, Kyankwanzi, Luweero, Mityana, Mukono, Nakaseke, Kampala, Buliisa, Bundibugyo, Hoima, Kabarole, Kamwenge, Kasese, Kibaale, Kiryandongo, Kyegegwa and Kyenjojo. 

Phase 4, which we shall also bring forward to be covered next financial year, will include Bukomansimbi, Gomba, Lwengo, Lyantonde, Kalangala, Kalungu, Masaka, Mpigi, Rakai, Ssembabule, Wakiso, Kyotera, Buhweju, Bushenyi, Ibanda, Isingiro, Kabale, Kanungu, Kiruhura, Kisoro, Mbarara, Mitooma, Ntungamo, Rubirizi, Rukungiri and Sheema.

Mr Speaker, Nakaseke District, with a target population of about 97,000 people above the age of people 16 years eligible for vaccination, as I indicated, will be covered in phase 3. 

All the regional referral hospitals, general hospitals and health centre IVs have been designated as care and treatment centres for patients who are tested Hepatitis B positive and plans are underway to provide services. Actually, we have already provided the necessary medication to these hospitals. 

In summary, ever since we started this intervention, we have covered 69 districts out of the 127 and that comprises 54.3 per cent. Our target population was 16.7 million. So far, we have screened 2.6 million people and out of this, 2,503,000 have tested negative and linked to vaccination. 

Challenges have been faced as we implement this programme. One of our biggest challenges is the high rate of loss to follow up. The last statistics that we provided to this House clearly indicated that we had a high turn up at the first dose but the numbers drop at the second dose and it was even worse at the third dose. Therefore, very few people complete all the three doses.

We held a meeting with all the leaders in those districts where we have been having this vaccination and encouraged them because the World Health Organisation has since issued new guidelines. Previously, after the first dose, you were supposed to get the second dose after one month and the third dose after six months – (Interjections) – Can I finish this statement please. 

The World Health Organisation has since issued new guidelines, after conducting research, because previously you were supposed to get the third dose after six months. The new guideline that was given, which we have shared with all the district officials, is that even if somebody missed the last dose after the six months, he or she can still get it within one year. You would still be within the period.

This is the guidance that we have given to all the districts. We hope that those who had previously missed the six months can still go and get the vaccination as long as they are still within the one year. 

Mr Speaker, we have been working with the Local Governments to continue with the sensitisation programmes on Hepatitis B on the radios. We have also trained health workers on the management and treatment of Hepatitis B cases. However, the challenges still remain. 

It would have been our wish to do this vaccination within a short period of time but because of limited resources – you recall that this Parliament has been giving us Shs 10 billion annually and that is why we have been doing the vaccination in a phased manner.

Mr Speaker, I would like to assure the Member of Parliament from Nakaseke District - I had talked to him before and indicated to him that we shall be in Nakaseke District in July this financial year. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, this is a response under our rule 46 and we know what that rule means. However, the minister has been generous enough to go beyond what the question raised because the issue was specific to Nakaseke but she has covered the whole country. Therefore, in a way, she has opened it up a bit. We can have a little engagement after the supplementary question from the Member who raised the issue.

2.39
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her statement. However, it has not been comprehensive enough to ensure that the people of Nakaseke get some hope. 

You are aware that a number of people in Nakaseke have died. You cannot tell me that we have to wait up to July. Why are you concerned with the districts where people are not dying and you leave a district where a big number of people are dying? I still insist that the matter of Hepatitis B is urgent and does not require dillydallying by the Ministry of Health. 

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, the honourable member from Nakaseke South County has indicated that people are dying in Nakaseke. However, the hardest hit area was Northern Uganda and that is where we started off with the vaccination. We are aware that Hepatitis B has been spreading but from the survey that was conducted in 2016, it clearly indicated what the prevalence is per region.

We also have private service providers and we indicated that those who are able can get the vaccination from the private service providers. However, the Government –(Interruption) 

MR SSEWUNGU: First, I would like to thank the minister; she is among those few ministers who come here and give us good responses to our queries.

The clarification I seek from the minister is, I was in the House when the honourable member from Nakaseke South County raised the matter. In his submission, he stated that he had managed to go to the National Medical Stores and a one Mr Kamabare had assured him that the vaccines are there but are not being utilised.

Honourable minister, when this matter came to your office, did you take any interest in this particular area? Giving us examples of other areas, including Kalungu, when I have not raised my complaint does not sustain the issue that was raised by the honourable member. Yes, you are doing very well but have you taken keen interest in the area raised by the honourable member and the issue of Mr Kamabare that the vaccines are there but are not utilised?

MR AGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. Hon. Ssewungu, in seeking clarification from the Minister of Health, has been elaborate to blame the minister for her detailed report, which largely talks about areas that were not necessarily areas of interest at the time the question was raised. 

Do we then wait for every problem to be raised as a matter of urgent national importance or can we benefit from a response to one matter of urgent national importance that perhaps affects other areas too? 

Me Speaker, I would like to know whether it is procedurally right that we do not consume information or clarification especially from areas that are not necessarily among those with urgent problems in lieu of those that have been raised with urgent problems. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. In summing up what the minister has said, I had dealt with that issue. I said this matter had been raised under our Rule 46 but the response of the minister was generous enough to cover different aspects. 

Therefore, because of that I was not going to restrict Members to Rule 46; after the supplementary question, I would allow more interactions with the minister because the statement is wider than the one that was raised under Rule 46. That is what I guided. So, we are proceeding properly now.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I prepared a comprehensive statement because this matter of Hepatitis B keeps coming up especially from Members in regions that we have not covered. That is why I had to make that kind of statement.

Mr Speaker, allow me to assure hon. Ssewungu - can I request hon. Ssewungu to listen? The National Medical Stores is a Government body mandated to procure, store and distribute vaccines, medicines and other supplies. 

Therefore, when one goes the stores, they will definitely find vaccines there only that these vaccines are meant for particular districts. As I indicated, we commenced vaccination for the entire Busoga, Bukedi and Bugisu regions this financial year, so you will see vaccines in the stores but they are meant for other regions.

We added the districts of Butambala, Nakasongola, Masindi and Mubende. This was after we realised that we had some little more vaccines procured from the money that we were given to cover that entire population. Therefore, I would like to also assure the honourable member that when hon. Luttamaguzi raised this matter, I took particular interest to consult the District Health Officer to find out what was on the ground.

It is true that there are people already infected with Hepatitis B. However, there are radio sensitisation programmes going on. It is not true that people are dying at the rate which was reported - (Interruption) 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. The issue of Hepatitis B, as the minister has indicated, is indeed highest in northern Uganda. As we speak the rates are not going down.

Recently, we had 10 people going for interviews and among other things, they were tested for Hepatitis B. Four people out of the 10 were rejected because they had Hepatitis B. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister; much as you have made an effort, you indicated that the challenge you have as a ministry is the follow up. 

You even indicated that for the vaccination, one needs three doses but that more often people do not finfish the three doses. There was an attempt to even have it in Parliament. It happened only once and the service was not concluded.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The point of clarification?

MS ANYWAR: Now my clarification from the minister is: having taken note that follow up is missing and having indicated that the World Health Organisation has allowed the period of one year for one to finish the dose, what about those who go beyond one year? With the challenges of little stock and the lack of a follow-up mechanism, what have you done as ministry to ensure that there is consistent follow-up to enable those who don’t complete the dose do so? Thank you.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is everybody’s responsibility to ensure that they remain healthy or get vaccinated. Government does its best to provide these vaccines free of charge and that is why we have engaged you, as members of Parliament, to help us with sensitising the population.

We don’t have yet a mechanism –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister admitted that it is a challenge to the ministry. In my constituency, people are waiting for the vaccines; sometimes the vaccines are out of stock. Nobody wishes to sit back and die. 

Actually, whenever there is vaccination going on, the hospitals or health centres are overcrowded the entire day. However, we cannot access the drugs when required. Therefore, is the honourable minister in order to reluctantly indicate that it is not the responsibility of the ministry but an individual - if there are no drugs for example in Kitgum, somebody must travel all the way to Tororo to get it? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I seem to have heard the minister differently. The minister said that the first responsibility to keep healthy lies with the individual. The responsibility to get vaccinated lies with the individual. Government provides vaccines free of charge. That is where she had stopped.  Therefore, I am not reading what you said as part of what she said. (Laughter)

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to request colleagues that this is a very serious matter. When we sent the vaccines to northern Uganda, the people who turned up for vaccination the very first time were in thousands. When we went for the second vaccination, after one month, they were almost just a half. When it came to the third vaccination – and that is why we called the members of Parliament - we had to even withdraw vaccines from some of these districts because they were about to expire and that is when we brought on board Nakasongola and Butambala -(Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable minister, for the response you have given. Indeed, citing the words of the Speaker, you have been generous enough to inform this House beyond the scope of the question as per Rule 46 of the Rules of Procedure.

However, this is what we are asking and it is plain; in Nakaseke South for example, you have three public facilities with one Government hospital and two health centre IVs. Then you have only two private clinics - one in Kapeeka and another in Nakaseke as far as I am concerned unless you have different statistics. 

In your response, you clearly said that the only solution the people of Nakaseke have at the moment is to go to private clinics and seek vaccination. On 30 April 2018, it was the response of the Ministry of Health that all vaccines were free. However, in private clinics, this vaccination is not free of charge; one has to pay about Shs 100,000. Look at someone in Nakaseke who earns nearly nothing but would like to access these facilities. 

We are being fair; in 2016, there was an epidemic and there was an intervention by Parliament and Government, and rightly so. In the short term response, you had to go where it was more prevalent than where it was not. However, even with the two per cent in the central region, Nakaseke inclusive, as a result of movement of persons from one area to another, the spread continued. Therefore, given the inability of people to raise this money due to high poverty levels, and the distances involved for an individual to move from an area to another, regardless of transport, the cost alone of acquiring this vaccination leaves them discriminated in this quest to fight hepatitis B.

The clarification I would like to seek is that since we are an entire nation and the vaccines are free for all of us, why shouldn’t you, as a ministry, resolve this issue by moving vans with doctors and nurses through these areas with free vaccines in order to curb this disease? This is important because we still have movement of persons from Nakaseke to northern Uganda, from northern Uganda to Nakaseke and to eastern Uganda; everyone shall suffer the same fate. Thank you.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What hon. Nsereko is raising is what we would have loved to do if we had resources. I clearly indicated that we are constrained because of the resource envelope. That is why we had to handle this in a phased manner.

Mr Speaker, allow me to inform the House that hepatitis B, just like HIV, is transmitted from one person to another through body fluids. We have been telling people to be faithful to one another and not to get into sexual intercourse with persons whose HIV and hepatitis B status they do not know. It is not that you are going to sit in a taxi with somebody who has hepatitis B and you contract it.

The position is that we are going to look critically at this and do an audit where we are doing the vaccination now; if we have room to reallocate, we shall do so. Allow me to assure hon. Luttamaguzi that we are going to handle his area maybe even before July, after doing an audit on the vaccination programme that is ongoing in the current districts. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. We will pause it here. That is the response to the issue raised by the Member of Parliament for Nakaseke South. I think it has been sufficiently handled. There are gaps that should be dealt with. 

I see the Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries here. There was a response that he should have made. Now that he is here, he should make it.

RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. RICHARD OTHIENO ON THE FAILURE BY UGANDA TO FILL THE ROTATIONAL VACANCY OF THE DEPUTY EXECUTIVE SECRETARY OF THE LAKE VICTORIA FISHERIES ORGANISATION

2.58
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable member for Budama West, Mr Othieno Okoth Richard, sought an explanation from the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the failure by Uganda to fill the rotational vacancy of the Deputy Executive Secretary of Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation.

Article X, sections 1 and 5, of the Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation Convention for the Establishment of the Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation is about the organisation’s head. Under those sections, the organisation shall have a permanent secretariat headed by an executive secretary who is appointed by the Fisheries and Agriculture Sectoral Council of Ministers for a non-renewable five-year term. The position of the executive secretary is subjected to rotation among the contracting parties - the East African States. 

The executive secretary is assisted by the deputy executive secretary who is also appointed by the Fisheries and Agriculture Sectoral Council of Ministers. The mandate of this deputy executive secretary shall be five years, non-renewable, and he or she shall be of a nationality different from that of the executive secretary. In this regard, the executive secretary was to come from the United Republic of Tanzania and the deputy executive secretary appointed from the Republic of Uganda. 

At the expiry of the term of office of the then executive secretary and deputy executive secretary, the Fisheries and Agriculture Sectoral Council of Ministers directed the then Executive Secretary of the Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation to write to the United Republic of Tanzania and the Republic of Uganda to nominate the executive secretary and the deputy executive secretary respectively. The recruitment process took place thereafter. 

The then executive secretary communicated to us that through an internal competitive recruitment process, candidates were selected from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, from the Directorate of Fisheries Resources, and the National Fisheries Resources Research Institute in Jinja/Kajjansi. Interviews were conducted by a highly technical and well selected committee and the best candidate was awarded the job. The name was submitted to Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation for transmission, as required, to the East African Community partner states - Kenya and Tanzania - for concurrency.

In this case, Tanzania nominated a candidate for the position of the executive secretary and Uganda and Kenya concurred with that candidate and appointment was effected. While Tanzania concurred with the appointment of the Ugandan candidate for the deputy executive secretary, the Republic of Kenya communicated expressing reservations on the selected Ugandan candidate. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries communicated to the Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation Secretariat for explanation from our neighbour, Kenya, and the response is still awaited.

In conclusion, Uganda is still committed to fast-tracking the process of appointment of the deputy executive secretary. The next Fisheries and Agriculture Council of Ministers meeting is scheduled for 1 February 2019 - just a few weeks from now - and the matter will be brought for redress.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who was the best candidate? Do you have the name on record?

MR SSEMPIJJA: It is Commissioner Nyeko (Mrs).

3.04
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his response. However, there is information that the country should know in response to the information that the minister has given.

Mr Speaker, the contracting parties to that organisation are only three - Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania. It is true that those three countries provide leadership on rotational basis using alphabetical order. Article V, section 5, of the convention provides that decisions of that organisation are made on the basis of consensus and that where consensus fails, then by a majority decision. 

The minister has just stated here that Uganda nominated and Tanzania accepted the nomination. It is only Kenya, according to the minister, which expressed reservations. That means there is no consensus. However, there is a majority decision in favour of the nomination because two against one means there is already a majority decision. Therefore, what remains is for the minister, who also happens to be the Chair of the Council of Ministers, to issue the instrument of appointment. The Council of Ministers’ meeting notwithstanding, the council has no business in this matter because the provisions of the convention are very clear. 

My question is: the majority vote is already in favour of the minister’s nomination and it is the very minister supposed to issue the instrument of appointment, so what is the problem? Why is he failing to issue this instrument of appointment and why is he telling us to wait for the Council of Ministers, which council has already expressed its position? Tanzania has supported the Ugandan who was nominated; it is only Kenya that expressed reservations. What is it that the minister is waiting for?   

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we have two sides in this House and I know hon. Ssekikubo belongs to the NRM Party. Is it in order for him to show impunity by moving to either side without your permission?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is he the one I saw walking out? (Laughter) I did not see the face, so I cannot tell whether it was hon. Ssekikubo or not. (Laughter)

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, I am the current Chairman of the Sectoral Council of Ministers. However, there are two things I would like to point out. One is that we work and decide by consensus, in most cases. As the chair, I have to seek for this consensus, considering the way the East African Community works, as everybody knows.

That notwithstanding, at the next Sectoral Council of Ministers meeting, which is going to take place on 1st of February and which I will chair, if we do not get consensus, I certainly shall invoke that provision. Therefore, I want to assure Members that we will do whatever it takes to make sure we reach consensus but if it fails, then we will have to look at those other ways of getting over the problem. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think you could have explained the point raised by hon. Othieno by telling us at what point consensus is developed; is it at the meeting or through letters? When is consensus deemed to have failed? Is it at a meeting or in some other informal settings? What we want to hear from you is what the position of Uganda is going to be at that meeting since Tanzania has agreed to it. That is what we want to hear from you, honourable minister.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, consensus is reached both through the letters and at meetings and also through interpersonal communication. In this case, one cannot force a member state to agree to any position. For the sake of consensus, one has to persuade them; in a meeting, one is not supposed to really show bad manners by pulling ropes.

Therefore, what I will certainly do is that. Of course, Kenya changed ministers, so maybe the new one might not have – However, that notwithstanding -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Honourable members, this House now knows that at the next meeting, the position of Uganda and Tanzania is known. Therefore, in case of failure of consensus, a vote will take place and the results of the vote are already known.

Honourable members in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from the Uganda Scouts and Girl Guides Association. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

Honourable member for Busongora, do you have a point of procedure?

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have an issue with the budget that we passed for the 2018/2019 financial year. This Parliament, under your guidance, appropriated money to the regional offices of the Ministry of Works and Transport under force account. Parliament approved Shs 1.2 billion for each of the regional offices for northern, eastern, central and western Uganda.

Unfortunately, Mr Speaker, arising from heavy rains that damaged most of the roads across the country, the finance ministry has not released the money to these regional offices. Each regional office should have received Shs 1.2 billion, but they have only released Shs 400 million to each of them. Therefore, it is like four regional offices have received money which should have been received by one region.

Mr Speaker, we are in the third quarter of this financial year and about to delve into the approval of the 2019/2020 budget. This money should have gone to projects, which were already earmarked in those regions. Why has the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development failed to release the money, which would have been used to work on the regional projects, to make Uganda accessible and also enable farmers access markets? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have raised it as a procedural matter. Where is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development? I think the responsible minister will deal with this issue as soon as he comes back in here. Let us go with the Order Paper. We will deal with that when he comes. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE HUMAN RIGHTS (ENFORCEMENT) BILL, 2015

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we were dealing with a new insertion after clause 7. It was insertion No.3 of a new clause after clause 7. The title was, “Complying with orders and directives of court”. That is where we stopped. I would like the chairperson to guide us on how to proceed with this matter. I think the entire text was read but there were some consultations to take place.

3.15
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Ms Jovah Kamateeka): Mr Chairman, you put the position correctly. We considered clause 7 and adopted the first two insertions after clause 7. There was a proposal on personal liability for infringement of rights and freedoms; the second one was about derogation from non-derogable rights and freedoms; we were considering the one on complying with orders and directives of court. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can I put the question now to the insertion as proposed by the committee? 

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. This proposed amendment is not in consonance with the earlier clause we passed, which states that orders issued by court shall be complied with within six months. I am trying to get the clause, which we passed.

In this particular amendment, we are saying, “Save for monetary orders against the state, any other order, directive or recommendation made or issued by court pursuant to the provisions of this Act shall, unless it is appealed, be complied with within such a time as shall be determined by court.”

By statute, we have already stipulated the time of compliance as six months yet we are also saying they shall be complied with in a time that is determined by court. That is a conflict because these two provisions are not in agreement. So, we either maintain the first one or we shall have to recommit it and amend it to say that court will be the one to determine the time of compliance. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think there was an explanation given by the chairperson that day, that the two issues are separate and distinguishable. Would you like to brief the House on that?  

MR EDWARD OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was still talking to my colleague, hon. Akamba, who is going to proceed with the Bill. However, I would like to request to have the question repeated so that I can address it. I had just stepped in, so I did not fully follow the debate. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chair, you had already explained this before. Would you like to explain it again? 

MR EDWARD OTTO: I can explain it but I would just like to know exactly what was read. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The issue of giving discretion to the court to determine the time within which a particular order should be complied with and the earlier provision where we stipulated six months as the mandatory period. They are saying, why don’t we choose one instead of having six months as a mandatory period and also have a discretionary period that we are giving the court in this section that we are dealing with under insertion No.3. 

MR EDWARD OTTO: Chairman, I know that this particular Bill is not affecting the other Acts that have been passed; it does not negate the application of the other Acts. However, in this particular case, we had provided for a six-month limitation period and it is specific to this particular amendment. Nevertheless, it does not negate the discretion with respect to other matters before the Human Rights Tribunal and those that have already been previously provided for. That is my understanding. Thank you. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Chairman, the six months, which actually appear on page 7 of the explanatory notes, refers to clause 7 - Power of High Court in human rights cases. This is for orders that may be made by court in human rights cases, which include restitution, rehabilitation, satisfaction. 

Those cases are under clause 7 (2). The one that we are considering now – complying with orders and directives of court - includes all other cases other than those that are specified in clause 7 (2) previously. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear? We replaced clause 7 and adopted the new clause 7 that was proposed by the committee. That is where the six months is provided for and it has specific cases of restitution, rehabilitation, satisfaction and other things. 

In subclause (3) it says, “Restitution, compensation, rehabilitation or any payment ordered by the court under this section shall be a civil debt owed to the victim of a human rights violation.” Subclause (4): “All orders made by court under this section shall be complied with, within six months from the date of determination, unless appealed against.” 

That is the distinction. This one now is in relation to all other issues another than those mentioned in clause 7. Is it clear?  Can I now put the question to this? 

MR NZOGHU: I have an issue with clause 7 (4), especially with the period.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which clause?

MR NZOGHU: Clause 7(4), the one that you have just read.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, we passed that one. We are now dealing with insertion No. 3, which is on complying with orders and directives of court.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairperson, I see the six months as being unrealistic, especially –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, it is not in this provision we are dealing with now. Can I put the question to this provision that the new insertion - complying with orders and directives of court - be part of this Bill? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR EDWARD OTTO: “Progressive realisation of rights and freedoms

(l) 	A person who has reason to believe that the state is not taking adequate steps for the progressive realisation of rights and freedoms guaranteed under chapter four of the Constitution or international treaties to which the state is a party, may apply to the High Court for redress. 

(2) 	Notwithstanding subsection (1), wherever a court finds that a specific right or freedom cannot be realised due to resource constraints, court shall order Government to take measurable steps for the progressive realisation of that right or freedom. 

(3) 	Government shall annually report to Parliament on the steps taken to progressively realise rights and freedoms as required in subsection (2) as well as any other rights and freedoms prescribed in international treaties to which Uganda is a party to.” Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable members, that is the proposal for the insertion of a new clause on progressive realisation of rights and freedoms. Can I put the question to this? I will put the question that this particular provision - progressive realisation of rights and freedoms - be part of this Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR EDWARD OTTO: “Loss of immunity from prosecution
(1) 	Immunity shall not be a defense to proceedings commenced under this Act.

(2) 	Subject to Article 98 (4) of the Constitution, a person to who immunity is granted under any law shall automatically lose that immunity if he or she is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to have violated a right or freedom guaranteed under chapter four of the Constitution. 

(3) 	Where a person loses immunity as prescribed in subsection (2), such a person shall be prosecuted or found liable for acts or omissions done in the course of his or her duty. 

(4) 	Where a person is dismissed or otherwise removed from office for misbehaviour or misconduct under any law, a finding that such a person violated a right or freedom guaranteed under the Constitution shall constitute misbehaviour or misconduct under that law and such a person shall be dismissed or removed from office.” Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable member, is that okay with you, the mover of the Bill?

MS KAMATEEKA: I concede, Mr Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. 

MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: Mr Chairperson, we are addressing the issue of immunity from prosecution. I know that in matters of human rights, the Constitution is not clear when we talk about immunity from prosecution, for example of the President. According to our Constitution, the President is immune from prosecution. How do we address this issue in this matter, as we may make a law that may be rendered redundant as it might be inconsistent with the grundnorm of this nation? 

MR EDWARD OTTO: Mr Chairperson, this law has limitations; under subclause (2), it is subject to Article 98(4) of the Constitution. It is subjected to other provisions and I think in that sense, it is catered for. It is not absolute, but it is subject to other provisions. Therefore, where lawfully it is provided for, like the immunity of the President, it is not in any way affected. Thank you.

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Chairperson, the clause is subjected to Article 94(4), which caters for the immunity of the President.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which are the immunities anticipated? Are we satisfied with this?

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. I do not think it is right for us to claim that we shall use an Act of Parliament to waive the immunity which is granted in the Constitution. 

This one says, “Subject to Article 98 (4) of the Constitution, a person to who immunity is granted under any law shall automatically lose that immunity if he or she is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to have violated a right…” Are we now saying that this law can be used to waive the immunity that is granted to the President or somebody in international law?  Thank you.

MR EDWARD OTTO: Mr Chairperson, we are talking of an Act as opposed to a constitutional provision. Obviously, this would be ultra vires of the Constitution. It is subject to the constitutional provision and I think that overrides whatever we are trying to provide here. It is an exception which is provided for by the Constitution. There is no way an Act of Parliament can affect a clearly provided constitutional provision, and the Constitution is very clear on that. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there are several Acts of Parliament that grant immunities to officers who are engaging in some activities; in the course of doing their jobs, they have immunity. I think this is the one they are talking about. In cases of human rights violations, you cannot cite those immunities. That is what they are saying. It is not in relation to the immunity under the Constitution under Article 94; that is excluded. This provision is made subject to that, so it cannot override it.

However, there are all these other laws where officers are given immunity because of what they do. Yes, there are those ones and that is what they are referring to. They are saying when it comes to cases of human rights, do not waive that immunity or say that you have immunity; they will prosecute you when you violate human rights.

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairperson, I wonder how the immunity of diplomats will be treated in this because it is not in the Constitution but it is granted by international instruments. How is that treated under this clause?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Committee chairperson, if you have a diplomat with diplomatic immunity and that diplomat has violated human rights, are you saying you will prosecute the diplomat?

MR EDWARD OTTO: Mr Chairperson, I think this is jurisprudence at play. Some of these questions are best answered in court other than here. However, I think there is still some discretion here and this matter could be determined on a case by case basis. I think it is a question of whether these privileges granted by international instruments – if they are ratified – supersede an Act of Parliament. 

It is very clear that the Constitution is above all these laws. However, with respect to international conventions, I believe it is a question of whether this will be ultra vires of an international convention if it is ratified. I think these are matters that will eventually be at the discretion of court and the facts have to be clear. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Immunity of diplomats is waived by the country that issued that diplomatic immunity, not any other country. If it is a Kenyan diplomat and it is Kenya that has granted that immunity, it is only Kenya that can withdraw that immunity, not any other government or law. Therefore, the question is: Would this law attempt to lift the immunities of diplomats? 

MR OKIN: I would like to seek further clarification.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We are looking for answers now, not clarification. If you do not have answers - Please, let us get answers.

MR OKIN: There are certain answers which are in the points of clarification, Mr Chairman. In a situation where we have an expatriate who is issued a diplomatic passport or has a United Nations (UN) passport and is a national of that country, say Uganda, and he has committed human rights crimes, how are we going to deal with that kind of situation? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mere possession of a diplomatic passport does not confer upon one diplomatic immunity. It is a very specific thing. I carry a diplomatic passport, but I do not have diplomatic immunity.

MR OKIN: Mr Chairman, what of a United Nations passport, for example? The United Nations passport has various kinds of immunities behind it, which the holder will be able to possess. If, for example, this national with the UN passport is a Ugandan and he commits human rights violations in Uganda, what is going to happen to that diplomat?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That would be a matter of evidence.

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Chairman, it should be understood that no one has immunity anywhere in this world to torture or abuse the rights of another person. Therefore, if you are a diplomat here and you are holding diplomatic immunity and you abuse the rights of Ugandans or even the rights of other nationals under your care, the laws of Uganda will take you up and hand you over to your country and they deal with your immunity. You have no immunity to abuse the rights of another person.

MR AOGON: Mr Chairman, my dear committee chairperson is very aware of the Constitution, which grants immunity to the President, yet she is using a blanket statement, “no one around the world”. Is she in order to use that kind of expression?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you know that President Uhuru Kenyatta was in the International Criminal Court (ICC). Please! Did he have immunity in Kenya? Yes, he did. Did he go to the ICC? Yes, he did. 

Can we proceed and take a decision on this? I put a question that the amendment as proposed by the committee – the insertion on the loss of immunity from prosecution – stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR EDWARD OTTO: “Unconditional release of persons unreasonably detained
(1) 	A person who has reason to believe that another person is being unreasonably detained in the circumstances prescribed in subsection (4) may petition the High Court for the unconditional release of such a person.

(2) 	A person in charge of prison, police station or any other detention facility shall, where he has reason to believe that a person in that prison, police station or detention facility is unreasonably being detained, release or apply to court or any other authority for authorisation to release that person from detention.

(3) 	Court shall, on being satisfied that a person is unreasonably detained-
(a) 	order for the production of such a person before court; 
(b) 	impose obligations on the person in charge of a detention centre in which such a person is detained as court deems fit; or
(c) 	order for the release of such a person from detention on any terms and conditions as court determines.

(4) 	In this section, a person shall be taken to be unreasonably detained where -
(a) 	he or she has been detained beyond 48 hours without being brought before a court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction;

(b) 	he or she being charged with an offence triable by a subordinate court, is remanded in custody before trial for a period exceeding 120 days;

(c) 	he or she being charged with an offence triable by the High Court, is remanded in custody for a period exceeding 360 days before the case is committed to the High Court for trial;

(d) 	he or she being committed for trial to the High Court, is remanded without trial for a period exceeding half of the period of imprisonment he or she would be liable to if he or she was to plead guilty or be convicted of the offence;

(e) 	the procedure leading to his or her detention was irregular or unlawful;

(f) 	there are no justifiable reasons for his or her continued detention;

(g) 	his or her non-derogable rights have been infringed upon; or
(h) 	his or her continued detention amounts to a miscarriage of justice.

(5) 	An order issued by court in subsection (3) shall, upon being served on the Attorney-General or the person in charge of a place of detention, be complied with immediately. 

(6) 	It shall be an offence for a person in charge of a place of detention to -
(a) 	refuse service or ignore the order made under subsection (3);
(b) 	upon being served with an order, to do any act that defeats the purpose of that order.

(7) 	Where a person in charge of a place of detention contravenes subsection (6), any person may make an application to court and court shall make such orders as it deems fit.

(8) 	A person who commits an offence prescribed in subsection (6) shall on conviction be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 10 years.

(9) 	A person who detains another in circumstances prescribed in subsection (3) (a), (e) and (g) commits an offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.”

The justification –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, chairperson. That justification should hold a lot of them, so you cannot go through all of them. Honourable members, any issues on this proposed insertion (6) after clause 7? Should I put the question? Yes, Busongora?

MR NZOGHU: I would like to seek clarification on the question on qualifying this “unreasonable detention”. Mr Chairman, I do not know why they choose to use “unreasonable detention” instead of illegal detention or we can use both because this one is not clear. If something is illegal, it is illegal. You do not have to say again it is unreasonable. Unreasonable in which sense? That is the clarification which I would like the chairperson to give.

MR EDWARD OTTO: Mr Chairman, when the committee was processing this Private Member’s Bill, the committee members who deliberated on this matter recognised the fact that given the resource constraint in a setting here; there are circumstances under which things may not work the way we would want them to idealistically work; given the level at which our institution developments have gone. 

We are not yet at that advanced stage, so we left this as a case-by-case matter that the court would have the discretion to determine as to whether it is illegal or not. However, we think the court would be able to make a declaration that is it is unreasonable and therefore illegal. I think it is mere semantics. Thank you.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, I am raising this matter because we do not want to be ambiguous. Once we leave that in ambiguity, it will imply that the officer responsible can give the interpretation that he or she wishes. However, once we put it in the real context of the law, it will reduce on the elements of misinterpretation. Therefore, we think that as Parliament, once we are clear, it is better for this country.

I feel that either the thing is irregular or illegal, but I have issue with the word “unreasonable” and I am not comfortable. It is ambiguous.

MR NSEREKO: Further to that, Mr Chairman, recently, when the Committee on Human Rights was presenting the report on Nalufenya, the chairperson told this House that some of the officers in Nalufenya clearly said that the victims had been handed over to them and they were not aware of where they had been detained earlier on.

Now, the matter of facilities and detention are important for the unconditional release of the victims. For example, there are safe houses or unsafe houses - as we call them - in this country. We must not shun away from these. This is the temple of legislation and justice. When we came here, we were struggling with the words “safe” and “unsafe” houses. When someone said the word “safe” house, people said no, no, no, there are no safe houses, but they are unsafe. There was a contradiction.

Therefore, let us be clear on the legitimate detention centres and those that are illegitimate so that we know them through legislation. I agree with “unreasonable”, accruing from the matter of the 48 hours of detention of anyone presumed to have committed an offence and the issue of the detention facility.

In this country, we are all aware that people are detained in illegal detention centres, not only by state actors but also people on their own. Therefore, we should curb this by clearly stating that every detention centre should be gazetted. When you go to (2), it clearly says: 
“A person in charge of a prison “– of course prisons are clearly gazetted every year by the Commissioner in charge of Prisons – “police stations or any other detention facilities”.

What are those detention facilities? All detention facilities must be gazetted. When you give that latitude that there are any other detentions facilities in this nation, it raises a question on human rights. You have recognised by law that there are torture chambers because every detention facility in this country must be gazetted. (Applause)

Therefore, let us be clear in legislation and clearly state that “A person in charge of prisons or a police station” so that it is clear that when you arrest someone you inform them what offence they have committed according to the Constitution and you take them to a police station. From there, statements can be extracted, and prosecution shall commence.

This ambiguity of talking about “any other detention centres”; what are those detention facilities we are talking about? Mr Chairman, I know you want solutions here – (Laughter)

MR SEMPIJJA: Honourable members, why don’t we save ourselves from that by having a detention facility explained in the definitions? This is so that you clearly say that a detention facility is gazetted.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In this case, we are talking about reasonable time you hold a person or these victims -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, no; please let us finish with one issue.

MR NSEREKO: The illegal detention centres or facilities are clear within the law. It is police stations. If someone is at a police station, everyone knows that there are some rights that they enjoy and that is where the matter of investigation and prosecution starts from. That is the question we grappled with on the issue of Nalufenya when we were debating that matter in this august House.

I would like the matter of detention facilities to be deleted from (2) so that we are clear that a person in charge of prisons and police stations, where he has reason to believe that a person in that prison or police station is unreasonably being detained probably, shall release or apply to court. In this case, I will be comfortable not talking about any other detention centre, other than a prison or police station. Thank you very much.


MR EDWARD OTTO: Mr Chairperson, with all due respect, I did not want to raise a point of order to my colleague because he is a member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. We should have raised all these issues in the committee and yet he is here debating. If I could finish, these are matters that as a committee –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Our Rules of Procedure are very clear. It is only during the debate of a report that a member of a committee cannot deliberate on their report. However, once we go to committee stage, a member can substantiate and give support to the Bill. So, is the chairperson of the committee in order to start attacking the member of his committee and yet we are at committee stage? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we agreed that all amendments have got to be brought in advance and circulated. That is what the rules say. Amendments which you spring up with from the Floor at committee stage would not be entertained. So, your amendment is consequential. It is a substantive amendment that should have been shared so that we avoid opening up debate on the issues. 

You see, if we are to open up debate at this stage and start bringing in amendment, then we will complicate everything. That is why we say the amendment should be shared and this directive is made by both the Deputy Speaker and the Speaker of the House when they are presiding. That the amendment should be circulated. The amendment should be circulated so that we all know what we are going to amend. It is because this is not just a letter; it is a law. Therefore, all proposed amendments have to be interrogated and their full implication understood before we adopt them. 

So, you cannot say we are amending and then it gets done. That is how we ended up with Article 9 (Cap A) in the Constitution. I was chairing the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs; it was brought, and I objected it but it came on the Floor. What is the implication of that amendment? 

Therefore, let us avoid these mistakes and follow the rules. If you would like to make an amendment, make it known clearly in advance so that we all understand its implication; its overall fitting in the structure of the law as it is.  So, there is no standing over this matter. Let us finish it. 

MR NSEREKO: I am not objecting to your ruling. However, as we are building consensus, we benefit from your wisdom. Previously, you opened up for the debate on the issue of Nakaseke. In this case, just like you have said, we are legislating for the nation and we are talking about detention facilities. This is a question that has been very controversial not only in the country but also outside the country. It is within the good image of this Parliament. I know that you can waive any rule of this House –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you cannot proceed the way you are proceeding. The issue is; if you want to list, you must be exhaustive. So, is there a phrase that can capture that whole thing without attempting to list something you cannot list? This Parliament has detained people. Courts of law have detention facilities as well as other places not necessarily police stations. So, is the word gazetted there? That is why I am saying, if you want to do something, do not introduce something that complicates the whole thing. It is because when you do, we have to investigate the full effect of it. For example, if you say “gazetted detention facilities” - I cannot say it; that is what I am guiding you to say. 

MR NSEREKO: Thank you. That is how I benefit from your wisdom. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I have some order, please? The point is; police stations and prisons are not the only detention facilities in this country. So, if you say you restrict yourselves to the police stations and prisons, what about all the other places known to the law?

MR EDWARD OTTO: Mr Speaker, you have wisely guided. The Judiciary today appeared before the committee and the issue of gazetting came up. They reported that because of lack of funding, courts in new districts cannot even get a court room. They have been sitting outside. So, in certain situations, if you over legislate, you end up in a situation where practically, you cannot –

I agree with your wise guidance. There are universally acceptable terms. In this case, if these are not detention facilities according to the law, these are matters before the courts. Therefore, such determination can be made. However, -(Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: You have clearly tried to guide this House that we include the word “gazetted”. That is our proposal at this point in time. I would like to persuade the chairperson of the committee to accept that we include and state that “a person in charge of prison, police station or any other gazetted detention facility shall, where, as reason -” and then we conclude that. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is your Bill.

MS KAMATEEKA: Honourable chairperson, that is okay. I would like to thank hon. Nsereko for bringing up the proposal. It is because even in the cases of the new districts, if the district does not have a gazetted detention facility, they should be able to use one in the neighbouring district. Therefore, we need to be consistent to avoid cases where we will give latitude to people to hold Ugandans in places where they think they are other detention facilities. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Other gazetted detention facilities. 

MS KAMATEEKA: It should be other gazetted detention facilities. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Does that capture the spirit? Can I now put the question to the amendment?

MR SSEWUNGU: If I may be guided properly by the chairperson. On 9, it says “A person who detains another in circumstance described in sub-section (3) (a) (e) and (g) commits an offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years”. Can’t you also put there a fine of some currency points and say either a fine or imprisonment for five years? What do you say, honourable chairperson, other than going for imprisonment alone? I would like to be guided on that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then the rich people would just pay. This is a human rights issue.

MR SSEWUNGU: There are some people who are willing to be in prison for the sake of the same. However, when it goes to a fine, which is so strong, they will feel it. We can put it there as another alternative. I was seeking –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, this is penalty for the person detaining. So, if you give the option of a fine, they will detain and pay the money. 

MR SSEWUNGU: I concede.

MR ANYWARACH: I am seeking this procedure well aware that you are not only a very senior citizen but also a lawyer. The issue of human right violation is highly connected with the action or violation of the law, in most cases, by Government officials who are also custodians of the laws - and therefore must be seen to defend the right of individuals.

Now, Mr Chairperson, in most jurisdictions, the Supreme Court or Constitutional Court are the final legal arbiters that render opinion on whether a law or action of a Government official constitutes a violation of right and therefore constitutional violation.

In that spirit, I am seeking for your guidance or a procedural matter that when we proceed with subsection (6) the way we have put it, “reference of human right matters by subordinate courts” and yet we know when a fundamental question of human rights arises, you are talking of rights not granted by the state. In most cases it is the jurisdiction of the Constitutional Court to pronounce itself.

Mr Chairperson, I find it disturbing that we are now looking at the reference of this matter of human right violation from a tribunal or Magistrate Court to High Court. That in effect would mean - we are looking at a violation by an individual rather than any government official and so on - and that can fall under other laws like the Penal Code Act, or criminal laws and so on. All that can fall under there.

Therefore, I would like your technical guidance that by inserting this subsection (6) are we not trying to limit victims from reaching the superior courts like the Constitutional Court that give their final opinion? Secondly, are we not, in a nutshell, trying to give a leeway to Government officials to just have a shortcut to High Court and then be heard when the Constitutional Court would have a better interpretation of the violation and also determine the right punishment. I need to be guided. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. However, honourable member, I am not aware of human rights cases that have been taken to the Constitutional Court. I am aware that matters that go to the Constitutional Court are matters where there have been contradictions with the Constitution itself and raise constitutional questions - therefore legality of the action of the law and things like that. That is what you take to the Constitutional Court.

However, this particular provision is in relation to Article 50 of the Constitution which sets another line of redress under the enforcement procedures in the Constitution which has never been enacted. That is why there is direct recourse to the High Court. 

The debate that we had last week was to deal with how it becomes accessible to people in the faraway place. That is how we came down; it subordinates courts and removed tribunals because they are a creature of another article of the Constitution which deals with the Uganda Human Rights Commission.

Therefore, the issue is we created a certain category of rights that can only be handled by the High Court and those by the Magistrate Court, called here now as “subordinate court”. That is where we were as of last week.

Therefore, we are trying to accommodate the minor violations that could be handled at that level and also the big ones which are also categorised in the preceding provision of this law that; “When it is like this, you access this court but when it is like this, you can access this other lower court.” That is where we are for now. Can we proceed?

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairperson, I concede. My only issue was the words “fundamental rights” to be included under subsection (6) and then take it to high court. My understanding of “fundamental rights” is those that are not granted by the state, for example, right to life.

Therefore, I thought that all these other rights which are not fundamental can be treated under Article 54 of the Constitution. However, where it is the issue of fundamental rights violation, I thought we should go to the Constitutional Court. But I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Can we proceed? Can I now -?

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I have not heard the chairman pronounce himself on the matter which I raised. Secondly, I would like the chairman to give us a clear distinction between subsection (8) and subsection (9) arising from a person who commits an offence prescribed in subsection (6) and a person who commits an offence arising from subsection (3). In my interpretation, they are almost committing the same offence and yet the penalty is not well aligned.

I would like to propose that the penalty for one who defies subsection (6) be aligned with the one who defies subsection (3) and “not exceeding five years” we replace it with “not exceeding 10 years” because they are almost the same. Both of them defy the orders of court.

MR MAKMOT: Thank you. In the wisdom of the committee I can see that one of the differences that comes out is that in subsection (6), it is an action to do an act that defeats a purpose of the order. While in subsection (3) there seems to be simply no - it may even arise in situations where you are not doing anything at all but these orders or detentions are reasonably being. Therefore, I seem to see that as the distinction but -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are they the same?

MR MAKMOT: They seem not to be the same. They are not the same.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If they are not the same, is the gravity different? If the gravity is different, can they be the same penalties?

MR NZOGHU: Here is my point of contention, Mr Chairperson. Subsection (3) says, “Court shall, on being satisfied that a person is unreasonably detained -
    (a) order for the production of such a person before court;
    (b) impose obligations on a person in charge of a detention centre in which such a person is detained as court deems fit;
    (c) order for the release of such a person from detention on any terms and conditions as court determines.”

Then when you go to subsection (6) it says, “It shall be an offence for a person in charge of a place of detention -
    (a) to refuse service or ignore the order made under subsection (3);
    (b) upon being served with an order to do any act that defeats the purpose of that order.”

Therefore, Mr Chairperson, that is where I have centred to say that you cannot therefore have different penalties for the two and yet they are almost in the same situation. And that is why I was proposing that instead of “five” we also put it at “not exceeding ten” so that they move together.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, there is a mistake. The (3) in Clause 9 should have been (4). I do not know whether you are reading it the way I am doing. Chairman, would you like to check that? If you look at (3), it does not have (e), (f), (g) and (h)”; only (4) does.

MR EDWARD OTTO: Yes, I can see that. I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It looks like it was initially that but when they re-drafted, they forgot to make that change.

MR EDWARD OTTO: That is true.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If in clause 9, you changed the (3) into (4), would it make sense?

MR NZOGHU: It would make sense but I would still address myself to the issue of the contents. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If it is (4) then (a) would be: “…unreasonably detained where he or she has been detained beyond 48 hours after arrest without being brought before a court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction.” Chairperson, you need to help us with this - Oh, hon. Akamba.

MR AKAMBA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. They are totally different because in clause (4) (a), (e) and (g) we are talking about a person who is violating rights. However, when it comes to clause (6), it is an “act of contempt”, which cannot weigh the same as an “act of violation”. 

Therefore, I think that the committee in its wisdom deemed it fit for the “violation” to carry a much heavier punishment than “contempt” of an order. Thank you.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairperson, I think hon. Akamba should explain this. Isn’t it in (c) when you talk of “order for the release of such a person from detention on any terms and conditions”? It is arising out of a court decision. Why are you segregating it from –?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nzoghu, which (c) are you talking about?

MR NZOGHU: I am addressing myself to the catch phrase here that, “Court shall on being satisfied…” –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which clause?

MR NZOGHU: That is clause (3). “Court shall, on being satisfied…” Hon. Akamba, align that one.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We have just corrected it.

MR AKAMBA: Mr Chairperson, we have just corrected that and hon. Nzoghu conceded that he has no problem in clause 9 to substitute (4) for (3). He said that it makes sense to him when we substitute it. In which case, when we read (4)(e), for instance, it says; “In this section, a person shall be taken to be unreasonably detained where the procedure leading to his or her detention was irregular or unlawful.” (a) “He or she has been detained beyond 48 hours after arrest without being brought before a court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction.”

(g) “His or her non-derogable rights have been infringed upon.”

Mr Chairperson, it is possible that person A can violate these rights at a given gazetted detention facility but by the time I take the order to that facility there is person B when A is off-duty. If person B ignores the order under clause (6), we shall punish B with a lesser punishment of not exceeding five years. 

However, that shall not exonerate person ‘A’ who at the time of taking the order is off-duty. That one will be punished not exceeding 10 years – I was illustrating but to be direct, the law here presupposes that a person has violated the right under (4)(a), (e) and (g) and court has ruled that that person has violated the right. We are saying that the punishment for that person should be “not exceeding 10 years in prison”. 

After we have got that judgement and we say that he has violated but in the meantime the person who has been illegally detained should be released; we take an order to any person in charge of that facility – but if they refuse to comply, that is contempt and should be subjected to a punishment “not exceeding five years”. So they are totally different.

MR AOGON: Mr Chairperson, for anybody to ignore an order that is coming, for instance, from the court is grave. It is equal to violating somebody’s right.

Therefore, the two have similar gravity. The penalties should measure the same weight without anybody questioning it. This is a matter of human rights – when you talk of “contempt”, it is where I am supposed to release you and I do not. So you suffer as well as your family; how do you feel? 

Therefore, I concur with hon. Nzoghu that it should carry a similar punishment of not exceeding 10 years. It is simple and clear.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairperson, I think this provision is looking at the detained, the detainer and the person in charge of the facility. When you look at clause (6) critically, which states that “It shall be an offence for a person in charge of a place of detention”, you are looking at a person in charge. 

For the reason of contempt of court, this person cannot receive the same punishment. The reason is that it could be out of some technicalities that he has not complied with the order within the time court did. However, you have a person who, by all intent and purposes, decided to detain someone – (Interruption)

MR AOGON: Mr Chairperson, my colleague is so much aware that once somebody has been given an order to release someone, there are procedures, which are laid down. If at all you have any difficulties, you communicate to your supervisor in advance that, “I am supposed to release somebody but I have difficulties here.” 

Is he in order to insinuate that somebody can have difficulties and he decides to detain somebody who has been released by a court order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member of Kumi Municipality, you are not in order. (Laughter)

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. If you look at the ingredient of the court order, it is looking at three things:

    (a) Produce the person in court
    (b) Release the person from wherever the person is - it is actually under (c). “Order for production of the person before court”, then;
    (c) Imposing obligation on the person in charge and then order for the release of the person from the detention point.

Now, you could actually have followed only two - the first and the second. For example, (c) and (b). Now you have had difficulty of producing the person in court at the time the court needs or requires. 

Now, for that reason, you cannot be seen to have committed the same offence with the person who intentionally detained the suspect. Therefore, I think the offences should be different. That said and done, I am okay with the committee’s proposed amendment.

MR AKAMBA: Thank you, Chair. We concede to the opinion of hon. Nzoghu that it should not exceed 10 for both because when you read (8), violation under (6) carries a heavier punishment but from the feel of the House, you cannot punish the person who violated less than the one who is refusing to implement the order.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you. Mr Chair, clause (6) envisages a situation of continued violation of the rights of the detainee. In other words, court has given an order and somebody refuses to obey that order, ignores it, or refuses to do what the order is saying. In other words, to continue violating the rights of the person who is in detention.
 
Therefore, the person has already been detained but even this one, do not just look at it as if it is merely contempt of court but it means that the rights of the detainee are continuously being violated. I do not think they are the same because this is aggravating already an existing situation. 

Therefore, it should be even harder because what the court is trying to do is to put a remedy but then the holding person is continuing to violate the rights of the person under detention. Therefore, I think it makes sense as it appears.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Mr Chair, I beg to differ with the submissions of my colleagues. You could be detained in Kisoro and a court in Kampala asks that you must be produced here. Because of the distance and you happen not to be able to produce the person that morning in the High Court in Kampala. You have not necessarily intentionally refused to produce that person and because of that, we are here saying, “Give him 10 years also.”

I do not think it is - let us give five years and leave court with the discretion to decide on that because this person is not intentionally refusing but has failed to produce someone in the time required by court.

MS ALUM: Thank you, Chair. I think this thing is quite clear. When you look at clause (3), it talks about a situation where the in-charge of the detention facility is just comfortable with the detainee. 

However, when you come to clause (6), it reaches a situation where the court is now ordering the person in charge to take action. When he refuses to, I think the penalty should be greater than the person who is violating and not yet ordered.

I think the way the committee has proposed in clause (6), this person should get a heavier penalty than the person in clause (3).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can somebody explain it in a very simple way who these people are so that we can understand? Who are these people? How many people are there? They are like three people - one is the detained, the person who arrested this person and took him to that detention facility and the third is the person who is in charge of the detention facility.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Chair, I had a situation in my constituency today. There is a detainee who was arrested at Kireka Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence (CMI) then CMI brought these people to Jinja Road Police Station. Therefore, this person is entrusted with the detainee but does not know the cause of their detention but keeping them safe.

The one who ordered is the one at Kireka CMI. What clause (3)(b) is saying, is imposing an obligation after court has been satisfied - I do not know whether I have tried to explain that, honourable members? Remember what happened here when we had the Nebanda issue; one of our commissioners had a police driver, both of them were arrested from Kasese and brought to Jinja Road Police Station and left there.

They were entrusted to Jinja Road Police Station - those situations are happening everywhere. Therefore, if court is satisfied with an obligation from one of the three - because the detainee’s human rights are being violated, there is no reason for keeping him in custody. I hope I have explained.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I requested for a simple explanation and if you cannot offer it, please resume your seat.

MR ABALA: Mr Chair, if you read clause (3), court is 100 per cent sure that the detainee has to go to court. Now the problem is the one who is keeping the detainee who has refused - the major problem is refusing, meaning going against the law. In my opinion, this person should qualify to get a heavier punishment so that he becomes an example to the rest to learn from for having refused - (Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, honourable member from Ngora. Mr Chair, this law has proposed that a service of court order on the Attorney-General is as good enough a service as on the person in charge of the detention centre. I want to be clarified, if that letter from the court comes to the Attorney-General, say at four o’clock and this person must be produced in court before five o’clock, for all intents and purposes, I get the information or I do not just get it – I am in charge.

Then, by the time you are getting it the following day, you are already in contempt of court. You have not refused but because of technicalities, you are supposed to now release this person and produce him in court, considering the distance. 

Therefore, should you punish this person in the same way as the person who has been keeping this person for this long? That is the clarification I am seeking from him. 

MR ABALA: Thank you. Mr Chairman, this is very clear. An element of refusal has occurred and that is the basis on which we are looking at this matter; we are not talking about the time. The issue is that the one in charge has refused to enforce the court order. That is different from this because the law is clear here; the man refused to –  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The refusal is not to release but it is on receiving service. Therefore, if you are banking on the word “refuse”, then you have to look at it again. 

MR ABALA: Mr Chairman, what I am saying is that still the service has to be offered by the one in charge but he has refused to do it. It means that he now qualifies to be punished and you should not be left scot-free. That is the reality. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You have not refused to release but you have only refused to receive service. In this case, they bring for the person in charge of the detention facility an order of the court and he refuses to sign it. 

MR ABALA: Mr Chairman, that is what we call impunity and we should not allow it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can we take a decision on this matter? 

MR DAVID MUTEBI: Refusal to get the service is an intention of denying someone the rights to access justice. Therefore, it deserves a very serious punishment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Supposing you come to this Parliament, the officer responsible for receiving service for Parliament is the Clerk and you go to a junior officer - a Clerk Assistant, for instance. You want to serve these documents to the Clerk Assistant and he says, “No, I am not competent to receive those documents.” 

The official person who should receive service of process for Parliament is only the Clerk and nobody else. Imagine the Clerk is not there but there is a junior officer who says they cannot receive those documents and are not supposed to receive them. 

Is there that possibility as well? Yes, it is there. For example, if you have the OC who is supposed to receive documents and then you find some junior person – we are talking about service of process – and the person refuses to receive it because they cannot, so what happens? Let us distinguish these issues and see whether we are proceeding properly. 

MR AKAMBA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The provision is very clear. It refers to a person in charge of a place of detention. So, if you find any other officer, who is not in charge of that detention facility, then he cannot be deemed to have refused. 

Subsection (6)(a) reads, “It shall be an offence for a person in charge of a place of detention to refuse service or ignore the order...” What the law says is that at that point, when you take the process to be served to the officer in charge and you find a junior officer, who is not in charge of that facility, you cannot charge him or her. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, now let us deal with the issue; should the two penalties be the same or separate and different? Can we deal with that issue now because I think that is the only issue that is outstanding?

MR AKAMBA: The amendment, as proposed by the committee, is that they should be different. Subsection (8) reads, “A person who commits an offence prescribed in subsection (6) shall, on conviction, be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 10 years.” This is the person who has either refused service or disobeyed a court order. 

According to the committee, indeed, that person should get a much higher punishment than a person who violates the law. Like you guided, Mr Chairman, there are three parties involved here: 
i. 	The detainee who is protected by the law
ii. 	The person violating or detaining, who is violating the constitutional provisions and the rights of the person detained; the law says that person should not do that but court has found him to have done that. 

Therefore, we are saying that should court find you guilty of violating somebody’s rights, you should be sentenced for a term not exceeding five years. 

Contempt of court is catered for under subsection (8) and it reads, “A person who commits an offence prescribed in subsection (6) shall, on conviction, be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 10 years.” 

Subsection (6) further reads, “It shall be an offence for a person in charge of a place of detention to: 
    a) Refuse service or ignore the order made under subsection (3). 
    b) Upon being served with an order, to do any act that defeats the purpose of that order. 

Hence, this entire section –  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, the question is; should the sentences be the same or should they be different? I think that is the issue you should address. 

MR AKAMBA: They should be different.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, you earlier said they should be the same and now, you are changing goal posts.

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Chairman, I know that saying “less than 10 years” means that court still has discretion but I do not know why it has to either be five or 10 years. I propose that we make it eight years for this person in authority who refuses to receive service so that we are not seen to be very harsh. I beg to propose. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is a completely new proposal. We have five and 10. The question was; should they be different or the same? That is the only issue. We do not want any other new term. 

MS KAMATEEKA: They should be different and the person in authority should have a higher sentence. However, that sentence does not necessarily have to put the bar at 10. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Higher than the person who grabbed you from the streets and hides you there?

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The practice is that the person in charge normally gives orders to their juniors and these people are usually accomplices. He may even decide to ask his juniors to tell the person who is coming – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, you are now diverting us again. The issue is, there are two people you are dealing with; the first person is the one who goes to the taxi park, arrests you from there, puts you in a vehicle and takes you to the place of detention. He dumps you, let us say, Jinja Road Police Station. 

The person in charge of the police station now takes over your detention. We are now saying that the person who grabbed you from the taxi park, put you in a car and brought you to the police station - should that person have a less sentence than the person who is in charge of the detention centre? 

MR CENTENARY: It should be the same because both of them have violated the rights of the victim. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we resolve this now? Please, chairperson, can you help us to resolve this matter?

MR EDWARD OTTO: On that simple question, the committee position is that they are different and they should not be the same. The reason, partly, which has been stated is that one is the act of trying to follow the procedure – maybe, in the criminal offence, arrest, detention and all that. 

However, in this other case, there is a court order  - after looking at all the facts - and this contempt of court element which at that point the committee sees as something different.
More importantly, as the mover of the Bill stated, these offences for five or 10 years are merely maximum. The minimum is discretional.

Therefore, I think it is recognition but in real practice through submission of evidence, these matters can - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now, the question is, should the discretion be all 10 years or one should be five years and the other 10 years? 

MR EDWARD OTTO: It should be five and 10 years as we stated. That is our position. Thank you.   

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I take a decision on this now and we go by what is proposed by the committee? I will now put a question to this. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. When you serve the entity that you are not supposed to serve, that is wrong service. In law, once you have done wrong service –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, that matter has been resolved.

MR NZOGHU: The principle here is, have the two or three entities broken the law or not? That is what the chairperson of the committee should explain to this House instead of going into the gymnastics of which one is heavier or lighter. 
Let him tell us if all these entities have broken the law. If the answer is yes, then I would like to seek your indulgence that he tells us whether both of them have broken the law or not.

MR OJARA OKIN: Mr Chairperson, I think the benchmark we have in these two case scenarios is that the human rights of the individual have been violated. In most cases, what we normally see is the physical abuse of human rights. We do not look at the psychological abuse of human rights and the psycho-social element involved. In my opinion, these are the same. Therefore, the punishments should be the same because the benchmarks as human rights have been violated.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Mr Chairperson, we are going to constrain our officers from arresting suspects because if they suspect that you have committed an offence, we have empowered them to cause an arrest and take the person to a gazetted facility. He or she is merely doing his or her job.

For lack of evidence or for some other technicalities found to be wrong or he or she has kept the person for more than 48 hours, court orders that this person be released. Why would you want to scare officers or people who are in charge from doing their work? Let court find that person not guilty and cause an order for release. However, let us not scare them and say – you mean they have to think through the process that maybe, “I should not arrest or I will go to prison myself.” Let them do their work. Courts are there to determine the wrong party. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the circumstances that constitute that are listed in clause 4. For it to be considered a violation, it is listed in clause 4 and it is not open. It should be that somebody has been kept beyond the 48 hours; he is being charged with an offence triable by a subordinate court and; is remanded in custody before trial for a period exceeding 100 days. Those are the benchmarks. 

It is not like the normal arrest that you find somebody and you – this is where now, there will be – Can we take a decision on this?

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: In that case, Mr Chairperson, why would the person who caused the arrest be punished that way? He has done his work. The person who should really be punished is the person who is refusing a court order to release.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In other words, what has been proposed by the committee is the proper one. Can we take a decision on this, honourable members? I will put the question on the recommendation as made by the committee. I will put the question with that amendment of clause 4 instead of 3; “Unconditional release of persons unreasonably detained”. I now put the question that that new insertion becomes part of this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New insertion agreed to. 

Clause 8

MR EDWARD OTTO: Replace clause 8 with the following:
(1) 	A person aggrieved by a decision or order of court may -
(a) 	In case of decisions or orders of a Magistrate Court, appeal to the High Court 
(b)	 In case of decisions or orders of the High Court, appeal to the Court of Appeal 
(c) 	In case of decisions or orders of the Court of Appeal, appeal to the Supreme Court. 
(2) 	The court to which an appeal is filed under subsection (1) shall proceed to hear and determine the appeal within three months from the date of filing of the appeal and may, for that purpose, suspend any other matter pending before it. 
(3) 	The law governing civil appeals shall, with necessary modifications, apply to appeals under this Act.

The justification is; 
    1. to provide that rules that govern civil appeals apply to appeals under this Act. 
    2. to require that a notice of appeal act as a stay of execution against the decision being appealed against. 
    3.  to provide for appeals from decisions of magistrate courts. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the committee is proposing to replace the current clause 8 with what the chairperson has just read as an amendment. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Chairperson. Except to insert the word “immediately” before “suspend” in paragraph 2. It would read: “...three months from the date of filing of the appeal and may for that purpose immediately suspend any other matter pending before it.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we use the word “may” and “immediately”? “…and may for that purpose suspend…” If it is “may”, you cannot say “immediately” because you are leaving it to the discretion of the court. 

“…the court to which an appeal is filed under subsection (1) shall proceed to hear and determine the appeal within three months from the date of filing of the appeal and ‘may’ for that purpose suspend any other matter pending before it.” If we had said “…and shall” it would be “immediately”. If it is “may”, I do not know whether it can go with “immediately” because you are now leaving it to the discretion of court.

“Court may” would be based on the case. The court would exercise the discretion that: “No, we will deal with this and…” Is that what the spirit is, honourable chairperson of the committee?

MR EDWARD OTTO: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I put the question to that then? I put the question to the amendment, as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 9

MR EDWARD OTTO: Clause 9: Application of civil procedure rules
Replace clause 9 with the following: 
“9. Application of Cap 71
The civil procedure Act and the rules made thereunder may, with the necessary modifications, apply to the enforcement of rights and freedoms under this Act." This is to ensure that the civil procedure rules apply with modification to human rights enforcement. The other justification is that this is better drafting.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is straightforward. Can I put the question to that? I put the question to the amendment, as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR EDWARD OTTO: Clause 10: Rules of Procedure
In sub clause (1), delete the words “after consultation with the minister” appearing in the second line.
In sub clause (2), insert the following new paragraphs immediately after paragraph (c) as follows:
(d) joinder, addition, substitution and striking out parties
(e) admission of amicus curiae
(f) service and enforcement of service
(g) notices, warrants and other processes
(h) summoning of witnesses
(i) facts to be proved at any stage of the proceedings;
j) the mode in which the facts may be given
(k) service of applications for enforcement or protection of rights
(l) reply to applications for enforcement or protection of rights
(m) consolidation of applications
(n) content of application for enforcement or protection of rights
(o) hearing of applications for enforcement or protection of rights and freedoms
(p) costs
(q) withdrawal or discontinuance of applications; and
(r) any other matter as the rules committee may deem fit.”

This is for consistency in renumbering and removing redundancies in provisions since the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is a member of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline and there is no need to consult the minister in such circumstances. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it clear enough? I put the question to the amendment to clause 10, as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, I see a new proposal before clause 11.

MR EDWARD OTTO: Immediately after clause 10, insert the following new clause: “Limitation of human rights action

(l) 	Save for rights and freedoms guaranteed under Article 44 of the Constitution, actions for enforcement of human rights and freedoms shall be instituted within 10 years of the occurrence of the human rights violation.
(2) 	Notwithstanding subsection (1), court may allow an action to be brought after the expiry of the period prescribed in subsection (1) on being satisfied that the victim of the violation was unable, for any justifiable reasons, to bring such action within the time prescribed under subsection (1).
(3) 	For avoidance of doubt, the Civil Procedure and Limitation (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, Cap 72 shall not apply to proceedings instituted under this Act."

The justification is that this is to limit the application of the Civil Procedure and Limitation (Miscellaneous provisions) Act on the enforcement of this Act, especially the requirement for a statutory notice before suits against Government are filed as well as the time within which certain actions are to be taken against Government. The other justification is that this is to prescribe the time within which to bring suits for enforcement of human rights. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Members, can I put the question on the proposal to insert a new clause after clause 10. I put the question that the new insertion on limitation of human rights actions stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 2
MR EDWARD OTTO: Clause 2: Interpretation

In the definition of the word “application”, substitute for “referred to”, the words “guaranteed under the…”.

Substitute for the definition of the word “competent court” the following: “’Competent Court’ means a High Court or Magistrates’ Court.”

Insert immediately after the definition of the word “minister” the following new definition: “’Non-derogable rights and freedoms’ means rights and freedoms listed under Article 44 of the Constitution.”

Insert immediately after the definition of the words “subordinate court” the following: “’Victim of a human rights violation’ means a person who suffers a human right violation and also includes such a person's immediate family or dependents or any other person whose rights have been violated as a result of the violation of the victim's human rights and freedoms.”

This is to align the definition of the words used with the Constitution and other laws; provide working definitions for words used in the Bill and for clarity. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to those amendments as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.
  
The Title

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the Title to the Bill remains title to this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.02
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Ms Jovah Kamateeka): Mr Chairperson, I would like to move that the House resumes and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the Whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.02
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Ms Jovah Kamateeka): Mr Speaker, I would like to report that the Committee of the Whole House considered the Bill entitled, “Human Rights Enforcement Bill, 2015” and passed all the clauses with amendments and also inserted new clauses after clause 7, under the headnotes:

    i. Personal liability for infringement of rights and freedoms
    ii. Derogation from non-derogable rights and freedoms
    iii. Complying with orders and directives of court
    iv. Progressive realisation of rights and freedoms
    v. Loss of immunity from prosecution and 
    vi. Unconditional release of persons unreasonable detained.

The Committee of the Whole House also inserted a new clause after clause 10 under the headnote, “Limitations of human rights action”. 

I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.03
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Ms Jovah Kamateeka): Mr Speaker, I would like to move that the House adopts the report of the Committee of the Whole House. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the Whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE HUMAN RIGHTS ENFORCEMENT ACT, 2015

5.04
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Ms Jovah Kamateeka): Mr Speaker, I would like to move that the Bill entitled, “The Human Rights Enforcement Bill, 2015” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Human Rights Enforcement Bill, 2015 be read for the third time and do pass. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE HUMAN RIGHTS ENFORCEMENT ACT, 2019”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable member. (Applause) Congratulations, chairperson. It is a small Bill but it ended up taking much longer than we anticipated. 

5.05
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Ms Jovah Kamateeka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you and honourable Members for the support and to congratulate the Tenth Parliament for this monumental act of passing the Human Rights Enforcement Bill, 2015; soon to be known as the Human Rights Enforcement Act, 2019.

Allow me to also thank the NRM Government that championed the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution with an entire chapter as Bill of Rights. Members must know that this Constitution has had wide implications on the enjoyment of rights on the African continent because many countries have come here and benchmarked this Constitution, especially the Bill of Rights –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Under what rule are you proceeding now? (Laughter)

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence to –

THE DEPPUTY SPEAKER: Are you speaking as chairperson of the Committee on Human Rights or mover of the Bill?

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As chairperson of the Committee on Human Rights, I would like to record our appreciation to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Attorney-General for finally rendering their support to this Bill and allowing it to pass.

I would like to thank the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, chaired by hon. Jacob Oboth; members of my committee, including those who served in the Ninth Parliament and also our staff, most especially Legal Counsel, Solomon Kirunda, who helped us come up with this Bill and defended it at all levels.

Finally, I would like to thank God, without whom nothing is possible and with whom everything is possible. To Him be glory, forever and ever, amen. For God and My Country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We gave you the latitude because it has actually not been a very easy one. (Mr Anywarach rose_)
Member for Padyere, on what matter do you rise?

5.08
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Mr Speaker, I am the Shadow Minister for Human Rights. (Laughter) I would like to thank the chairperson and the Committee on Human Rights and also the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for the good job they have done. Above all, I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for the steady drive of the House in making this law. We benefitted from your knowledge.

There was an amendment that I was supposed to bring but because of the rule, I could not; especially an obligation on the person in charge of the detention centre to reveal the identity of the detainer who brought the person to be detained. For all intents and purposes, technically, there are people who may fear that this is a detention that was ordered from above.

I am not going to tell, like we had a problem here to tell exactly who came and reigned havoc on members of Parliament. It took time to finally accept that these were A, B, C, D members of the security forces.

This is a milestone in the enforcement of rights. This Act is going to help us a great deal. I would like to pray that this will not be a classical example of rule by law. It should be rule of law that the ruled and the rulers will also find it within their conscience that it is good enough for them to play by the same rule.

Therefore, on behalf of the Leader of the Opposition and my ministry – (Laughter) - I would like to thank you and the House. God bless you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which ministry is this again? (Laughter)

MR ANYWARACH: The shadow ministry for human rights. I would like to thank you for the good job done.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, do you have a matter?

5.10
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Mr Speaker, I wonder whether that ministry has been gazetted. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was my question.

MR EDWARD OTTO: Mr Speaker, allow me to take this opportunity to thank you for guiding these deliberations in respect to the Human Rights Enforcement Bill. Allow me to also thank the Members for their input. It has been a very good debate. I would like to thank the mover of the motion, who is the chairperson of the Committee on Human Rights.

On behalf of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, it is important to thank the Legal Counsel to the committee, who is in the House and many other members of staff who worked on this Bill to make sure that it is given the value as had been initially proposed by the mover. 

I would like to thank everyone and I would like to say what it has done, other than the constitutional provision; this new law has taken the battle for human rights away from the streets to courts. I think when that discourse is in the courts, it will be managed in a civil way. It will help us enhance the development of democracy in this country. 

Thank you everyone; I thank the Clerks, I also thank Government because without the certificate of financial implications, among other things, there would be a big fight in this House. I would like to appreciate the growth of democracy in this country. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, there were some issues that should have been raised at the beginning. Probably, this would be the time for the members from Ngora County, Buikwe County North, Katikamu County South and Chua County West to raise their issues and then, we will see how to proceed. I will start with Ngora County.

5.12
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you. I rise here to raise a matter of urgent public importance. On 12 January 2019, the police from Pallisa District, specifically around Akisim Sub-county, brutally shot two people from Ngora and one, Joseph Ouma died. He was shot twice in the stomach. Mr Robert Acelon was shot in the left leg. 

In the morning of 12 January 2019, a one Tukei was knocked dead by a boda boda man. Ouma was a son of Tukei and we buried both of them yesterday. What is shocking here is that the police from Pallisa did not play their role as expected.

For them, when the negotiation failed, they instead mobilised drunken boys. These boys had sticks and under the police’s supervision, they beat the people. As we talk now, 18 of the people were badly beaten. As a result, there is tension between the people of Ngora and Pallisa. The people of Pallisa cannot go to Ngora freely and vice versa.  

Therefore, I have the following prayers:

The first one is that the police should investigate thoroughly the cause of death of Joseph Ouma and the perpetrators must be brought to book.

Secondly, the Government of Uganda should compensate the family for the death of Joseph Ouma who was shot dead by the police. 

Thirdly, the police should meet the medical bills of Acelon who is now hospitalised in Mbale Referral Hospital.

Government of Uganda should pay the fees of the children of the late Ouma. He had eight children and they should be sponsored at school so that they enjoy the human rights we have been talking about. 

Finally, I also appeal that the Minister of Internal Affairs comes here to brief this House on the reason the police of Pallisa shot our people and killed one. 

I also would like to appeal to the people of Pallisa that they should not be brutal to my people. We have already buried five people from February 2018 to date. That is why I appeal to the people of Pallisa not to be hostile to my people because we are peaceful. If we also react, it will become very dangerous. Thank you.

5.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, we would like to send our condolences to the people of Ngora. On the situation between the people of Pallisa and Ngora, the Minister of Internal Affairs will first come and make a statement here. However, tomorrow, the responsible officers will be on the ground to make sure they diffuse that situation.  If there is any officer who has acted outside the law, he or she should be disciplined.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Buikwe County North is not here. Katikamu County South is also not here. Is Chua County West here? 

5.18
MR OJARA OKIN (Independent, Chua County West, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) of Kole. On 5 January 2019, the RDC of Kole, Mr Johanan Olweny Omara moved in my constituency, Lagoro Sub-county, Pacudu Parish and   harassed and brutally arrested and tortured four members of a family. That was done around 10 O’clock at night. 

So, when he arrested them, he bundled them into his pick-up and drove them to an unknown destination. However, the following day, these people were discovered to be in one of the police stations in Kitgum District. 

Up to now, the motive of the action of the RDC is unknown. We requested the District Police Commander to establish exactly what the motive was. 

My prayer is that we would like this matter investigated. An RDC is a public officer who should be the custodian of the law. That kind of brutal arrest and manhandling of fellow citizens is uncalled for. While this matter is being investigated, we would expect that the RDC is suspended to allow free investigations to take its course. 

We would like to also request the minister responsible to bring a report to this Parliament on the situation and condition of the four people who were beaten, arrested and detained. Thank you.

5.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, the primary role of the RDC in a district is to maintain peace and security. Actually, they are the head of security in the district. The Member has raised a serious issue. We are going to request both the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister for Presidency to investigate and report to this House in two weeks. 

5.21
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nabilatuk): Mr Speaker, I beg for your indulgence. There is a matter which is affecting the six new districts which took effect on the 1, July 2018. These are Nabilatuk, Kwania, Kapelebyong and many others. 

On the 23 December 2018, we received a letter from someone who was writing on behalf of the Permanent Secretary Public Service called Bakku Leku asking the interim councils of the six districts in consultation among themselves to pass a resolution to request for services of neighbouring districts to immediately recruit people.

In the case of Nabilatuk I consulted the Commissioner Electoral Commission because we already have candidates. The Commissioner said the elections would be held on 15 February 2019. Therefore, the council sat and passed an interim resolution saying that we would be comfortable waiting for the new substantive chairpersons to come in so that the proper District Service Commission can be put in place.

At the beginning of this year, we had a meeting where I am an ex-officio member of the district council. We sat with the council and the councillors said since the election is near, let us wait for the substantive chairpersons to be in place. I also consulted other people from Kapelebyong; there is a gentleman called Mr Francis Akurikin and others from other districts that I called to have a quorum.

Today, another person wrote and I have just seen a letter here copied to all districts directing the Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) to go ahead to advertise and recruit ignoring the role of the interim councils.

Article 194 of the Local Government Act is clear. Interim councils do not have powers to institute District Service Commissions. I am just wondering, Mr Speaker, whether the ministers in charge, either Public Service or Local Government can come and clarify to the country about the rules we are following. Are we following the Local Government Act or different rules? 

We are being written to letters as new districts. The one of 23rd December is different; the one of 2nd January is different from that of today. And they are signed by different people. We wonder what is going on.

5.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jennifer Namuyangu): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank my honourable colleague. What I am aware of is that the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Local Government has written to the CAOs of the new districts asking them to use the District Service Commissions of the neighbouring districts to assist us in recruitment; reason being that these districts received money for the wage bill and many of them do not even have staff. We are worried that we shall lose this money if they do not use it to recruit staff.

You are also aware, Mr Speaker, that we have some districts that do not even have interim councils like Bugweri Therefore, we are of the view that since this recruitment is on merit, I do not see any reason why colleagues should say they have to wait for the elected leaders to be in place; when we are not sure of when they will be in place and yet, the financial year will be closing and this money will be returned to Treasury.

Basically, that is the stand of the ministry and we strongly would like to appeal to colleagues to let this process go on so that we can have staff in place to support the districts to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. That is the response. This House is adjourned to tomorrow 2.00 o’clock.

(The House rose at 5.26.p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 16 January 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 
