PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - THIRD MEETINGWEDNESDAY , 18 JANUARY 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6788STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTWednesday, 18 January 2023The report by the committee for UNRA was reviewed and it is due for presentation today. This is part of the House commitment; that we must work for this country and we must finalise the accountability cycle. We are doing budgeting now and we ought to finish the accountability cycle. In finishing it, we have to have all these reports presented to the House and adopted. As per Article 163(5) of the Constitution, we get the treasurer memoranda to be presented to the House.Honourable members, yesterday, I noted that the performance of the Public Accounts Committee (COSASE) in processing the Auditor-General’s reports for Financial Year 2020/2021 has been a cause of concern to this House. Failure for a committee to do its work is an indictment on the House: one, on the committee and two, on the House. When somebody fails, you have all failed and we have all failed. Out of the 107 entities audited by the Auditor-General, the committee has only considered four entities and I do not want to say, shame on the House, but shame on you, Public Accounts Committee (COSASE). It is you people who have failed. We have invested a lot of money in the committee and you get money like any other committee. We have put money in that committee, but we have not got results. Article 163(5) of the Constitution grants this House six months to consider and pronounce itself on the report.IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 3RD SITTING - THIRD MEETINGParliament met at 1.58 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome you to this afternoon sitting. Yesterday, we adopted the report of the Public Accounts Committee (Local Government) and we are set to receive the Treasury Memorandum from the Government.The Government Chief Whip should be able to present that as soon as possible and that was for the year ending 30 June 2021.Today, we will consider the report of the Public Accounts Committee (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises). All these accountability committees are called Public Accounts Committees: there is Public Accounts Committee (COSASE), Public Accounts Committee (Central) and Public Accounts Committee (Local Government). We considered the Public Accounts Committee (Local Government) yesterday. Today, we are going to look at the Public Accounts Committee (COSASE) and we will also look at a report on Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA). PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6789THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 18 JANUARY 2023The six months have passed and the reports are not ready. Even if we gave you an additional year, you may not be able to finish. Based on that, we are going to adopt all the reports that are pending under the Public Accounts Committee (COSASE) because the committee, that is headed by the Leader of the Opposition, has failed to produce what we expect of them.We need to help this country because we need actions taken on what the auditors found out during their course of work. I want to ask honourable members that while we do this work, let us not just play to the gallery. Let us do the work. Even the Bible says, “By their deeds we shall know them.” We want to know you by your deeds; how many reports have you presented? What have you done? What motions have you passed? Rule 216 of the Rules of Procedure is very particular on the documents that are in committees and these documents that are in committees are a property of Parliament. Nobody is obliged to give out information that is not yet passed by Parliament. I am warning the chairpersons and the clerks for the acts that they practice in giving out information. That is a total breach and we will not tolerate that as Parliament. Do what you are supposed to do and leave what you are not supposed to do. Honourable Members, based on that, we are going to adopt all the reports and hand them over to Finance for a Treasury Memorandum. As people’s representatives, we have seen a lot of information, messages and articles regarding the NSSF. We need to find out from the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development whether the savers’ money is safe.We need a report from the minister tomorrow in this House, on the status of the savers’ money and also detailing what the fight is about. We see a lot of fights on social media, but we need that sorted out because it is endangering people’s savings.Once more, I want to thank you for coming. Can I start with Hon. Allan Mayanja?2.07MR ALLAN MAYANJA (NUP, Nakaseke Central County, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for commenting on the workers’ fund, specifically about the scandals on social media about the savers’ money. It is unbelievable for the minister, Hon. Betty Amongi, to ask for Shs 6 billion from the fund. The Secretary-General for Free Trade Union, Hon. Lyomoki –THE SPEAKER: Honourable, we may not confirm whether she asked for Shs 6 billion, but what is being reported? That is why we need that clarification. MR ALLAN MAYANJA: Okay. In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the bad publicity arising from the scandals unfolding at the workers fund could as well discourage potential voluntary servers. I, therefore, concur with you that the minister presents the report or even the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development takes interest in this matter. Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Macho?2.08MR GEOFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I really want to apologise for calling for a procedural matter during your communication, but I was burning inside because it seemed funny that you were communicating and my side - where we have the Leader of the Opposition and his cabinet, nobody was here at the time. But Madam Speaker, to communicate –THE SPEAKER: At least I saw my son, Hon. Masaba. Even Hon. Atkins was there; you were there. Hon. Abed was there; everybody else was there. MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I appreciate your communication. Value for money: value for money of committees vis-à-vis the work given. Madam Speaker, it disturbs my mind 6790STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTthat out of the 170 entities, only four entities were handled by the COSASE and this makes me question whether the Opposition, when allocating these honourable members dockets of chairperson, they first evaluate and track the record of how they have performed. These are very sensitive positions and it is my prayer - Mr LOP, since you are here - that you communicate to your principals that we have people who are very capable like Hon. Abed Bwanika. These people would have been able to handle such dockets because as I speak, it might be that all the money might have been spent on only the four entities. Now, where is the value for the taxpayers’ money? At the same time, I pray that such matters were discussed in the House when those particular chairpersons were there. That is why I was interested in whether the chairperson of COSASE was here because one time, I saw him on television complaining that he has a lot to talk about in Parliament, but is not given time. Why does he have time to go on social media and yet we have the House of legislation here?I believe the chairperson of COSASE must have run away and he is not in the country yet we are discussing his report; he should have been here. My colleagues who were there during the 10th Parliament – you remember the days of the FDC – it is very important when you are a chairperson of a committee; you must always come early. That is decorum and respect to the House. That is why the chairpersons of the ruling party - the NRM - are always in the House. Madam Speaker, with that concern, I pray that Uganda should have a strong opposition. The National Unity Platform (NUP) should change from being activists to a political party because we need to – THE SPEAKER: Hon. Macho, let us not go into political parties. When you are in this House, you are Members of Parliament irrespective of the party you belong to. Whether you are NUP, FDC – I was the vice chairperson of that committee and I was FDC, and I was very active. So, withdraw that statement. MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, since we have a capable LOP and with your order, I withdraw (Laughter). But the political parties need to be serious to check the regime in power. Thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, as the Opposition - maybe he has not brought it out in a better way - your work is to check the party in power. That is what you are supposed to do; that is why you are responsible for accountability committees. Now, if you are not checking this side, then what are we doing?And as he has said, value-for-money audit; we are checking other people, but we do not want to be checked. I am going to ask for an audit and LOP, I am going to ask for a value-for-money audit on your committee – PAC (COSASE). The other accountability committees have presented their reports and they are doing well. 2.14MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also thank you for inviting the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, and we await the details. My concern, however, I do not know - but I need guidance from you on how Government is running. Is this Government run by President Museveni and his brother and children? Because a Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development writing a letter saying he is in Kapeeka appearing before Gen. Salim Saleh!Madam Speaker, we have had problems even here with MPs. The other day, I saw MPs from Sebei seated; that they are promoting Muhoozi Kainerugaba; that he is going to Sebei.  Hon. Chemaswet was there at the press conference. (Laughter) [Mr Macho] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6791THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 18 JANUARY 2023We need to know, Madam Speaker, whether this family is running this country as a family or we have a Head of State. I do not know whether the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development coming here will also resolve that unofficial running of the state by the relatives of the President. Finally, Madam Speaker -THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, was it out of my communication? MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, you –THE SPEAKER: I am just asking: was it out of my communication? MR SSEMUJJU: You said NSSF should come here tomorrow and part of the problem is that we are inviting a minister yet the minister is also appearing in Kapeeka. (Laughter) So, I am wondering if you are going to get Kapeeka  to appear here because that is where the real problems are; that you have a Head of State who is running the country together with his children and brothers. Madam Speaker, finally, the issue of – THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, you wanted the President to run this country with you or with who; your wife and your children?MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, this Parliament vets – THE SPEAKER: Muhoozi Kainerugaba is a general in the army.MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, this Parliament vets ministers every year, and I thought – THE SPEAKER: We vetted Mama Janet; we vetted her. MR SSEMUJJU: I do not want to comment about you; you will stop me because –(Laughter)– after vetting on Zoom, she has never appeared. But Madam Speaker –THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Hon. Ssemujju has been away and he needs to register his presence. Can you finish? MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I needed guidance –THE SPEAKER: You need guidance on –MR SSEMUJJU: I need guidance on whether when you summon a minister – because you see it is easier - we had trouble here with Hon. Namuganza; the rules say you write to the President. But the ministers are also appearing before Salim Saleh, so who do we write to?THE SPEAKER: It is actually not the rules; it is the Constitution. Hon. Ssemujju, I have asked – actually not asked, but ordered and directed the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, to come and present on matters regarding NSSF tomorrow. And they have to be here. I am not aware of Kapeeka because I have never been there. So, I do not know anything about Kapeeka. (Hon. Ssewungu rose_) Yes, procedure?MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a procedural matter and indeed, these are areas where you directed long ago. Sometime back, I raised here the issue of Grade III teachers who are being phased ou. And as we speak, there is another matter coming –THE SPEAKER: I thought you were responding to the communication from the chairperson. You will bring that issue after communication from the chairperson. MR SSEWUNGU:  Most obliged. THE SPEAKER: Hon. Atkins?2.18MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Madam Speaker, happy New Year; I am happy to see you in the New Year. Madam Speaker, this Parliament should pray hard that Jesus does not come back 6792STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTtomorrow because I do not see a possibility of one of us making it to Heaven. Corruption is bleeding this country to death. From the IGG’s report of 2022, Shs 23 trillion was lost to corruption, with Shs 1 trillion lost to procurement fraud alone. Madam Speaker, we represent communities and in our hospitals, we do not have medicines. We cannot pay our teachers and health workers, but we money is lost to corruption. This House owes you a duty. We swore to preserve, guard and protect the Constitution. If we cannot put our foot down, roll up our sleeves and join you to fight corruption, then I do not think we have work here.Madam Speaker, in this country – and among those reports gathering dust on the shelves – eight cows or animals or cattle cost Shs 5 billion. In other words, each cow or animal went for Shs 625 million. I think we need to activate our systems and I totally agree with you that this cannot be business as usual. We have to do things differently. Otherwise, we are letting down our country. Madam Speaker, finally, every time you show your identity at any international airport and say you are a Ugandan, people are a little bit careful because of our place in the corruption ranking or index. I think we have a duty, responsibility and obligation to reverse that trend. As I sit down, it pains me that in Kenya, a road to the airport – that is an eight-lane – costs half the cost of the four-lane road that we have here. So, every time you look around, you have corruption all over the place. Our major role, as Members of Parliament, is oversight and the moment we abdicate on the role, we have no job here. Madam Speaker, you have our full support and we are not going to allow any blackmail on our Speaker. Every time she calls us to do our job, we are all over the media trying to blackmail her on TVs and radios. You have our support and we will leave no stone unturned – looking at people turning our country into a big joke internationally. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Procedure?MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter. In your communication, you told us about one of the accountability committees - that is COSASE. When you compare the tone that is spoken during the meetings in the accountability committees and in the report, the report is lukewarm yet the tone is very strong during these sessions.Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right, since even the chairperson of COSASE is in the House, that we give him an opportunity maybe to tell us why it is one of the accountability committees that has performed lowest and has no reports?THE SPEAKER: Hon. Silwany, we made a ruling to that effect. We are going to get a report on UNRA from the chairperson of the committee. So, as we wait for the report – LOP, I will give you chance to talk.2.24MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Central Division, Fort Portal City): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Whereas we talk about corruption, it is all over and the corrupt target Parliament. That is a fact. What I have observed over time is that these mafias find a way to approach the different leaderships of committees to ensure that their wars are concluded here in Parliament. That is a fact. As a member of COSASE, I lost interest in the committee because I could no longer see the value of my time and integrity. I saw that in whatever is run in that committee, there is an underhand. So, I felt very -THE SPEAKER: Hon. Alex Ruhunda, are you insinuating that there was corruption in the committee? MR RUHUNDA: Of course. What I am trying to -[Mr Katusabe] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6793THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 18 JANUARY 2023THE SPEAKER: Do you have evidence? MR RUHUNDA:  Madam Speaker, at the right time I will unveil the facts here. I will come and unveil the facts here -THE SPEAKER: When do we expect it? If you do not have evidence now, then, you should withdraw that statement. This is because to the best -MR RUHUNDA:  Madam Speaker -THE SPEAKER: I am still communicating. If you do not have evidence to that effect, withdraw your statement. I do not want it to be seen that my chairpersons are corruptible. No. If there is no evidence to that effect, withdraw it until you have evidence.MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, I withdraw that statement because I do not have the evidence right now. (Laughter) However, I would like this to go - THE SPEAKER: Can I have order? If you want to laugh, go and laugh from the corridors. MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, I would like this to go on record that the members and chairperson of this committee are vulnerable to corruption like any other person who holds a sensitive office in this country. So, we cannot rule out that fact and we shall look for the evidence and it will be unveiled when the time comes. However, Madam Speaker, the manner in which business of these committees – in the case of COSASE – is being conducted is something that we need to interrogate and resolve. This is because the committee -THE SPEAKER: Are you a member of the committee? MR RUHUNDA: Yes. I am a member of the committee, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know how to resolve issues of the committee. Can we leave that to the LOP? Leader of the Opposition, that committee is under you and there are issues that they are raising. Have it resolved. We do not need to discuss it here. MR RUHUNDA: Let me conclude my point, Madam Speaker. I thank you for your ruling and I am glad that you have ordered an audit of the performance of the committee. I am sure that many facts will come out. We need to protect and keep the dignity of Parliament. Parliament is not a persecuting organ. We are not here to persecute individuals, but we are using the parameters of Parliament to protect the law and appropriation of resources and safeguard the country. We should not come and be highhanded because we are in powerful positions and take advantage of being in such a position. I beg to move.MR EDDIE KWIZERA  (NRM, Bukimbili County, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Arising from your communication and what the honourable members said, one Member of Parliament should not criminalise the institution of Parliament because we have the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, which can investigate anything that has happened. Secondly, who owns these committees? When I was in the Sixth Parliament, committees were owned by the members of the committee and they would check the leadership –THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, listen to the advice of an elder. This man was even in the Fourth Parliament. (Laughter)MR EDDIE KWIZERA: But the biggest challenge we have as a Parliament is that leadership is imposed irrespective of integrity and capacity to lead these committees, and the ownership. Even the reporting system becomes a problem. Therefore, it is high time this Parliament checked the leadership of the committees because Parliament performs through Article 90, such that the committees are not appointed by foreigners. You may be in a committee and 6794STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTfind that the chairperson has been imposed on you even without -THE SPEAKER: Who are the foreigners, Hon. Kwizera?MR EDDIE KWIZERA: I mean those who appoint committees in Parliament are not Members of Parliament.THE SPEAKER: The Government Chief Whip brings a list from amongst the Members.MR EDDIE KWIZERA: Yes. That is what I am saying. I would think that in the appointment –THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kwizera, there are no foreigners who choose committee chairpersons unless you are saying that Hon. Obua, the Leader of the Opposition and I are. We are the ones who decide.MR EDDIE KWIZERA: Can I clarify what I am saying. I am not talking about foreign in terms of sovereignty. I am saying that the Members of Parliament here have very little say on the committee leadership -THE SPEAKER: But your whip has and the Commissioners. MR EDDIE KWIZERA: But what are the qualifications? Influence peddling? Thank you very much.THE SPEAKER: By the way, what is the qualification of being an MP?MR EDDIE KWIZERA:  Senior six.THE SPEAKER: So, why would you want somebody to be more qualified than that? MR EDDIE KWIZERA:  But performance.2.31MS MARGRET RWABUSHAIJA  (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your communication, particularly where you summoned the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. With due respect, I want to inform the Members that the whole of last week, we were waiting for the Minister for Gender. She was on our programme, but she did not appear for a whole week. That is in the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. She had appeared in the media and had a lot of issues that she wanted Ugandans to know about and that there was something wrong. The minister is the one who took even the initiative, according to what she said when she met the media, to ask the IGG to come in. I was very appalled yesterday when she said that there was nothing wrong - that everything is smooth. I thought there were double standards. It is unfortunate. I am very happy that she will be here tomorrow following your request. This is hard-earned money from the workers of this nation. When we see that things are happening, today they are blaming one another, then something has gone amiss. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. In the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from the Pader-Abim Community Multi-Purpose Electrical Cooperative Society. They are represented by Hon. Akello Beatrice Akori, Hon. Okot John Amos, Hon. Anywar Ricky Richard and Hon. Lagen David from Agago. Kindly join me in welcoming them. (Applause)You sent us very good Members of Parliament. They are very active. Send them back again.2.34THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take, in good faith, your communication relating to the work we do in the Opposition. I contend that this Parliament is not seeing the Opposition heading committees for the first time and do appreciate the challenges of these committees. I would love that we administratively deal with backlog because I sense that an omnibus adoption of the reports may not solve the [Mr Kwizera]COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6795THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 18 JANUARY 2023problem at hand. I will request my team of committee leaders to retreat, we find a remedy and try to appreciate what is pending and what has not been handled at all, so that we can deal with it within the little time available. Secondly, we need to understand that these committees are headed by the Opposition, but they are committees of Parliament; 99 per cent of membership is from the ruling party. When their work is curtailed, it is an indictment of all. Certainly, leadership is very key, but all of us must work to make sure these committees perform. Nobody should try to curtail their work because the head is the Opposition. I would like to ask my brother, Hon. Alex Ruhunda, to be calm. He was a chairperson of a Committee on Trade in the 10th Parliament and it was disbanded –(Laughter)– so, we need to be courteous sometimes in the way we deal with each other when we are handling these matters. Courtesy is the name of the game. The Speaker’s communication was intended to align our work. I do not think she intended to malign any Member or leader of a committee. The honourable member needs to take a breath and understand that we are here to serve this country beyond our individual interests. Therefore, courtesy is very important while dealing with these issues. Thirdly, we can deal with these challenges. One of the issues we need to handle in the Business Committee to finally deal with the issue of backlog is how much time we gazette for these committees. Also, in-house, counsel each other on how to deal with external pressure. At least, I have been following my committees and their leaders. I can firmly say that my leaders are safe from any external influence because I follow them routinely. We held a meeting with the Speaker. The Commission even hired some support to try and align the work of these committees, all to ensure that the reports come out. If the reports are not coming out, maybe, Madam Speaker, the House may have to evolve a framework of dealing with the Auditor-General’s reports. In my personal assessment, these, too have issues. Take an example: over the last two years, probably three if I am not mistaken, there was a migration in the budgeting framework from sector-based to programme-based. The programme-based kind of budgeting and reporting requires that there is emphasis on value for money. However, the Auditor-General is still producing templates of the same funny reports, and, therefore, committees are struggling to hold these people accountable.Have we migrated? Perhaps the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should be interested in whether we need to cause amendments to the Public Finance Management Act, including the National Audit Act, 2008 because it never did away with it. A few things are not coming out well when it comes to programme-based budgeting. I know the people at the front bench are enjoying it because Parliament is failing to undertake proper scrutiny. Some ministers – I am saying “some” - on purpose, do not understand programme-based budgeting. Some Members of Parliament also do not understand it. They are struggling. I am following committees dealing with the budget framework paper and midterm performance, but I notice that they are struggling to adapt and adopt.Madam Speaker, we need to have an in-house meeting to understand the migration of the way the Government is running so that the Executive does not have their own turf and then we fail to follow what they are doing, as Parliament. This is because the reports will not come out the way we need them to. Otherwise, I seek your indulgence so that we do an in-house meeting and find a way of dealing with the pending business of the House. Thank you so much. THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. We will continue doing capacity building on the migration for Members, the ministers and everybody. It is not an easy thing. 6796STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTHowever, at the same time, we need to complete the accountability cycle and because we have to complete the accountability cycle, we will adopt all the reports today. After adopting the reports, we will have a meeting. Tomorrow, I will give you another booklet of all the reports for accountability committees. We can now sit and agree on how you should handle them. Remember, these are for a financial year. Now, you are going to approve the budget before you finish what was there. I appreciate what you are going through because you are not an accountant, like some of us, but we have to go through an accounting process and close the cycle. Since we are closing the cycle, we will adopt your reports and then go back to the indoor management rule and sort ourselves out.2.41THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. From your communication, on issue No.1, I have already relayed your directive to the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. The minister, Hon. Betty Amongi Akena, has affirmed that she will be here tomorrow to present a statement in form of a report about all that is happening at the National Social Security Fund.Hon. Alex Ruhunda – THE SPEAKER: Honourable Government Chief Whip, Miss Uganda is becoming – what is the problem? Today she is even wearing a miniskirt. (Laughter)MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, whatever we say here is recorded. That is why I wanted the Government Chief Whip to remember that the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development is known by parliamentary records as “Hon. Betty Amongi Ongom.” There is no “Akena” yet. (Laughter) This is just for record purposes because I know the Hansard will have problems with your additional names. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: As much as we have those names on the record of Parliament, upon the marriage, she got the name “Akena.”MR OBUA: Thank you so much. That matter is settled because it is a known fact that Hon. Betty Amongi Ongom is legally married, under the laws of Uganda, to the Hon. Jimmy Michael Obote Akena.  Madam Speaker, Hon. Alex Ruhunda made an allegation that mafias approach different leaders of committees. This was a blanket allegation and I know a big percentage of the parliamentary leadership, in terms of committees, is designated by the Government Chief Whip. Members, I want to state that in principle, we have a duty and obligation to defend and protect the sanctity of this Parliament called, “the temple of legislation.” So, whatever we do has a direct bearing on the integrity of this House. I call upon him: if there is any committee headed by a Member of the National Resistance Movement, to please provide that information to the Office of the Leader of Government Business and the Office of the Government Chief Whip.There was also an allegation that the leadership of the parliamentary committee is imposed –(Interjection)–  honourable members, I am well informed. The difference between the Sixth Parliament and the 11th Parliament – THE SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, please take the information. MR ATWIJUKIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I actually want to help the Government Chief Whip. In regard to the utterances of the honourable colleague - because I am a Member of that committee – it, of course, has a far-reaching impact to the committee and this House. We could be facing challenges, but not issues of corruption. For example, when we were handling one of the institutions - Uganda Airlines - Hon. Ruhunda and team are on record to have gone to the media terming it as a “Tooro affair.” They said, “This is one of us from Tooro. Do not touch her.” Therefore, it cannot be the same Hon. Ruhunda indicting [The Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6797THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 18 JANUARY 2023all the Members of COSASE, as if there is anything wrong. (Applause) Madam Speaker and honourable members, for some of these issues, we need to be more careful, especially for some of us who are still growing our careers. I request that Hon. Ruhunda goes on record to officially withdraw – THE SPEAKER: He withdrew his statement. MR ATWIJUKIRE: Oh, I was very disturbed. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to put this on record. For the two years we have been in this seat, we have not got any information of corruption against any committee chairperson; be it from the Opposition or the Government. The chairpersons are not corrupt, but some of them are just lazy.MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, now that you have affirmed, would it be procedurally right for us to expunge – THE SPEAKER: By the way, Hon. Ssenyonyi is my very good friend, but what I am saying is that you have not done what I expected of you. You have been a little lazy. I am speaking with facts; I have reports that have been laid on the Table. Out of 211 reports, I have 107 pending. What are we doing? That is an indictment to the institution of Parliament. Yes, Government Chief Whip.MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, now that you, as the leader of this institution, have affirmed that you have never received any allegation of corruption, may I move, under rule 229, to expunge from the official record the allegation made by Hon. Alex Ruhunda because the rule states: “Where the Speaker is of the opinion that the words that have been used in debate are defamatory, indecent, unparliamentary or undignified, the Speaker shall order that such words be expunged from the official record of Parliament.” Madam Speaker, I beg to move.THE SPEAKER: How do you expunge what has been withdrawn? (Laughter) He withdrew the statement and even apologised.MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, I can stand here to withdraw, but the records have already been captured. Expunging means deleting from the official record.THE SPEAKER: Actually, you need to apologise to your Member. 2.49MR MEDARD LUBEGA SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On a matter of national importance, I rise to report on a matter that relates to land evictions, which have been variously discussed in this Parliament.In a place called Kakunyu in Wakiso District, an entire village of over 2,000 people were evicted by a one Dr Kaggwa, causing villagers that have been in the village for over 100 years - in terms of generations -, to live with their property destroyed. Some of the graveyards were destroyed and others abandoned. Those people went to court and obtained an order to reinstate them as lawful occupants on the land. Upon getting that order, with the assistance of the Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Hon. Sam Mayanja, the police was requested to provide security to ensure that they are reinstated by the RDC of Wakiso. Hon. Sam Mayanja wrote to the RDC to assist in the execution of that court order and also wrote to the Inspector General of Police to provide security, and it was agreed that, that would be complied with. On the date of reinstatement, the police that had otherwise been provided to guarantee execution was ordered to move away from the premises and the evicting party brought Saracen guards, who are guarding the place to date. The residents have again approached the police, which has said they will not allow them, this time round, to cause violence.Two incidents are of particular importance, Madam Speaker:6798STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT1. One of the families that own a burial ground on the land lost a child who cannot be buried and they have kept the dead body in the mortuary for a week now because they cannot access the burial ground, even after winning a case in court. 2. An old man called Christopher Kimuli, estimated to be 110 years old, was evicted and up to now, he has to go around begging people to rent for him in the nearby town. Another old woman aged about 90 years called Zabeti Nandawula was also evicted and is begging for rent, even after winning in court.Mzee Paul Ssegane Kimuli, about 75 years old, was equally forced off the land and has lost a paternal aunt who could not be buried on the same land. With your permission, I will lay on the Table the court order as well as the clearances from the police, which now the police have turned around refusing to enforce. Before that, my request is to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, particularly the senior minister, now that the minister of state has been defied. You have always guided the senior minister to take interest. Let her do so and ensure that the eviction is reversed.Two, that the court order is enforced and that people are allowed to enjoy their land rights as lawful occupants - and we are not talking about people they call squatters or trespassers. They are confirmed and have been there for generations; for over 100 years. I beg to move.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can you lay on the Table the documents you have talked about?MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I thank you. With your permission, I proceed to lay on the Table the decree and warrant to give vacant possession vide Civil Suit No. 020 of 2021, Akamada Regina Mukasa and others v. Dr Apollo Kaggwa, the clearance from the police in respect of the same matter dated 1 September 2022, the letters from the Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Dr Sam Mayanja to the RDC Wakiso, Ms Justine Mbabazi dated 9 January 2023 and 16 December 2022, respectively.Finally, a letter to the Inspector General of Police from Dr Sam Mayanja to the Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development dated 9 January 2023 and a petition to me, the MP, dated 8 January 2023. I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we have Hon. Nabakooba, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development analyse what is happening, take action and report back to this House next Thursday together with the Attorney-General.2.56THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua): Madam Speaker, I undertake to accordingly notify the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. However, the learned Attorney-General is already here to act as directed. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Attorney-General?2.56THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. We shall definitely act on this. I only request my colleague to share with me the court order you spoke of because you did not list it among the documents. THE SPEAKER: It is part of it.MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA:  We shall follow it up, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Attorney-General.2.57MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Omoro): Madam Speaker, in view of the earlier notification submitted to you in regard to rule 141(2) of our [Mr Sseggona] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6799THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 18 JANUARY 2023Rules of Procedure and well captured in your communication concerning performance of committees, would it not be procedurally right for you to grant an opportunity, as requested by the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry, for a formal request to be made to this House at this particular time?THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I received a letter from the vice chairperson of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, requesting for extension of time for reporting on the Consumer Protection - Competition Bill and Museums, and we have granted permission for 30 days. So, you should be able to report back to this House after the 30 days. MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker; if I may lay the request for formal record. THE SPEAKER: Please lay it on the Table. - I am going to come to yours; yours is on education. Hon. Ferigo? Let us be brief really when bringing these matters of national importance. MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a formal request with regard to Rule 141(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to request that this august House grants extra time of one month to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry to enable it adequately consider the Competition Bill, 2022. I beg to lay, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Catherine. Hon. Ferigo?2.58MR FERIGO KAMBALE (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the closure of Kilembe Mines Hospital in Kasese Municipality. Madam Speaker, on 2 December 2022, the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Health directed Joint Medical Stores that the credit line for providing medicines and medical supplies to Kilembe Mines Hospital be withdrawn. When this information came out, the leadership of Kasese were shocked because we could not believe why. Kilembe Mines Hospital is owned by Kilembe Mines Limited, which is a Government entity. Government owns Kilembe Mines Limited with a shareholding of 99.96 per cent. So, it is an entity that belongs to Government. The second reason we were shocked is that this hospital serves a population of around 500,000 people and this hospital serves most of these subcounties on the mountains. Most of the women who give birth from all those mountains are served by this hospital. Two weeks back, the local population decided to demonstrate because it was shocking news. The matter is becoming worse; it is even becoming more of a security matter. Just last week, our area minister, Hon. Kabyanga Godfrey communicated to me that the matter is becoming more of a security – THE SPEAKER: Is he a Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance or area minister?MR KAMBALE: Yes. The Minister of State for Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance in charge of National Guidance, who comes from our place. THE SPEAKER: So, he is not an area minister. MR KAMBALE: Okay. (Laughter). He is a national minister, but he is a minister from our place.  THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you give us your prayers; we have known that Kilembe Mines Hospital was closed. MR KAMBALE: Yes, I want to give that small bit of insecurity – THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers?MR KAMBALE: Prayer No. 1 is that this being an emergency – this decision was taken even when we have patients admitted. We 6800STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTrequest that this decision be reversed because it is about the lives of our people. Number two, I request that the Committee on Health pick interest in this matter. Let the committee come to the ground and appreciate the plight of our people. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ferigo, what was the reason behind closing the hospital?MR KAMBALE: It is very funny. (Laughter) [Member: “Information.”] THE SPEAKER: Ah ah! You do not just switch on a microphone and start saying “Information.” You are raising the same thing; we need the hospital operational. Can we hear from the minister? Honourable minister, did you close the hospital?3.03THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Anifa Kawooya) Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I wish you a happy New Year and wish you good health and blessings as you steer this august House in the Year 2023. Madam Speaker, I do share the pain of my colleagues and the people from Kasese. The reason for closing that hospital is that the people of Kasese and my colleagues in this august House are aware that there have been many floods in that area. These are facts. I am happy that he has called on the Committee on Health to go to the ground. Following the repeated flooding and destruction of the Kilembe Mines Hospital by water from River Nyamwamba, health service delivery was reallocated to the other health facilities. That was step No. 1. River Nyamwamba - everybody who comes from Kasese knows what the damage is; everything flooded and the entire hospital flooded. What we did, as a ministry in the immediate, was to reallocate all other health services to all other health facilities within the municipality where the community has been accessing healthcare. We have met with some of the Members from this area.To ensure availability of medicine in the operational health facilities, the Ministry of Health approved the reallocation of the essential medicines and health supplies and credit line budget from Government to other private not-for-profit health facilities within Kasese District, and they are handling the patients. That was the immediate concern we started with. Among these entities and facilities was the Uganda Catholic Medical Bureau, which is the biggest with health facilities and all equipment that were within Kilembe Mines Hospital. After the flooding, the ministry entered into a tripartite agreement between the Ministry of Health, Kilembe Mines Hospital and the Uganda Catholic Medical Bureau, which expired in May 2022. The honourable colleague is well aware of all other issues between Kilembe Mines Hospital, the Ministry of Health and the Uganda Catholic Medical Bureau. This has not yet been renewed and there are no financial obligations for the ministry to Kilembe Mines Hospital. We were giving additional financial help like other health facilities, but once the hospital flooded, we had to look for immediate solutions. This issue has been with us and even as I speak, before the Health Committee yesterday, but one, we had to give them the explanation. The Ministry of Health has immediate plans to construct another public health centre IV in Bulembia Division. We are doing our best to have another alternative. There is no Kilembe Mines Hospital now because it flooded. The services are being taken to other facilities around. The letter that the colleague alluded to was about medicines – it was not about removing or abolishing the hospital, but to have the medicines that were going to Kilembe Mines Hospital distributed to the other facilities to ensure that health service delivery continues –(Interjections)- Let me conclude on this. [Mr Mamawi]6801THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 18 JANUARY 2023Madam Speaker, as I speak, we are still engaging to see how we can – because as you are aware, Kilembe Mines Hospital is still to be repossessed. So, as a ministry, we found our hands tied to carry out reconstruction afresh. I thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the contingency plan that you have in terms of equipping the other hospitals – what about the people within that area? How far are the other hospitals from that area?MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker, I need to come back and give the nearest health centre services. THE SPEAKER: Dr Ayume, the Committee on Health needs to follow up on this and advise the House on what can be done. Please, follow up and report to the House. We need this yesterday. We are giving you two weeks to report back to the House3.09MR DA VID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of critical national importance pertaining the Standard Gauge Railway Project-Affected Persons in Busoga subregion. Madam Speaker -THE SPEAKER: Can I have order there?MR ZIJJAN: I rise to engage the House regarding the suffering of the Standard Gauge Railway Project-Affected Persons (PAPs) along the linear path of the proposed Standard Gauge Railway. To be specific, I am talking about communities such as Magamaga Parish in Mayuge District, Wandago – that popular place – Kakira, Wairaka, Wanyange, Bugembe, Mpumudde-Kimaka and Amber Court, touching the Nile. About three years ago, the Government earmarked the affected areas for purposes of passage of the standard gauge railway. It, as such, stopped the project-affected persons from developing their homes, businesses and social institutions among others. Notably, Madam Speaker, Fairland University’s construction was stopped. Other affected institutions were St. Monica Senior Secondary School, Guardian Primary School and Sole Hope Hospital, which was established to fight jiggers in Busoga sub region – we remember that outbreak - Kateyemba, Mpumudde, Kiresa Primary School -(Interjection)-   honourable colleague, take a chill pill; calm down. I am legislating for the people, not you. These people stopped the development of their homes, businesses and social institutions. I have addressed the issue of St. Monica Secondary School, Guardian and other places such as Mpumudde, Kiresa. Others were a Pentecostal Assemblies of God church and five other churches, Airport View Hotel and 150 fish farmers in the area. Needless to mention, some of these institutions and individuals had acquired loans to develop their enterprises. They have since fallen prey to banks and lost livelihoods. It should be noted that this is not the first time the Government is doing this and leaving project-affected persons in dire straits. In 2007, the same communities were demarcated for passage of the Eldoret-Jinja Oil Pipeline. Surveys were conducted, property evaluations were undertaken and the project affected-persons were instructed to discontinue any development. Madam Speaker, it is now 17 years down the road and the Government has not compensated the project-affected persons. It did not restitute their losses or at least communicate to the project-affected persons that the Eldoret-Jinja Oil Pipeline had flopped. To date, some project-affected persons fear to develop their land because they think that the Government is still intent on implementing the Eldoret-Jinja Oil Pipeline. As a result, Madam Speaker, jobs have been lost, education opportunities of the children who were in the affected institutions have been 6802STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTaffected, businesses have collapsed and the suffering continues to be perpetuated by the Government against the citizens. My prayers, Madam Speaker, are:1. That the Government explains what is happening with the Standard Gauge Railway project and how it plans to restitute these areas where people are suffering. The same applies to the Eldoret-Jinja Oil Pipeline. 2. That the Government be compelled to pay compensation for the Standard Gauge Railway project-affected persons without further delay. We are in the budget cycle and this needs great consideration. 3. That the Government needs to explain the fate of the Eldoret-Jinja Oil Pipeline and release people to reclaim and develop their property because, clearly, the Government hoodwinked people and this pipeline project is unlikely to take place. 4. That the Government should revisit its compulsory acquisition approach so that project-affected persons are compensated in the initial stages of such projects. It defeats understanding when the Government compensates after a long time – when some of the project-affected persons have even passed on. I will quote an example of Mzee Tenywa in Mpumudde-Kimaka Division, the head of the fish farmers -THE SPEAKER: Can you conclude on your prayers?MR ZIJJAN: He died due to anxiety and depression because of the Government’s flip-flopping. So, I pray that this be considered as a matter of national importance. I thank you most sincerely, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister for works?3.16THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Works) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for drawing the attention of this House to this fairly critical matter. However, I would like to put it on record that the Government that I serve does not hoodwink citizens. In the event that we change plans, we communicate. We do not hoodwink.Secondly, Madam Speaker, allow me to commit my ministry to come and bring this Parliament to speed on the progress of the Standard Gauge Railway project and what we are about to do to the PAPs. If possible and if you will allow us, maybe, up to next week, I will be very happy to come and speak in this House.THE SPEAKER: You will report to this House on the status of all the PAPs. Since we are in a budgeting period, if there is no money, we could actually budget for it. MR ECWERU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Finally, on the question of the pipeline, that is the mandate of my colleague from the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. If they are not here, on behalf of the leadership here, I will undertake to inform my colleague from the energy ministry to equally come.THE SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, on the pipeline?3.17THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP  (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, I undertake, in addition to Hon. Musa, to inform the relevant ministry, which is the competent authority to come and respond accordingly. Thank you.3.19MR SANON BWIIRE (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance concerning Naigombwa swamp, which connects the two districts of Kaliro and Namutumba. This swamp flooded last year and my colleague, Hon. Naigaga of Namutumba and I, brought it to the attention of Parliament.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [Mr Zijjan]6803THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 18 JANUARY 2023Madam Speaker, on 17 June 2022, you wrote to the Minister of Works and Transport for urgent attention. However, up to date, there is not any signal from the ministry to respond to the cry of the people.This swamp has retarded the development and economic progress of the two districts because there is a lot of business that happens between Kaliro and Namutumba. Our people are becoming impoverished because this small stretch has now blocked small-scale traders from doing their business.It is painful that this very swamp claimed three people; two of them were children who were crossing from Namutumba to come to the better primary schools of Kaliro.Our humble prayer is that let the minister take immediate intervention to save the situation. This time around, the local people do not have the boats they were using last time to cross this swamp and access services. I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I even wrote to your office in regard to that bridge. To date, we have not got any feedback. Can you to go to the locus and report back to this House on what action you have taken? How can we even write to you and you just sit on the letter?3.21THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, I beg to apologise for our delay in communicating back. I want to confess to you that the heap of your request and that of colleagues –THE SPEAKER: They are actually not my requests. I am requesting for and on behalf of my Members. My letter is a directive to you. I am not requesting you. That is your role.MR ECWERU: Thank you. I have a programme. After Rwenzori next week, I will be going with my colleagues to Aleles, Mt. Elgon and Bukwo. I will now include this one also in my leg to the Eastern side.THE SPEAKER: So, do we expect a report next week?MR ECWERU: Madam Speaker, next week will be a little too early because I have to –THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, why don’t you ask your team from Kaliro, Jinja or wherever to go and find an immediate solution?MR ECWERU: I will do that.3.22MR PATRICK BINGI (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the plight of Kanywamahuri Primary School right in the heart of my constituency in Kywankwanzi District, which risks eviction. Colleagues, 2023 started off on a sad note for the education fraternity of Kyankwanzi. This particular school was served with an eviction notice by a one Butare James, who claims to be the undisputed owner of the land where the school is seated. This land is comprised in Singo on Block 780, Plot 2 Kanywamahuri Butemba.This is just one of the few government schools that we do have. If it is sued and consequently evicted, the pupils, the staff and generally the entire community will stand to suffer.My humble prayer to the minister is that the ministry immediately intervenes to save the school in any appropriate way possible, sooner than later. The term is soon opening, but the management is not stable. This is a government school that we cannot afford to lose. I beg to submit.Madam Speaker, with your indulgence, I beg to lay on the Table a copy of this eviction notice from the legal team. It is from Baraka Legal Associated Advocates that was addressed to the school for the ministry to take appropriate action.THE SPEAKER: Please lay and give the Attorney-General a copy.6804STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTMR BINGI: Madam Speaker, this is a notice to sue/of eviction addressed to the Management Committee of Kanywamahuri Primary School Kywankwanzi District from Baraka Legal Associated Advocates by a one Butare James.THE SPEAKER: Is it a Notice to Sue or eviction?MR BINGI: It is a Notice to Sue or a Notice of Cessation of Trespass. The contents of the letter are threatening to sue. They are saying -THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, can you look at that first before it is laid on the Table? Honourable members, can we finish and go to the report - first, look at it then you report back.3.26MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU  (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As granted, I raised an issue here where the Ministry of Education and Sports is phasing out Grade III teachers and all teachers from nursery are required to be bachelor’s degree holders.When I raised this matter here, I gave information that student teachers are out of most of the teacher training colleges and the colleges are empty. Minister Kaducu informed this House that she would come here and give us the status of what they are doing.Right now, we do not know how teachers are going to teach in the next year. Actually, those who are retiring have to be replaced. However, if you want bachelor’s degree holders, who is going to train and pay them? What is going to happen to those colleges you are closing? Up to now, the Ministry of Education and Sports is quiet.To make matters worse, honourable members can attest to this. Most of our phones are flooded with the Arts teachers promising to strike before the term begins. They have written to the Public Service requesting for their increment. This was promised by the Ministry of Education. However, what we have heard from the Prime Minister is intimidating teachers; that they have to first pay policemen and soldiers, and then they will think about arts teachers. Therefore, the matter I was raising to the honourable minister, Dr Muyingo, who is in front of us here, was for him to give us information on why they are not coming to Parliament to tell us what they are planning for schools. If colleges are closed and you are phasing out Grade III training schools, who are you recruiting with a bachelor’s degree? Who is going to pay all those Grade III teachers to go and study for bachelor’s degrees for them to qualify to teach in primary schools? Otherwise, in the coming few years, we are going to miss teachers in schools. What is happening is that the professional people in the ministry have kept quiet. We met them in the Committee on Education and Sports, but out of the 17 commissioners, only three appeared. Those are the areas I would like to seek clarification on, from the minister. And I would like to know whether Arts teachers are going to strike. What is funny is that these people wrongly paid some Arts teachers as Science teachers. They are now saying that they have to retrieve that money from those teachers. We cannot continue burying our heads in the sun when handling matters relating to the children of this country, especially when dealing with education. THE SPEAKER: I know Hon. Ssewungu likes quarrelling. MR SSEWUNGU:  Hon. Dr Muyingo is always dodging me, but now that he is here, with your directive, let him answer appropriately. Thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you give us a response? Attorney-General, is that document okay? 3.29THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Madam Speaker, this is a letter. Aside from being a threat, it means nothing, COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6805THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 18 JANUARY 2023but we are going to look into it. However, no one - THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are getting this information from legal brains. MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: No one can carry out an eviction on land in Uganda without a court order. If it is done, it is illegal. I beg to submit. I am going to work with the honourable member to follow up this matter and get to the bottom of it. THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much, Attorney-General. I have always told you that we have a very able Attorney-General. 3.29 THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to congratulate you for having successfully completed 2022 and wish you the best of 2023.It is true that the ministry has started implementing the teacher’s policy, which my brother, Hon. Ssewungu, knows very well, after it was approved by the Cabinet. Some of the activities that are taking place right now include putting in place a degree awarding education institution that will specialise in preparing teachers for this country; it is specific for teacher training and research. Of course, this also means that some of the National Teachers Training Colleges have to be phased out. Others are going to be converted into campuses for that degree awarding institution.There is no need to worry or panic, like Hon. Ssewungu is trying to create a situation, because all the teachers – [Mr Ssewungu: “Order”] – the Speaker has not allowed you. THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, how do you put an old man like that to order? No, let him finish presenting before you raise your point. DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, Hon. Ssewungu is my former student.  That is how he has been behaving since. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, I just want to assure the nation that we have a very good plan for all our teachers. They will all be absorbed into the system. Some are going to take up lecturing in the degree-awarding institution while others will be helped to improve their skills so that they can be posted to the institutions they fit in.I just want to assure the public that none of those teachers is going to lose their job. None of these teachers is going to be thrown out. We have made enough arrangements. As for the Arts teachers striking, I am not aware of that. I do not think there is need to even think about striking or threatening to strike because Government has planned to enhance our teachers’ salaries in a phased manner, as and when money comes by. Therefore, there is nothing that requires any of the teachers to even think about putting down their tools. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much. Maybe, we will need a comprehensive report on that issue; on the transition from the nursery, primary and secondary schools; we need a comprehensive report. DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, we are preparing a document that will enable everybody in the House to follow what is happening. This document is going to be presented to Cabinet first, before it comes to this House. I thank you.MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I have a brief submission. We should not mislead this House just for the sake of answering questions. I am a professional teacher like a doctor is. I know what a National Teachers College, and what a Grade III Teachers College is.  Now, when you talk about phasing out the National Teachers Colleges, I can agree with your arrangement, but there must be a process. There is no Member of Parliament or a member 6806STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTof the Committee on Education and Sports who has a copy of the policy you are talking about. Therefore, that accusation is not correct – THE SPEAKER: The policy is not yet in place. They are yet to present it to the Cabinet. MR SSEWUNGU: He said here that I know it myself, yet it is in the Cabinet. I am not a member of Cabinet. He stated it here on the Floor. THE SPEAKER: No, he said it is going to be presented to Cabinet before it comes here. It is a progressive process. MR SSEWUNGU:  Most obliged, Madam Speaker, but still, we have to help the minister. If he is not reading newspapers yet his office gets newspapers daily, it is unfortunate. Go to your office and look at the Daily Monitor of today. It talks about teachers striking. 3.35MR DAN ATWIJUKIRE (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. In the cattle corridor, we have had a severe attack of a strange disease called “Coccidiosis infection.” It attacks animals and they die instantly. I was talking to a few farmers. One of them has so far lost 50 cows in two months. Another had lost 15 cows in total. They were all wiped out in one month. I also talked to many others. It is a very serious attack. I think it might cross over to many constituencies where people keep cattle.Therefore, it is my humble prayer that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry, and Fisheries urgently goes on the ground to study this infection to help farmers manage it. This is because if we continue with this trend, we may come here for the Government’s help to restock. Therefore, it is important that the Ministry of Agriculture intervenes early; do a study and guide the farmers on how to proceed and manage the infection to curb the attack. Thank you, Madam Speaker and Members.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Government -3.37THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we will request the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to get in touch with the honourable member, but also, if necessary, to come and brief the House on how they are handling this matter in the cattle corridor.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We expect a report on Tuesday.3.37MR WILSON KAJWENGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning continuous loss of water in Lake Kagera and the resultant looming catastrophe as the taps are running dry in Nyabushozi, Kabula, Lyantonde and the surrounding areas. The constituency I represent is semi-arid and it depends on the waters of Lake Kagera. In December, we received heavy rains, which led to the rise of the water levels of Lake Kagera, which resulted in forcing the bridge that connects Rakai and Isingiro to give way. Since December 2022, there has been consistent and continuous gushing out and streaming of waters of Lake Kagera and that has resulted in the levels of Lake Kagera going down 1.7 metres deep. That has led to the abstraction points from which Nyabushozi and other areas draw tap water going dry. This is a looming catastrophe. Lake Kagera is the lifeblood of the production and sustenance of economic activity of Nyabushozi and the surrounding areas. The effect of the continuously unhindered loss of water from Lake Kagera is of untold suffering. (Ms Kemirembe rose_) I accept the information, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Can you make your prayers and then she will give us information?[Mr Ssewungu] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6807THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 18 JANUARY 2023MR KAJWENGYE: Madam Speaker, my prayer is that the Government, through the Ministry of Works, UNRA and the Ministry of Water and Environment, should urgently block the flow of water from Lake Kagera and a study be done because the continuous flow of water into Lake Victoria might also cause another catastrophe. This morning, I have been told that as a result, levels of River Rwizi, which is also the lifeblood of Mbarara City and other areas, have also gone down. I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. MS KEMIREMBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I wanted to give my colleague is that this bridge is called Kanagisa. It is at the boundary of Kagera and Isingiro in Rakai District.There is a water plant that was supposed to be commissioned this January, but due to the reduced water levels, the commissioning of Rukuku Water Project in Lyantonde has not been effected. My additional prayer maybe to UNRA or Ministry of Works –THE SPEAKER: Isn’t it under the Ministry of Water and Environment?MS KEMIREMBE: For the bridge, because the problem is with the bridge.THE SPEAKER: Yes, water and works.MS KEMIREMBE: Because that bridge has to be worked on so that the water levels can stop dropping.THE SPEAKER: Are you the Minister of Water and Environment? (Laughter) Honourable minister, can you give us –3.41THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, I have looked at the petition. The request is for UNRA and that is almost the same ministry, and then the Ministry of Water and Environment. I undertake to direct my office from Mbarara to go and check this.THE SPEAKER: Incorporate what Hon. Kemirembe has said into the petition. MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am actually rising on a procedural matter. I have listened to the submission of the chairperson and I also listened to the submission of the Member of Parliament representing workers concerning the debates around NSSF. We have –THE SPEAKER: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, Miss Uganda, you made these rules. You said once a debate is completed on an item, you do not go back in reverse. How I wish you would bring up that issue tomorrow. If you have a motion to do that, you can bring it up tomorrow, but I know you want to talk about the issue of governance in the NSSF. So, I expect you to speak to it tomorrow.MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I was not actually going in reverse. It is a style of speech. (Laughter) THE SPEAKER: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, we passed that part unless you have a matter of national importance. Next item.MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES) ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON UGANDA NATIONAL ROADS AUTHORITY FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I communicated earlier, we are going to receive a report and it is going to be an executive summary of issues of UNRA. We will debate it and see whether the report should be adopted or not. Chairperson, can you – MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter and I want to thank you for your indulgence. As we discuss UNRA - I have been waiting for this report to come and it is timely that it has come. 6808STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTHowever, as we sit here this afternoon, the staff of UNRA have been given notice. Most of the staff have approached us that they were given notice that UNRA will no longer exist.Madam Speaker, UNRA was established by an Act of Parliament in 2006 and it became active on 1 July 2008. This is under the Uganda National Roads Authority Act No. 15 of 2006. Madam Speaker, by just writing and telling staff that you no longer have jobs because UNRA is going to be merged means that we are going to discuss a report, but someone somewhere is already saying UNRA is not an existing authority. This rescinds what was done by this Parliament and yet it is Parliament that is supposed to do this. That is why I rose on a procedural matter. Would it be procedurally right -THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, if it is true that the staff are being told to step aside, you are acting in anticipation. It is this Parliament that created UNRA and it is still this Parliament to abolish it. I do not see where you are going to take UNRA.I request that you do not put personal feelings into this rationalisation. UNRA is one of the institutions with a success story. (Applause) Some of us grew up not knowing whether the works ministry was existent, but now, we have roads. So, when you start saying, “Step aside” - step aside to where? Are you Parliament? Let it come back to Parliament and we will make a decision.MR ENOSI ASIIMWE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue is not only with UNRA, but I have a petition from the staff of NEMA. They are also complaining that the board and the executive are implementing Rationalisation of Government Agencies and Public Expenditure (RAPEX)) in anticipation. The guidelines have not yet been exhausted, but they have already put out notices to staff that they are going to be terminated, they should start looking for alternative employment, yet, the process has not been fully accepted or rejected by Parliament. So, I am wondering what the Executive is trying to do by implementing a decision that has not been either approved or rejected by Parliament. THE SPEAKER: Hon. Avur, and then we will need guidance from the learned Attorney-General. 3.48MS JANE A VUR PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Commissioner for bringing up this issue. It is not that the staff have just brought petitions. This is even being reflected in the National Budget Framework Paper that we are processing. It is as if already the process of rationalisation is not only on, but is being implemented. I thought, like you said, that these are agencies that were created by an Act of Parliament. Madam Speaker, I request that you direct that Government expeditiously brings this RAPEX report here and we debate it. Maybe, before we even handle the National Budget Framework Paper. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER: Honourable Attorney-General, can you guide this country in terms of rationalisation; who has the mandate to undo what was done by Parliament and is it right for us not to budget for these MDAs and yet, this is a budgeting process. Then, at the end of the day, you are going to come with supplementary budgets.   3.49THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I sit on the rationalisation committee of the Cabinet. I know that no one has been given a termination letter because we know that many of the entities we are dealing with are entities created by Acts of Parliament. My office is currently working on the Rationalisation Bill. When it is ready, it will be brought to this House, debated and implemented. However, if that has happened, and people have been requested to leave their [Mr Silwany]6809THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 18 JANUARY 2023offices because of rationalisation, that would be wrong. However, if they are being reduced in their ordinary spaces of work, that is a different matter. We would like Members to share with us these notices on rationalisation. On the issue of anticipation - and I think that is the conversation we should be having during this period - when we are budgeting and Government tells you; “We intend to do this,” and Parliament can say, “No, we do not intend to do that.” That is the conversation. Budgeting is a shared responsibility. The Executive has plans, Parliament inputs and we agree. However, Madam Speaker, I must assure you and all Members of this august House that no action shall be taken in respect to rationalisation, which is contrary to the law. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER: Information?  MS KATWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In that case, Attorney-General, you want to tell us what happened to Rural Electrification Agency (REA) was illegal? THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, REA was not a formation of an Act of Parliament. Attorney-General?MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, you answered it so aptly for me. REA was made by Statutory Instruments, which was a preserve of the Executive and the Executive reversed its position. However, UNRA is by an Act of Parliament. So, the only way you can deal with UNRA any other way is by removing that Act of Parliament through the legislative arm of Government. What I have seen - and I think that is why colleagues we really need to share – this is a communication. What I have seen the honourable member sharing is a communication from UNRA telling them the stage at which their rationalisation is, but nowhere in this does it say that you are going to leave your office. THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, we have got communication from very many MDAs that are threatened. They are telling them, “You should be able to hand over because we are going to be merged.” You have a rationalisation committee; why don’t you get the ad hoc committee, which we had in Parliament because as Parliament, we have a report on rationalisation. Why don’t you get the committee, which was headed by Hon. Nathan and consolidate what was agreed from Parliament and what you have? You are going to get an embarrassment; you will come to this Floor and you will fail. MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, the process of rationalisation is not a process of the Executive. It is the process of the Government, which includes the Parliament and the Executive. We have a thought as an Executive arm of Government; we think we should go this way and we want to come here and share that, but we are definitely - and like we reported a couple of months ago – before we come to the Floor with this matter, we are going to go through the various committees, which are handling the various institutions. THE SPEAKER: Counsel, get the ad hoc committee that did rationalisation, harmonise the report from that committee with your report because the other one is a processed report; it was even passed in the House. MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. We shall use that committee report and share with them. I will take it back to Public Service and raise that. We shall share with them and all the committees. We shall do as much as we can, but we will definitely deal with it. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We will expect to hear from you. I thought you brought an issue.    3.55THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, just for the record, I am happy the Attorney-General has put a lot 6810STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTof things straight and I just want to say to this House that nobody has been told to step aside. The process will follow the legal procedures as established in our laws. Like the Attorney-General has correctly observed or guided, we will never do anything outside the law, as a ministry, and if there is anybody who has any other evidence that is contrary to what I have stated, I would want that evidence to be laid here. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable chairperson -3.55THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES) (Mr Joel Ssenyonyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I begin by appreciating your guidance. As committees, we should be able to do a lot more work than we are doing, challenges notwithstanding. There are numerous challenges, some of which we have discussed with you, but we must be able to do more. That is why even with the challenges, I would like to appreciate members of my committee who are active, spare time to be able to do this work. I am thanking publicly because there also some members of my committee like Hon. Alex Ruhunda who have not attended even one single meeting. THE SPEAKER: Honourable, I do not want attacks. Can we go to the report?MR SSENYONYI:  I am not attacking; I am just giving feedback. THE SPEAKER: Let us go to the report. MR SSENYONYI:  Madam Speaker, as COSASE, we are very proud that our Speaker is our “OG”. It gives us a lot of pride and confidence. THE SPEAKER: She is an OG with excellent performance.MR SSENYONYI: That is what I wanted to talk about. Madam Speaker, you remember that when you were investigating Bank of Uganda, you took over four months and the Speaker, Rt Hon. Kadaga, gave you an extension because of the importance of the work you were doing. Some people could have thought you were being lazy, but others thought it was important to get that time to deal with the work -THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want us to differentiate between the Auditor-General’s reports, which are guided under Article 163(5) of the Constitution – that you are supposed to report back within six months. The issue of Bank of Uganda arose out of this House, where a Member said we should investigate why banks were closed; it was not out of the Auditor-General’s report. Those are two different reports. For the other one, you can even take 10 months as long as you bring quality work.MR SSENYONYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I kick-off, I request to be guided because you mentioned that today, we shall be adopting all reports by the Auditor-General, as they are. I have two reports – the one on Uganda Airlines and the one on UNRA, which are ready. I beg to be guided on how I proceed, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: I am guiding you to present the report on UNRA. There was a problem with the one on the Airlines, where there was a leakage of the report and we ruled on it. A property of this Parliament cannot leak and you still continue debating it. Therefore, the Airline’s report on the report presented by the Auditor-General is what we are going to adopt. We are not rejecting the report on the Airlines, but we are adopting the recommendations of the Auditor-General. So, can we have UNRA?MR SSENYONYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Maybe, again, to seek a little more guidance -THE SPEAKER: We are still investigating who leaked it and, as you are aware, our staff who worked with you are already on [Mr Ecweru]6811THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 18 JANUARY 2023disciplinary action - because of that leakage. So, we are looking for who leaked that report. MR SSENYONYI: I take your guidance because as you had mentioned back then that there would be an investigation, I thought that maybe, at some point I would also be invited, but that did not happen. Let us, in the meantime, move with UNRA as you have guided, Madam Speaker. Therefore, I am going to present the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises) on the Auditor-General’s report on UNRA. I will start by tabling the report and minutes. As you guided earlier, Madam Speaker, for lack of time, I will be skipping a couple of things, for example, the introduction, background of UNRA and budget performance. I suppose Members had the opportunity to read through. MethodologyWe held meetings, had document review and field visits. Madam Speaker, allow me to go to committee findings, observations and recommendations. Unauthorised inter-project funds reallocation/diversionSection 22 of the Public Finance Management Act provides for virements which, upon approval, should not exceed 10 per cent of the money allocated for an activity of a V ote where the virement is from one activity to another. The UNRA flouted this law by not getting the necessary approval and by diverting from one activity to another more than 10 per cent of the money allocated, in some cases diverting the entire 100 per cent. A total of over Shs 124 billion was diverted from the budgeted projects to other projects contrary to the above provision, leading to mischarge. There was no evidence that the reallocations of such magnitude were authorised. In addition, following the reallocation or diversion of funds in the fourth quarter of the year, the initial approved work plan was not revised to indicate new targets for projects where the funds were diverted to and from. As such, there is no link between the actual expenditure with the project’s targets for which funds were diverted. The accounting officer explained that diversion of funds was caused by the inadequate funds for planned projects. Therefore, to avoid payment of interest due to delayed payments to contractors on fast-moving projects, funds were transferred from slow-moving projects to avoid creating liabilities for the Government. Management further informed the committee about the need to review the PFMA to take care of these virements and they also pleaded for enough funding to solve the problem of over commitment on projects. Our observations1. UNRA did not seek the necessary approval to reallocate funds from one activity to another, as required by law. Under section 22 of the PFMA, 2015 (as amended), the accounting officer was required to request for an approval of the virement from the minister and show that the allocation did not exceed 10 per cent of the original allocation was not contentious and that it would not lead to future liability of the V ote or Government. The same provision is referred to under Regulation 16 of the Public Finance Management Regulations, 2016. 2. UNRA usurped the powers of Parliament to appropriate funds, in contravention of Article 156(2) (a) of the Constitution and Section 25 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 (as amended). 3. Unauthorised reallocation/diversion of funds is in contravention of the Public Finance Management Regulations and Treasury Accounting Instructions. The diversion also impacts negatively on 6812STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTplanned activities, leading to failure to achieve intended planning objectives. 4. Despite UNRA’s assertion that the transfer of funds from slow-moving projects to fast-moving projects was to avoid creation of liabilities for the Government, the committee notes that the entity still incurred liabilities to the tune of Shs 215 billion in Financial Year 2020/2021. 5. The committee noted the circumstances under which management made relocations, but observed that diversion of funds is a mischarge of expenditure, thus budgetary indiscipline. 6. The accounting officer admitted to the flouting of the law and took personal responsibility for this. 7. The accounting officer committed an offence as provided for in section 79(1) (e) and (m) of the PFMA, 2015 (as amended), which makes it an offence for an accounting officer to divert funds without approval. We recommend that:1.  The PS/ST should strongly caution the accounting officer for violating section 79(1) (e) and (m) of the PFMA, 2015 (as amended). Madam Speaker and Members, within Public Service, there are about three ways of taking disciplinary action. One is caution, which is a warning. The others are suspension and dismissal. So, as a committee, we think that the accounting officer should be given a warning, which will be on record on her file in regard to this matter. 2. The accounting officer should always seek approval for reallocations whenever budget variations are inevitable and the variations should not exceed 10 per cent of the activity budget as provided for by law. 3. UNRA should plan for projects whose activities are on-going and exhibit readiness for implementation. Madam Speaker, the other issue that we interrogated was diversion of funds for employee costs. According to the financial statements, the accounting officer reported to have spent Shs 98.3 billion on employee costs. However, a review of the payments file indicated that out of the above amount, actual expenditure on salaries and related costs was Shs 93.7 billion. The rest of the salary funds, amounting to Shs 4.6 billion, were spent on settlement of civil works obligations. Given that there were no arrears in respect of employee costs that were reported, there appearS to have been over-budgeting for employee costs. Further, the excess funds were diverted from salary provisions to capital development activities. The diversion of funds led to a misreporting, in the financial statements, of Shs 4.6 billion. The accounting officer explained to the committee that budgeting for employee costs was consistent with the approved employee recruitment plan and the existing UNRA staff structure. As part of rationalisation of agencies, the Minister of Public Service wrote to UNRA freezing recruitment of new staff, replacement of those who left and those who passed on. The surplus funds on employee costs that arose out of failure to recruit were used to pay debts on capital development activities. She informed the committee that UNRA eventually recruited when the freeze on recruitment was waived. Of course, we observed that there is a misstatement in the financial statements, which renders the integrity of the financial statements doubtful. The accounting officer spent money meant for employee costs, which is a recurrent expenditure on settlement of civil works, which is a capital expenditure without seeking the necessary approval. [Mr Ssenyonyi]6813THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 18 JANUARY 2023Therefore, we strongly opine that the accounting officer should ensure that the reporting in the financial statements is made in line with the actual expenditure to avoid this confusion. Also, the accounting officer should always seek the necessary authority to reallocate funds. The next item is revenue performance. There is the performance of NTR. I am going to skip a few things again for lack of time, as you guided Madam Speaker, and look at observations.The Ministry of Works and Transport did not make a provision for non-tax revenues in the ministerial policy statement. Thus, UNRA did not budget for the same. Failure to set NTR collection targets in the budget affects the assessment of revenue performance to ascertain whether the forecasted revenue was realised as planned and managed as per the established laws and guidelines for development purposes. Our recommendation is that the Ministry of Works and Transport should always provide for NTR in the ministerial policy statement to enable UNRA to budget as provided for in section 13(15) (f) of the PFMA, 2015, as amended. This is a ball we are throwing back to the ministry because the excuse of UNRA is the ministry - and rightly so-within the law, supposed to deal with this issue. The next item is quantification of outputs under activities. Again, Madam Speaker, I will skip part of that body and look at observations. Here, we were talking about failure to plan and report on the quality and quantity of activities that are implemented, which renders it difficult to establish individual activity costs for each planned output, and thus curtails effective accountability when funds are subsequently spent. Further, without clearly spelt out planned outputs, it is difficult to ascertain whether funds appropriated by Parliament and released were spent and the intended objectives achieved. Again, this was a question of a bit of disorganisation in as far as the documentation and the paperwork is concerned. We opine that the accounting officer should ensure that unit costing at activity level is provided to facilitate linkage of inputs to expenditure and physical achievements, which are in line with the budgeted amount. That is what was missing. It is important that this costing is done as such. The other item is implementation of quantified outputs. 35 outputs worth Shs 2.49 trillion were quantified and we noted a couple of things. 19 of these were implemented, 14 partially achieved and two were not implemented at all. UNRA did not implement the following planned activities despite having received the required funds:1. Procurement of rescue and support under the improvement of ferry services;2. Construction of 10 kilometre equivalents along package six; that is, Karugutu, Ntoroko and Kabwoya-Buhuka;3. Construction of 10 Kilometre equivalents along Rwenkunye- Apac-Lira-Acholibur Road;4.  Civil works for the construction of UNRA offices, works for construction of Kamdini Weigh station;5. Design and build of Ibanda Weighbridge;6. Rehabilitation of 40 Kilometre equivalents along North Eastern Road-Corridor Asset Management Project. The accounting officer explained that the non-implementation of some key activities was due to inadequate funds for planned projects coupled with the diverting of funds from slow moving projects to fast moving projects. This was, however, not supported with the revised work plan. The accounting officer also provided the following reasons for implementation of the sampled projects:6814STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT1. Procurement of rescue and support under the improvement of ferry services. The initial plan was to procure the rescue boats off the shelf. However, this was changed due to the need to customise the rescue boats to the specific needs of the different ferry routes. The customisation process delayed hence resulting into delayed procurement.2. Construction of 10 Kilometre equivalents along package six (Karugutu-Ntoroko and Kabwoya-Buhuka). The accounting officer told us that this was caused by delayed procurement. 3. Rwenkunye-Apac-Lira-Acholibur Road, there was need to update the design. This has since been finalised and designs issued to the contractor and works are ongoing. 4. The civil works for construction of UNRA offices - delayed procurement.5. Works for construction of Kamdini Weigh station, the delay was due to the need to standardise the design in line with the requirement of tripartite transporters facilitation programme.6. The North Eastern Road Corridor Asset Management Programme - the accounting officer told us that there was a delay in the approval of changes in scope arising out of design changes due to an increase in traffic along the road and the delay in approval of the contractor for the road and sources of materials by World Bank.We observed that:1. Whereas UNRA claimed inadequate funding, the amount warranted to the entity was not fully absorbed. Shs 227.4 billion remained unspent.2. The committee notes that partial or non-implementation of activities implies that the expected service to the beneficiary communities is not attained and also defeats the purpose for budgeting and budgetary controls.Our strong opinion is that the accounting officer should ensure that plans are executed according to the approved budget, the reasons and excuses they gave, notwithstanding. The other item is achievement of intended services from implemented outputs. We have a table there. I will just move to the observations.1. Some of the projects are slow moving, which has greatly affected their completion and, therefore, affected service delivery.2. There were delayed projects that lagged behind their completion dates. That also affects service delivery.We recommend that:1. The accounting officer should ensure that slow moving projects are fast-tracked. Hopefully, the Treasury Memoranda will be getting an update as Parliament on this.2. Strict timelines should be set to avoid costs associated with delayed completion of projects.The other item was submission of quarterly performance reports. We have a table here. All of these were delayed. Maybe, just for context, it was noted that the entity submitted performance reports after the deadline given for submission. Table 2 clearly indicates that all of those were deleted. The accounting officer responded that the timelines of submission of semi-annual and annual budget performance reports is 31 January and 31 July respectively, as guided by the PFM Regulations of 2016. Further, that the PS/ST  guided in the budget execution circular that the other two reports, that is quarter one and three, should be submitted on the 30th day of the first month of the current quarter because of the need to finalise reconciliations. [Mr Ssenyonyi]6815THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 18 JANUARY 2023Our observations are:1. The committee noted that failure to submit quarterly performance reports in time and prepare monitoring plans and reports is not only contrary to paragraph 8.1,2,4,5,6 2017 of the Treasury Accounting Instructions, but also affects timely evaluation of performance. 2. The budget execution circular issued by the PS/ST  on 30 June 2021 explains the delay for submission of the quarterly performance report for quarter four. There was a delay in submission of the other three quarters, which was not explainable. Our recommendation is that the accounting officer should be held liable for failure to comply with the submission deadlines, because this is strictly a function of the accounting officer and the law, anyhow. The other issue was accuracy of performance reports submitted. A review of the annual performance reports and physical inspections of outputs reported It was noted that there were inconsistencies in the reported performance. For example, on the upgrade of Atyak-Moyo–Afoji, whereas UNRA reported having spent Shs 3.8 billion only Shs 2 billion was spent; Shs 1.8 billion was diverted and Shs 2 billion was actually spent. There is a table that we refer to in annexure 1. Management explained that PBS directly picks the performance expenditure numbers from the IFMS system and no authorisation is granted to amend or pass adjustments caused by mischarge in either of those two. We observed that inaccurate reporting of performance misleads the users of the financial information and casts doubt on the reliability and authenticity of the information; financial and non-financial, presented by the entity. We recommend that UNRA should, within two months, liaise with the ministry of finance to resolve this issue. We hope that feedback can come back to Parliament; at least, as far as the committee is concerned, within these two months.Delayed payment of cash compensations to Project Affected Persons (PAPs) There is an appendix, which shows a bit of information. There are several PAPs that have not been compensated. Here, the delay in payment of these PAPs was attributed to inadequacies in PAP identification and valuation that resulted into disputes and rejection of awards, delays by PAPs to provide requisite information and documents such as bank account details, powers of attorney, and letters of administration, among others, to warrant payments. It was also attributed to absentee PAPs and landlords, whose valuations were ready for disclosure, but could not be traced in time. We observed that delay in paying off these PAPs always leads to delays in commencing of roadwork. This is how some projects become slow-moving with resultant financial consequences to the taxpayer in addition to the delayed service. We recommend that Government and UNRA should always first acquire the right of way before signing contracts or commencing project works. Therefore, we should not shoot first and aim later. We should acquire the right of way before getting into contracts. Otherwise, getting into the contracts when there is no right of way acquired is costly to the taxpayer because the other people have got to be paid anyhow. There is a bit of status of land acquired for the projects and resettlement of PAPs. We have a table that gives information about the status of receipt and transfer of land titles for fully acquired plots. It was of great concern that titles do not get to be acquired in the sense of transferring them into UNRA’s name. Yes, people handover the titles to UNRA, but then, UNRA keeps them and there is no transfer, which is risky. 6816STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTOut of the 990 titles expected for the Kampala-Jinja Expressway project (KJE), for example, only 649 had been received by UNRA. On the other hand, out of the 23 titles on the Hoima-Wanseko Project, only nine had been received. It is a mixture of those that are not received and even with those that are received, the title is not transferred yet the title does give you information. I want to move to the observation, Madam Speaker. The delay to transfer titles is risky. Section 59 of the Registration of Titles Act provides that a certificate of title is conclusive evidence of ownership of land. Thus, without transferred titles, UNRA opens up itself to potential fraudsters. We recommend that the accounting officer should engage with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development on the required taxes or duties for the transfer of titles to UNRA and to make the necessary budget provisions in order to secure legal ownership of the land acquired for the various projects. Payables and advancesI want to skip some of this information, Madam Speaker, and move to the observations. The committee cited the risk of incurring wasteful expenditure in form of interest and litigation costs arising out of unpaid certificates to contractors. People do work and they are not paid so they will go to court and so on. That is an expense for the taxpayer. The committee noted a large amount of advances, which were not explainable. We recommend as follows:i) UNRA should prioritise payables considering they cause losses to the taxpayer in terms of interest accrued; and ii) The accounting officer should come up with strategies to accelerate recovery of advances as a means of ensuring that UNRA rationalises the resources available. Loss of funds in interest on delayed payments to contractorsWe observe that the authority incurred nugatory expenditure to the tune of Shs 17 billion due to the delayed settlement of invoices from contractors, something that is totally unacceptable as it burdens the taxpayer unnecessarily. The interest expenditure was included as part of the annual expenditure for the year. We recommend that the accounting officer should ensure prudent financial management practices that prevent losses to the entity. Delayed valuation of infrastructure assets worth Shs 10.4 trillionWe observed that failure or delayed valuation of infrastructure assets renders the financial accounts doubtful and misstated. Therefore, it does not give a correct reflection of their physical state. Our recommendation is that the accounting officer should, in a period of six months from the adoption of this report, revalue infrastructure assets in accordance with the laid down policy. The UNRA has got to know what it is worth. That is the only way you can follow up. We think that in six months this should be done so that that matter is taken care of. Delayed completion of road projects There is a litany of explanations. I will move to the observations. Delayed completion of road projects increases the administrative costs of delivering the projects. We recommend that the accounting officer comes up with clear remedies and strategies to improve and strengthen the timelines of delivery of projects. These remedies should be provided to Parliament in six months’ time. Parliament hopefully shall follow up to make sure we get this feedback. [Mr Ssenyonyi]6817THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 18 JANUARY 2023Civil cases arising from failure to return residual titles that are worth Shs 6.9 billionI will just move to the observations. Madam Speaker, civil cases arising from failure to return residual titles pose a risk; in case of unfavourable court rulings, the authority is bound to incur more financial losses totalling approximately Shs 6.9 billion. For an example, somebody may have a title of 10 acres, but UNRA is interested in only five. So, this person hands over their title to UNRA. Then, UNRA keeps the title, yet, this person needs their title for whatever other business like bank loans. When UNRA delays to do that, people go to court. These are the losses we incur. Recommendations i) The accounting officer should ensure the authority adheres to the requirements for titling in the land acquisition and resettlement policy in order to protect the Government from avoidable financial loss due to litigation; ii) UNRA should accelerate efforts towards alternative dispute resolution to avoid incurring huge litigation costs. Many times, UNRA is not even engaging these people. They are your clients in a sense; they are running to court, but before that happens, why not to engage them as one of the avenues? We hope that UNRA gets to do this and provides feedback. We carried out oversight visits. We toured the Busega-Mpigi Road Project. There are details about that particular road. I will quickly move to observations. The committee observed that the project works were behind schedule, despite the extension that had been given. UNRA stated that at least an extra four years would be required in order to complete these works, yet, the initial completion date was 21 May 2022.The committee noted that despite the feasibility study that was carried out prior to the commencement of the project, the costs are expected to greatly escalate because of change of the project route. We recommend that the Auditor-General should conduct a special audit on the Busega-Mpigi Road Project and report to Parliament within one month from the adoption of this report. Madam Speaker, we thought this was a very serious issue. There was so much money involved, the extensions and all of that - a proper engineering audit and all of that needs to be carried out so that we are sure of what is going on.Kampala Entebbe Expressway maintenanceThe Government of Uganda, through UNRA, planned to find a contractor to operate and maintain Kampala Entebbe Expressway. Egis Road Operation was awarded the contract on 13 April 2021 to undertake the operation of a performance based management contract with an overall contract period of 60 months, extended by two years subject to satisfactory performance. These are the details: the contract value was Shs 122 billion, excluding V AT and contingencies. The commencement date was 24 May 2021, 60 months being the duration. I will move to the observations regarding this very project:1. Lighting of the expresswayFrom the time of commencement of usage of the expressway, lights have never been installed rendering it extremely dark in the night. As a result, accidents and numerous cases of robbery and attacks have happened after dark. The delay to light up the Entebbe Expressway is unacceptable. A road of this calibre cannot commence operations without lighting. Aside from the insecurity on the road, revenue 6818STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTcollections have been affected negatively since motorists avoid using the road at night.2. Tolling collection systemThe committee observed that tolling operations commenced on 8 January 2022 with NFC and cash payments with an average monthly collection of Shs 2.8 billion. With performance based operation and maintenance services, UNRA told us that every month, of the Shs 2.8 billion that is collected, they give over Shs 900 million and sometimes up to Shs 1 billion to Egis to maintain the expressway. We asked them what “maintenance” means and they talked about branding, routine maintenance, cleaning of the expressway, etcetera. The committee observed that – THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, did you get the particulars of the directors of Egis? MR SSENYONYI:  Yes.THE SPEAKER: You will have to give us that information.MR SSENYONYI: The committee observed that the operations and maintenance of the expressway, at nearly Shs 1 billion paid to Egis per month, is on the higher end. 3. The construction contractor (CCCC) is not fixing defects on a timely basis. For example, drainage issues, leaking underpasses and over-bridges and cracks in the pavement layer. 4. The contractor informed the committee that UNRA delays to pay for operations and maintenance. This affects the operations and also attracts interest. Recommendations1. The Auditor-General should conduct a special audit on the operations and maintenance of Kampala-Entebbe Expressway and report back to Parliament within three months of the adoption of this report.Madam Speaker, we felt that Shs 1 billion per month does not make sense and so, it is important that a special audit gets done.2. UNRA should erect lights on the entire expressway by the end of January 2023. 3. The construction contractor should fix the defects within three months and UNRA should provide an update to Parliament. The other road that we looked at was the Kira-Kasangati-Matugga road and the details are provided there - the contractor and contract value of over Shs 200 billion. We observe that this project is moving behind schedule given that it was supposed to end in December 2022. Compensation of PAPs is still on-going and utilities have not been moved in many areas along the project route to enable commencement of works. 4.  Construction works have negatively affected some neighbouring communities. In some cases, there is flooding. Recommendations 1. The contractor should expedite compensation of PAPs and road works.2. UNRA should give an update of timelines to Parliament within one month from the adoption of this report. 3. UNRA should prevail over the contractor to undertake measures that cushion the neighbouring communities from environmental hazards and carry out routine maintenance so that the road is motorable. Madam Speaker, when we visited some of these areas, the complaint was flooding all the time because of the construction work. So, people are saying, “We are happy about the road. We [Mr Ssenyonyi]6819THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 18 JANUARY 2023love it, but our homes flood and we cannot use them.” Therefore, it becomes a deleterious kind of situation. We are hoping that UNRA gets to take this action immediately. The other project was upgrading of Kigumba-Bulima-Kabwoya road from gravel to bitumen standard and the details are provided.I will just move to the observations:1. UNRA did not seek prior approval before allowing the contractor to carry out additional works in Masindi Municipality, which were not part of the initial contract. The story behind this, which is in the details, is that a contractor constructs the road and when they get to this municipality, they realise that they can do a bit more work. UNRA says, you can go ahead, but doing more work means incurring an extra cost, which was not part of the initial contract amount. Moreover, UNRA did not seek approval for this because you are committing the Government and you are not seeking approval. In our engagement with the contractors, they are actually contemplating taking UNRA to court. They are saying, we were given approval, we did more work, we want the money paid. The contractor has so far carried out approximately 85 per cent of the additional works without payment. We recommend that UNRA, together with the ministry of finance, resolve this issue of outstanding payments to the contractor within one month from the adoption of this report and report to Parliament on the same because the aspect of going to court worried us; it would mean paying a lot more than we should. The other was upgrading of Hoima-Butiaba-Wanseko road gravel to paved bitumen standards and the details are there. We observed that the works on this road supervised by UNRA appeared well done. However, there was silting at the roundabout; this is attributed to a design defect. We would like UNRA to fix the defects causing de-silting within two months from the date of adoption of this report. You cannot do a good road and then, you do not deal with the other attendant issues like de-silting. Madam Speaker, I will quickly move to general observations as I begin to wrap up. The committee made the following general observations and recommendations: 1. Presidential directivesOften times, H.E the President has written to UNRA directing the authority to award contracts to particular contractors. UNRA informed the committee that whenever they get a presidential directive, they choose to go to the direction of direct bidding with only this one recommended contractor. This, they said, is because their hands get tied since they cannot disregard the directives of the President. The committee notes that there is a reason the PPDA regulations provide for open bidding. This is to ensure fair competition and to safeguard the taxpayer by getting the most qualified contractor who will ensure value for money.2. The committee observed that disregard of the law does not augur well for legal entities like UNRA. Direct bidding cannot replace open bidding except under peculiar circumstances like emergencies and in this case, these were not emergency situations. Recommendations 1. Contracts arising out of Presidential directives should not be handed over to individual contractors without going through the process of competitive bidding. 2. UNRA should always abide by procurement laws. Presidential directives do not replace the law and where a contractor fails to deliver, UNRA management will be held solely responsible regardless of the directives. 6820STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTThe other issue, Madam Speaker, was corruption at weigh bridges. UNRA collects money at weigh bridges from trucks that exceed the set limit of load. However, sometimes trucks are left to go with a claim that the network, which operates the weigh bridges is faulty, leading to heavily loaded trucks going unchecked and also loss of revenue. Additionally, there are numerous reports of corruption at these weigh bridges. Some of the UNRA officials who operate the weigh bridges extort bribes from trucks, which are overloaded and they let them go without paying the set penalties. UNRA management admitted this and they said they are investigating some of their officials. Observations 1.  UNRA is losing a lot of revenue from the different weigh bridges because while some trucks are weighed, others are left to go alluding to poor network affecting the functionality of the system.2.  The act of workers at weigh bridges illegally collecting money from truck drivers and the overweight trucks left to go without weighing is a criminal act. This also has a negative impact on the roads, since heavy trucks cause potholes in newly constructed roads. Recommendations 1. UNRA should, within one month of adoption of this report, investigate these incidents and communicate to Parliament the findings and the action taken against these corrupt officials. Good enough, they admitted. 2. UNRA management should streamline the operations of the weigh bridges with the intention of eliminating all the loopholes that provide a breeding ground for the existing tendencies. In conclusion, UNRA’s financial health is sufficient to meet its obligations. However, there are risks to it. Risks include the build-up of arrears due to inability to meet its obligations on time, hence attracting interest costs. Further implementation of the budget had challenges as identified that could erode the attainment of the objectives in various projects being implemented. In addition to fixing the financial issues, UNRA needs to operate within the law to avoid mischarge, which is a diversion of funds contrary to budget allocations. There is a reason why the law forbidding mischarge exists. This law must be followed to the letter. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. As you have heard, UNRA is a very sensitive institution, an MDA that needs to be helped. I now open the debate. 4.38MR JOHN TEIRA (NRM, Bugabula County, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The report has highlighted several issues. Our biggest challenge in discussing UNRA is that we have a matter, which is pending before us that we shall debate whether it should be merged or not, but the report highlights very pertinent issues, which need our attention on whether we are in for the adoption of the report as a whole or not. I will refer to clause 3(6) where UNRA is supposed to do road maintenance. Along Jinja Road, 16 kilometres were supposed to be worked on and only 4.6 kilometres done. I am glad the Minister of Works and Transport is here. There is a particular pothole around Lugazi. Every evening, cars queue along the road to be repaired after hitting that pothole, which has been there for a very long time. When I see in the report that the delay is not because of finances, it really baffles me. Madam Speaker, there is just a level of negligence which individual officers of the institution should be held accountable - for failure to do their work. STATEMENT ON THE STATE OF FORESTS IN THE COUNTRY[Mr Ssenyonyi]6821THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 18 JANUARY 2023For example, take the cost of maintenance on the Kampala-Entebbe Expressway. The cost goes high because the contractor has failed to do the real periodic maintenance. When it rains, the Expressway in particular areas floods and this is an issue, which has been raised for several times, which should have been addressed by now. The issues raised in the report are pertinent and I stand to say that we adopt it. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Hon. Teira. You need not even go very far; the potholes within town - even at the gate of Parliament. (Laughter) I complained about the potholes on my road and the minister promised to work on them. To-date, nothing has been done. 4.41MR JACOB KARUHANGA (NRM, Kibanda South County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the chairperson COSASE, for the report. I am particularly interested in Kigumba Town Council’s four kilometre road network that was supposed to be paved. We are aware that it was part of Kigumba-Bulima Road section. For several months now, the contractor abandoned the site. Listening carefully to the chairperson’s presentation, it is mentioned that UNRA’s financial health is okay. I am wondering whether they failed to get money or there is another problem. Probably, we would listen or get some clarification from the minister. I beg to be clarified. Thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: The minister may not have all the answers as of now, but we will get a Treasury Memorandum to the effect and we need actions taken as recommended by the committee. So, are you saying we adopt the report?MR KARUHANGA:  Madam Speaker, as I said, I fully concur with the chairperson. THE SPEAKER: Thank you.4.42MR ALFRED EDAKASI (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like also to agree that we adopt the report. However, I would like to raise three things. One is on the BKK Ferry - and I just hope the minister can take action. Those of us on that side - Serere, Kaberamaido, Buyende who are supposed to benefit from this ferry – for the last many years, we have had hope, but we see in the report that only 82 per cent was accomplished by 2020 and yet, our people are waiting for this ferry. It would be nice to just know what the current update is. Secondly, Madam Speaker, on the delay of titles, I had an experience that confirms this. On the road off Entebbe to Garuga, which was built, I two or so years ago, the organisation for which I am the board chairperson – Fellowship of Christian Unions – gave land to UNRA so that the road could be constructed, but up to now, the title has not been returned and even the residue title could not be transferred. Currently, we actually have a land grabber on that land and I imagine there are very many cases like that. There should be an action. I propose that UNRA comes up with a timeline. When they receive a title, after compensation, there should be a timeline for them to return the title; it should not be left indefinite. Thirdly, during the time of due diligence on the roads and the people who are affected, there were kibanja holders who are holding kibanja  on titled land. This particular land I am talking about also became a victim. There was a kibanja  holder who claimed holding a kibanja  on titled land and yet, he was compensated. I imagine that the consultation should have involved the titled owner. There are many such cases related to the same story. We need to take action on this - if someone claims to be a kibanja  holder on freehold, the freehold title owner should be consulted before this person is compensated. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 6822STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTTHE SPEAKER: Thank you.  4.45MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Omoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the report – THE SPEAKER: As I told you, you have 20 minutes. Maybe before we go far, when we look at page 33 on the issue of Presidential directive, I would suggest that we amend and say, “Contracts arising out of Presidential directives should be handled in accordance with the law.” I put the question. (Question put and agreed to.)THE SPEAKER: Hon. Catherine -MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson for the report presented to this House and I fully associate myself with the recommendations of this report. Madam Speaker, regarding the delay of completion of projects due to failure to secure the right of way, I appreciate the recommendation given by the committee on fast-tracking projects and also setting a timeline for projects. A number of times, we have faced challenges with UNRA projects during construction of roads due to failure to set the timeline and the failure to secure the right of way. It is very important that we move to the extent of setting timelines for projects so that we are able to avoid some of these unnecessary delays. This will put UNRA on the right track of ensuring that they secure the right of way first and move to ensure implementation of projects. Madam Speaker, secondly, on the special audit that was recommended on the operation and maintenance of Kampala-Entebbe Expressway, I fully associate myself with the committee recommendation for a special audit on the costs of maintenance. Finally, on Masindi Municipality, UNRA went ahead and allowed the contractor to do extra work, which was not covered in the contract agreement and the issue of outstanding payment has come up. The committee has recommended that this issue of outstanding payment be resolved. However, I did not see any recommendation on the decision of allowing extra work to be done before seeking approval. Madam Speaker, it is crucial that an approval be sought before authorising a contractor to move ahead and start implementing a project. Otherwise, these are avenues that give room for people to “eat money” that belongs to contracts and projects. I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. You need to take note of the issue of land titles. How can we have titles, which are not in our name? Do you own property there? We need those titles to be transferred to the name of UNRA, which is conclusive evidence that the ownership is with UNRA or else, you will get some mafias claiming that land.4.48MS CHRISTINE APOLOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to appreciate the chairperson for the report. I also appreciate you, Madam Speaker, for recognising the work that we did. I was one of the members of the ad hoc committee and we have been wondering why you gave us the assignment. So, as you said that the Attorney-General should engage with us, I want to say, strongly, that if this Parliament were given an opportunity to listen to UNRA, Members would really see the essence of having UNRA remain as an entity. (Applause) THE SPEAKER: Hon. Christine Apolot, can I rephrase your statement to “if the Attorney-General and team were given a chance to listen to UNRA”? Parliament listened to UNRA, through you, and we are content with your report. That is why we adopted it. So, it is the other team that should listen to UNRA.6823THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 18 JANUARY 2023MS CHRISTINE APOLOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hope the Attorney-General is taking note of it so that when it comes back to us, we do not spend a lot of time. Madam Speaker, there is an issue of PAPs that was identified by the committee. My proposal is that since you directed the minister to come up with a comprehensive statement for all PAPs across the country, we should also push that when the minister is presenting, he should bring details about the PAPs identified by COSASE. Finally, Madam Speaker, presidential directives, to some extent, work. Many times when the President visits our districts – and we are the ones who invite him – he is also conditioned by certain factors to make certain pledges. For the case of Kumi Municipal Council, there was a section of the road the President directed should be tarmacked. When UNRA came to the district, the municipal and district authorities were engaged in a meeting and UNRA confirmed that they were going to tarmac 14 kilometres within the municipality. Madam Speaker, to-date, it is about one and a half years, no action has been taken. May I find out the plan the minister has to support UNRA to have this implemented across the country? Thank you very much.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 4.51MS MELSA A V AKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this golden opportunity. I take this opportunity to thank COSASE very much for this comprehensive and elaborate report. Madam Speaker, our roads have been facing the same challenges that COSASE has observed. There are terms used by UNRA like “road under procurement” or “a project, which is yet to be funded”. For example, Koboko-Yumbe-Moyo Road has been “under procurement” for three years. Madam Speaker, I seek advice from the ministry on how long it takes for new roads to be “under procurement”. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, Yumbe-Zombo Road has been “under procurement” from the beginning up today. At least, give us a promise on that road – do you have information? I hope you are not a member of the committee.MR SEBAMALA: On that particular issue.THE SPEAKER: Okay. Give us the information.MR SEBAMALA: The Koboko-Yumbe Road procurement started in 2015. As of today, they have just - I think they are evaluating expression of interests. That is one of the roads you are working on. Could you give us more assurance, honourable minister?THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, have you heard?4.54MS MOURINE OSORU (NRM, Woman Representative, Arua City): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to appreciate the report. Before I put forward what I wanted to say, I would like  to give information to the minister that for the Koboko-Yumbe-Moyo Road, I remember in 10th Parliament, we were given money by the World Bank  -THE SPEAKER: It was a grant. MS OSORU: Yes, it was a grant. They were going to work on Koboko-Yumbe-Moyo Road. Up to today, Madam Speaker, there is nothing. THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the question would be: where did the grant go? Did it come or not? If it came, where did you divert it to? Did you take it to Amuria? (Laughter)MS OSORU: Secondly, Madam Speaker, I heard in the presentation by the chairperson – and indeed, it is true that money was allocated for Atyak-Adjumani Road and a portion of that 6824STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTroad was done. However, money for the road from Laropi to Afoji was also appropriated, but I think the tsunami came from somewhere and swept the money away. Therefore, I want to know from the honourable minister where that money for the road from Laropi to Afoji is. Lastly, UNRA only remembers us when it is time for elections. In Arua City, you have abandoned your own road at the border points. We all know that at the customs we have at every border point, we collect revenue for Government. However, for the last five years, honourable minister, you have abandoned your responsibility as UNRA and we are losing revenue there. You come here and talk big, but by the end of the day, you do nothing on the ground. (Laughter)Madam Speaker, I noticed something on the Entebbe Express Highway. There are guardrails that have been vandalised. I think people are cutting them as scrap and selling them. Even the wire mesh that was there, I see much of it has been cut off. As UNRA, you have a lot of work to do. Yet, we even have police patrolling that place. I wonder what time thieves vandalise this road. In the report, the chairperson informed us that the money meant for other projects was relocated to other fast-moving projects. I would like to know who authorised UNRA to relocate funds from slow-moving projects to fast-moving ones. Secondly, this tendency of relocating money to other projects will slow down. This is how other projects begin to struggle. This is how we just dump money at the expense of our taxpayers. You begin to claim that other projects are bigger than others. When will those other projects be completed? That is my concern. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: I think the only mistake UNRA made was not to act as per the Public Finance Management Act. They ought to get permission from the PS/ST to move money from one activity to another. Hon. Aza, all the people who have spoken are from West Nile, this is now Sebei. Hon. Aza, are you okay? Can I hear from Sebei.4.58MR WILLIAM CHEMONGES (NRM, Kween County, Kween):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the report. I have listened to it; it is really comprehensive and has touched on all the issues that we go through in our constituencies. First and foremost, I also want to add that UNRA is doing very well among the other entities that we intend to rationalise. For example, in Sebei, if you look at our terrain, if it were not UNRA, I doubt that we could be having any roads now.What I want to comment on is that the report left out something very important, which I think should be added. For example, in our area, when we are allocating money to maintain roads, Sebei should be looked at critically because our area is hilly. You are either slopping or you are climbing and the soils – (Interruption)MR NANGOLI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give information. He is my neighbour. Actually, it is the entire Elgon subregion, not only Kapchorwa. That is it. I wanted to give you that information so that you carry on. Thank you. MR CHEMONGES: Thank you very much, my honourable colleague. What I am saying is that the entire Elgon Region is hilly. You are either sloping or climbing. When you come to the allocations we always do here for our road maintenance, even the machines you gave to districts for road maintenance - I can assure you that the one of Kween has been down for the last one year. You cannot blame us. The problem is the terrain. The machine works under very tough conditions. Even where it is flat, still, it is packed with loam soil, which is soft. When it comes to sending money to the districts in Sebei, you can only maintain the road during the dry season between November and April. However, from May to November, you cannot do anything because of the soils. [Mr Osoru]6825THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 18 JANUARY 2023Therefore, the issue of sending money quarterly does not work in Sebei. We need to be sending all the money in November –(Interjections) - yes, this is the fact and a lot of money. We should actually be given four times what people get. (Laughter)Finally, I thank Government first of all, together with the UNRA for the road that has been done from Kapchorwa to Swam. However, on this road, we were given some kilometres, which were meant to support the town council roads, but these were taken to support the terrain. Right now, for example, Kween has four town councils. All those are completely useless. You cannot use them because once it rains, you cannot connect to the main road on which we have spent a lot of money. The main road is there, but our farmers cannot transport items from the village to the main road. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, I hope you are taking notes. You heard the issue of Yumbe-Koboko-Zombo Road. 5.03MS HOPE NAKAZIBWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also thank the chairperson of COSASE and the members for the detailed report. I also concur with most of the members that we badly need to have UNRA remain a standalone institution. However, the observations that have been made by the committee are realistic and are the very issues that our people in Mubende and various other regions within Uganda are facing. We have PAPs on Mubende-Kakumiro-Kagadi Road, which have up to now not been paid. We have held several meetings with UNRA that have raised the hopes of the people of Mubende, but the hopes were watered down by their unresponsiveness after the very many meetings that have failed. About the delayed payment of funds to UNRA, we have a road that is under maintenance from Mityana to Mubende.  This work has stalled for many months and we have had a number of accidents on that road. We recently visited UNRA with Hon. Kabanda, the MP of Kasambya and we were told that they do not have money for this project. Madam Speaker, we need the minister and the responsible agency to speed up this project.  The other thing is the Lusalira-Nkonge Road. Like the COSASE Chairperson presented, we have a number of projects that, sometimes, the President directs they should be given to particular people. These should follow the law, like the Rt Hon. Speaker has guided so that we see these projects moving. Our people were told not to develop the land anymore, if it is on the road side. They have over waited and nothing has been given to them; neither have we seen the road works start.Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and beg the minister and the responsible authorities to take charge so that we can have all these projects worked on. Otherwise, I thank the committee chairperson and the members. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable minister, the findings are recurring from year to year. These PAPs were not only paid in the last financial year, but also in the previous one. We really need to have this resolved. If you put money value to this - these people need to use money.5.06MS SYLVIA AWAS (NRM, Woman Representative, Nabilatuk): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report presented. However, I want to give information to the Ministry of Works and Transport. Before you procure a contractor, ascertain that there is availability of funds. You do not need to contract when you are not sure about the availability of funds because delayed procurements or delayed payments accrue interest, yet, this is a loss to the Government. I do not know whether the Minister of Works and Transport and the Executive Director of UNRA are seeing this. You should only award contracts when you are sure about the availability of funds. 6826STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTThe other issue is on road maintenance. Looking at Nabilatuk District, the road from Namalu is in a sorry state. It is impassable because there are a lot of potholes and because of this, accidents are happening almost daily. The contractor who is given the contract to maintain the road says he has not been paid the money and so, he cannot continue working. Why did they award that contractor? The directive of the President is a law in itself and it is according to the law. It is up to the technical people to apply the law because once he directs, you are supposed to apply the law. So, either you go for single sourcing or direct procurement. I do not see any problem with the directive of the President. Nobody should take UNRA - that recommendation should be withdrawn. Thank you very much.THE SPEAKER: No, we amended the recommendation and it was approved. 5.08MS PASKA MENYA (Independent, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish you a Happy New Year, 2023. We continue praying for you to keep safe. I rise on the same concern of roads. We appreciate the report from the committee. However, I want to be specific on the road from Puranga–Pajule–Acholibur to Kitgum. This road has been under procurement for years I cannot tell now. The road from Puranga to Awere is a very short distance. I am surprised that we always get reports about limited funds. This national cake that we have in Uganda is supposed to be shared equally. Why wouldn’t we, the people of Pader, also get the national cake to clear that short distance from Puranga to Acholibur? The President is very concerned about the issue of economic transformation, but with the poor road network, how are we going to achieve it? When you talk of connecting the country to the neighbouring countries, we see this road being the most suitable road to connect Uganda to South Sudan. However, the short distance from Lira to Acholibur, connecting to Kitgum, Kitgum – Nimule-South Sudan is not being worked on. Honourable Minister, take this as a matter of concern. This is – (Interruption)MR MACHO: Thank you, my colleague.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will need to finalise this debate.MR MACHO: Thank you very much, my colleague. Madam Speaker, the issues of border connections are very important because cross-border trade will help our people, as a region, to curb the issue of unemployment. That is why I want to use the same opportunity to request the Government of Uganda - Kenya has tarmacked its road from Kisumu to Matayos. If that road is connected, our people will make a lot of money through cross-border trade. At the same time, the road from Tororo-Mungula –Buteba-Busia - the Kenyan side has already tarmacked its side. Kenya is like London. I wish they would tarmac this urgently. It will boost business across Busia, Uganda and Kenya. Thank you, Madam Speaker.MS MENYA: Thank you, colleague. Madam Speaker, as I summarise, Pader District is one of the districts that have given out land for the construction of an industrial park. With the poor road network, I am afraid investors are not going to take on these industrial parks. Honourable minister, please, I continue appealing to you to take this seriously. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 5.12MR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the roads constructed by UNRA in the country. Some of them are very good with wonderful road signs. However, I appeal to UNRA that every time they finish a road, they should sensitise the road users on the signs. People do not know the difference between a staggered line and a full line or a solid line. They overtake - this is one of the causes of the many accidents in this country. It is important that we do sensitisation. [Ms Awas]6827THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 18 JANUARY 2023Secondly, on the compensation, there is variance in the values that are given. The road, for instance, from Masaka to Mbarara; when they were compensating and they reached Lyantonde, the price appreciated after that. It is the same even when they are dealing with the transmission lines. There is a problem we need to investigate, Madam Speaker.  THE SPEAKER: Hon. Enosi Asiimwe, have you heard that?  DR BWANIKA: Yes, the price changed in Hon. Enosi Asiimwe’s place. Thirdly – THE SPEAKER: It is only about the market price. The land in Lyantonde may be more expensive than the one in Bukedea.MR BWANIKA: Madam Speaker, you are aware that as you come near Kampala, land appreciates. Thirdly, the road from Masaka to Mutukula is a road that opens Uganda to Tanzania. This road takes us to the Port of Dar-es-Salaam, which is very key –(Interruption) MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I too want to applaud the chairperson and COSASE. Listening to the presentation, I am so concerned about the insensitivity of some of the UNRA officials. On the Kyotera–Mutukula Road, since 2003, no proper works have taken place on that road; not even basic maintenance. Currently, we are losing an average of more than 10 people a week. We are competing with very many trucks. Daily, we have releases of over 200 commercial trucks competing with boda bodas, people walking on foot as well as cyclists. Madam Speaker, this issue has come to this Floor since July 2021 and the Prime Minister promised that works would commence. I want to put it across again. Kyotera-Mutukula road is in a pathetic state.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have heard the issue of Kyotera. 5.16MS FLORENCE KABUGHO (FDC, Woman representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to know from the minister if there is any provision of emergency intervention in case of a disaster occurrence in Kasese. Honourable minister, two months ago, a road from Katoru to Kayanzi was badly affected by floods. Kayanzi is a landing site within a national park and there is no other route to access that landing site. Schools are about to open and there is no school on that landing site. It has always been hard for the people on this landing site to get food and access other services. Honourable minister, I came to your office and reported this issue. You told me you were going to get in touch with the district engineer and up to now, nobody has set foot on that route. I pray you give me an assurance that you are going to handle this issue.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister is a muko from that place. 5.17MS VERONICA NANYONDO (NUP, Woman Representative, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the chairperson and the committee for the report. My concern is about the Presidential directives and pledges. I think there should always be a time limit on these pledges that the President makes. For example, in Bukomansimbi District, we have Kyabakuza-Matete road. You were there when the President made that pledge very many years ago. This road is very important because we have Kibinge Coffee where we get the best Ugandan coffee for export. We use that road, but it is very difficult for the farmers to access the market.Madam Speaker, I pray that you order the Committee on Government Assurances to follow up on these pledges so that they are implemented in time. Thank you, Madam Speaker.6828STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT5.18MR JOAB BUSINGE (FDC, Masindi Municipality, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support and thank the committee chairperson and his team for the good report. In the same way, I would like to thank UNRA for the job well done. In my opinion, they made a good mistake by prioritising the roads in Masindi Municipality.On record, the work was not done to its conclusion because some prioritised roads were not done. The good thing is that the report has indicated that UNRA is not short of funds.  We pray that UNRA continues to complete the pending roads. Madam Speaker, thank you very much. 5.20MR KENNETH KIIZA (Independent, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The report came out with one key issue of delayed compensation of PAPs affecting land acquisition. A case in point is the Masindi-Biso road, a 48 kilometre road, which was supposed to be completed this year. A lot of PAPs have not been paid, especially sugarcane growers. When we wrote to UNRA, they wrote back by saying that they do not have commercial value for sugarcane crops. This has delayed compensation and at the end of the day, the road works are going to take longer than expected, hence causing financial loss to the Government of Uganda. I beg to submit.5.21MR IBANDA RWEMULIKYA (Indepen-dent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportu-nity. I also thank the chairperson and the team for the wonderful report. I appeal to Members to adopt this report.I am very concerned about delayed implementation of some projects like the Karugutu-Ntoroko road. Since 2016, this road has been on procurement up to now. The other day, honourable minister, I asked you in the committee what was happening with the procurement of this road. It is the only tarmac road that we would have in Ntoroko. The Ministry of Works and Transport constructed a good one-stop border point to facilitate trade between Uganda and Congo, but the fact is that the road is very bad. I would like the minister to tell us today so that as people’s representative, I take the news to Ntoroko that this project is not attainable. Secondly, is the issue of delayed payment of PAPs. The fact is that when PAPs are mentioned and evaluated, they are not willing to do any other work on that piece of land. For almost six years, there has been no development and people are not using their lands because they are PAPs, which is very disturbing. The last is about the issue of payment of contractors. Madam Speaker, the other day, UNRA told us that they have Shs 599 billion and that that is the money that they need to pay contractors. It accrues to almost Shs 200 million interest per day. This is haemorrhage. It is very disturbing and we really want to beg Parliament that in this appropriation, we should add these monies so that UNRA pays the contractors so that Government does not continue losing money. Madam Speaker, Shs 250 million per day is a lot of money, which can do a lot of work in hospitals and schools. I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Aza, you are older than all of us here. You are more mature than all of us here, but your conduct does not show your age. You can speak, but do not repeat that conduct anymore as long as Hon. Tayebwa and I are in this Chair. Have you heard?5.23MR TOM AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Most obliged, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and my colleagues of this august House. Chairperson COSASE, thank you very much for the report. Honourable Minister of Works 6829THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 18 JANUARY 2023and Transport, I would like to draw your attention to page 14 of the report under quarterly performance report, accuracy of performance reports and delays in project implementation and specifically, to project 0265 on upgrading Atyak-Moyo-Afoji road, 104 kilometres and a 1.2 kilometre bridge across the Nile at Laropi connecting Moyo District to Adjumani District. The Laropi Bridge project and the Laropi-Afoji road have been delayed because money that was meant for the projects was diverted as shown by the report. For instance, COSASE realised that Shs 1.8 billion was diverted and it said Shs 2 billion was spent on the output for the construction of the road and the bridge. Madam Speaker, this has led to delays – THE SPEAKER: Hon. Aza, the money which was diverted was supposed to be for that bridge. MR AZA: It was part of fast-tracking the bridge. Yes. This has led to –THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, take note of that. MR AZA: This has led to delays in the fast-tracking and commencement of the construction of the bridge in Moyo District, thereby leading to untold suffering of the people on issues related to transport, communication, movement of goods and services. I will be very grateful, honourable minister, if you could help us and fast-track the construction of the bridge across the Nile in Moyo District. I thank you very much. 5.26MR MICHAEL KAKEMBO (NUP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me add my voice to thank my honourable colleague, the chairperson of COSASE and the minister. I am rising to bring to your attention one major road in Entebbe. Entebbe International Airport is not safe and it has not been safe for very many years. All of us use Entebbe International Airport. We have a road that rotates around Entebbe International Airport that can act as an emergency exit for Entebbe International Airport. In case of an emergency, that is the road that we all need for the safety of all Ugandans, including the President who resides in my constituency. I want to bring it to your attention that this time, we should give it priority because a good road around Entebbe International Airport is good for all of us who are using the airport. I beg to move. THE SPEAKER: Hon. Gilbert?5.27MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the chairperson of COSASE, for the wonderful report. Madam Speaker, looking at Kampala-Entebbe Expressway road toll payments, as Government, we need to be very serious. What they are charging is quite high and every time you are passing on that road, you must pay. Even when someone moves on that road more than five times, they must pay. I pray that it is changed; let it be paid once. Madam Speaker, looking at the economy, the situation is not good at all. That payment is extremely high. Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson – THE SPEAKER: How much is it? [Member: “Shs 5,000.”]MR OLANYA: No, it depends on the vehicle. Small vehicle is Shs 5,000 and big cars are Shs 10,000. Trailers pay Shs 20,000. THE SPEAKER: That is on the road toll?MR OLANYA: Yes, on the road toll. THE SPEAKER: Or the Expressway. MR OLANYA: Yes, on the Expressway. THE SPEAKER: Now, if you do not want to pay Shs 5,000, why don’t you use the main road? (Laughter)6830STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTMR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, I am happy that Government has done well. Using that road is more convenient there is no traffic jam and more so, when you are in a hurry. So, we are really happy for the road, but if Government can consider payment at once.Finally, Madam Speaker, I thank the chairperson for bringing to our attention the compensation by UNRA before the contract is awarded. In many instances, UNRA or Government awards contracts to the contractor before compensation, when they are not sure whether someone would accept for the right of way. It is very paramount for Government to clear the issue of compensation before contracts are awarded. We have seen many contracts being delayed – (Member timed out.) MS SANTA ALUM: Motion –THE SPEAKER: There is a motion. Honourable members, I have been sitting here from 2 o’clock. You have been moving up and down like a cattle keepers.5.30MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I move my motion, allow me to thank the committee for their very good report. It is very insightful and has a lot of information. Members have spoken and it has touched many of us.Madam Speaker, I stand to move a motion that we close the debate. A lot has been mentioned and we need answers from the ministers because we have many issues in our constituencies; in my district, UNRA has not worked on any road. Madam Speaker, I move that the debate be closed so that we listen to the minister in charge of roads. I move. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is the motion seconded? (Members rose_)The motion is seconded. Honourable minister, can you respond to queries raised?5.31THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, I thank the chairperson of COSASE for presenting a very objective report. When the roads are good, they are good for all of us and when they are bad, they are bad for all of us. THE SPEAKER: And when they cause accidents, they cause accidents for all of us. MR ECWERU: They affect all of us. So, I thank the committee for a very objective paper. I would be doing a disservice to this House if I attempted to say I can adequately respond now. I want to request you, Madam Speaker, to allow me just to say a word and then, I request this House to allow me to proceed and come back with a Treasury Memorandum, which explains adequately what needs to be done, arising from this report and also including some of the issues that the Members have indicated incidental to this report. If that is okay, I want to say, on the onset to all of you chairpersons of committees and members – UNRA, for example, is an agency of the Ministry of Works and Transport. In future, if it pleases you, Madam Speaker, it would be prudent to request the committees when they are interfacing with these agencies, to kindly bring the policy makers on board so that the minister is there and the minister listens in and he can be able to make an input because some of the issues that the agency management will comment on or state border on policies. So, it would be good for me, for example, if you are discussing UNRA, if you are discussing Civil Aviation Authority or any other agency that is under the supervision of the ministry, I would want to request that we are made to know so that we accompany them. Madam Speaker – (Interruption)DR BATUWA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. In line with having policy makers participate in that meeting, there is an amendment that I saw viable to this report, about salary discrepancies in UNRA. UNRA is 6831THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 18 JANUARY 2023an institution with workers earning in excess of Shs 100 billion – THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, are we opening the debate afresh?DR BATUWA: No, I am asking – THE SPEAKER: Is that one of the issues that was raised in the report? DR BATUWA: It is an issue that was –THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you conclude?MR ECWERU: I will be happy to come if you allow. Already my teams were sending messages and they have given me a report, that in my opinion, is not adequate and therefore, allow me retreat and come back with a Treasury Memorandum, which will adequately answer all these. I wanted my sister, particularly from Arua City, to know that we try. She said that the minister comes and talks big here - it is my height.  (Laughter) I really try to do whatever it takes. I will do whatever it takes to come and adequately address your issues. Where need be, I am also going to - like I said before, in all our field visits, we will endeavour to come with the Members of Parliament so that they can get our feelings and we hear from them and then, prescribe remedies that are acceptable to all of us. Thank you so much.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, when we are doing financial accountability on matters of audit, it is always the accounting officer who is responsible. Therefore, for you to be invited, it would not have an impact because under Article 164, it is the accounting officer accountable. However, the budgeting period is when we invite the minister to the sectoral committees. Now we are doing a post-mortem examination of what was given to the institution. Are we in agreement, Attorney-General? Unless you just want to go and admire the committee.MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, on the law, you are spot on.  What the minister was saying was for them to participate and just listen when these views are being collected. However, Madam Speaker, you have nailed it appropriately, legally, as usual. (Laughter) Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I wonder why UNRA did not give the committee the letter, which they wrote to the PS/ST as well as the response from the PS/ST on the virement. I do not know why it was not given to the committee, but I have a copy. The virement was authorised by the PS/ST. However, you need to respond to it in your Treasury Memorandum. MR SSENYONYI: This is just quick information, Madam Speaker. The letter that was given to us had two problems. One, it was written by the PS/ST, but the Act says it is the minister. Secondly, the PS/ST granted approval for a very small fraction – it was about Shs 2 billion – but the entire virement was a total of Shs 124 billion. So, even if it was approved by the right person, it was just for Shs 2 billion -THE SPEAKER: I have a virement of Shs 134 billion and Shs 58 billion here. MR SSENYONYI:  They did not give us that one. THE SPEAKER: That is why I am saying I do not know why they did not give it to you, yet’s they have the record clear. Hon. Avur?5.38MS JANE PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving the people of Pakwach a chance to speak on this.  THE SPEAKER: Are you starting the debate?MS PACUTO: No. (Laughter)  Madam Speaker, I thank the minister for the wise decision to come back to this Parliament on a number of issues that have come up. However, I would like to bring it to the attention of the minister and the Attorney-General, as they 6832STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTcome back, that Article 26 of Constitution of the Republic of Uganda – and this is in reference to delayed payments to PAPs – states that:“Protection from deprivation of property (2)(b)(i)… prior to the taking of possession or acquisition of property; and (ii) a right of access to a court of law by any person who has interest or right over the property.” Honourable minister and Attorney-General, there are a number -(Interjections)- No, I am addressing both of you. It is not only with UNRA, but also with other Government projects either earmarked or already being implemented. Whereas other PAPs have been paid, you may find one individual who refuses to agree with the Government for some reasons and the project cannot take off, yet, it is provided for in the second part of the law that I have read. I would like you to inform this Parliament, as you come back, about how you are using the second part of this law to ensure that projects take off in time. Thank you very much.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (COSASE) on the Auditor-General’s report on UNRA for the Financial Year ended 30th June 2021 and other reports that have not been considered by the committee be adopted by this honourable House. (Question put and agreed to.)Reports adopted.THE SPEAKER: I now adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.(The House rose at 5.41 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 19 January 2023 at 2.00 p.m.) [Ms Pacuto]