


Wednesday, 10 January 2018

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I will cause an amendment to the Order Paper to accommodate the statement that was promised by the Minister of Health on the situation in Nakaseke, so that we all know that is going on there. She is coming to make the statement. Clerk, make the necessary adjustment on the Order Paper to accommodate this statement. 

Honourable members, I have also had a request from the Leader of Government Business. They are preparing a tribute motion for the late former Archbishop of the Church of Uganda, Archbishop Livingstone Mpalanyi Nkoyoyo. As soon as it is ready, this House will pay tribute to the departed.

This afternoon, Dr James Makumbi is also being buried. I gave communication to this effect yesterday; today is the burial. Many of you will not be able to attend the burial because we are here. The programme was made very quickly, but we are with them in spirit. We know what Dr Makumbi has done for this country. We will find time and also pay tribute to him in the not too distant future. Thank you.

Yesterday, I read the President’s letter and asked the minister in charge of this Bill to be ready to come and lay it formally here so that I can refer it to the committee. It is not on the Order Paper but that is something that must be done today. I hope the minister was briefed and I hope the Clerk extracted the documentation and forwarded it to the minister as I had directed. Thank you. 

2.09
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance concerning what I witnessed at Entebbe International Airport last night.

There is construction going on at the airport and we do not know when it will be completed. From what I witnessed, there is a lot of suffering and frustration caused by the way things are being done there. They have blocked the road where the ordinary passengers used to pass and the only route to the check-in is for the Very Important Persons (VIPs) section. 

The ordinary people, especially the disabled and aged, have to move a long way on foot. There is also no provision for emergency and the only passage to the check-in point is the stairs. One time I found four young men who were trying to assist passengers who had heavy baggage. However, they all disappeared after that because they were just helping. Therefore, there was nobody to help other people that were coming in. 

There was a white man who went up the stairs pulling his suitcase with him and it seemed rather heavy. He was limping but I did not know what the problem was. When he got up the stairs, he shouted, “I want a carrier”. We looked at him and thought he was mad. Some young man then run from somewhere with a cart and when he arrived there, the mzungu said, “Look at me, look at my leg”. He had one good leg but his left leg had a piece of metal on which he was walking. He asked, “How do you expect me to bring luggage up the stairs and there is nothing to help us?” When I looked at the man with the one leg, I felt very sympathetic; he was frustrated and I was not happy at all.

Is this situation going to continue like that? I do not know what is happening today and I do not know what has been happening since construction started. I witnessed that last night. Are we going to have that type of treatment for the disabled and the aged? 

I asked the askaris who were manning the route where the VIPs pass if they allow the disabled and the aged people to pass there. By the way, it is a long route. They answered, “If they ask, we allow them.” However, who is guiding them? Their vehicles drop them at the parking lot and they have to walk all the way to the check-in point, and it is very frustrating.

I felt like crying because of that man, and maybe it is happening to our people every day. Can’t there be something done by the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) and Ministry of Works and Transport in order to help people on a daily basis? Maybe we can have carts waiting for them at the entry point from the parking yard. Something must be done; otherwise, nobody is going to talk for them. 

That is my submission. I am asking this yet the Minister of Works and Transport is not here and Civil Aviation Authority, of course, is not here. However, my call should reach them so that something is done for the disabled travellers. Thank you.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As a former Foreign Service officer, I would like to say that the foreign policy of Uganda has changed. One of the cardinal jobs for the Foreign Service officers is to attract tourists to Uganda. I was speaking about sustainable tourism in Haiti and trying to invite people to come and visit Uganda. The person who was seated next to me was a delegate from Romania and he had climbed Mt. Rwenzori; he said, “Uganda is such a beautiful country but the facilities in Uganda are a big problem.”

Therefore, when you hear such a statement about what is happening at our airport, what is that white man going to tell people about Uganda? This should be taken as a very serious matter. We must improve. We are trying to convince tourists to come here because we have got a beautiful country, national parks but such a thing can be a minus for this great nation of Uganda. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, it is not really a procedural matter (laughter)

2.15
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to register regrets for any inconveniences caused. Sometimes, these are inevitable inconveniences, which we also go through elsewhere when renovations are being done. In our neighbourhood, here in Kigali, we had to go through inconveniences. 

I want to assure the country that this will stop because the project has a timeframe. However, this does not mean that we will not check on what is happening so that we can improvise and reduce on the inconveniences. Therefore, I will talk to hon. Bagiire, who is the Minister of State for Transport, to make sure that he is on the ground because Entebbe is our eye as Uganda. We have to make sure that our guests and our people are not inconvenienced.

MR WILLIAM NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are three issues which I would like the Government Chief Whip to clarify. It is clear that people are being inconvenienced in a way that is de-humanising. The issues for clarification therefore are: One, when do you promise Ugandans and other people who are using the airport that the inconvenience will end? 

Two, isn’t it possible for you as Government to put in place measures that can actually help the people who are affected, especially those whom the honourable member for Bubulo talked about. How can they be helped in the meantime? What needs to be done?

Three, we have gone to other airports. Even when they are doing the construction and rehabilitation, you still get a service that is different. Why isn’t it applicable in the Ugandan situation?

MS HELLEN ASAMO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Mutonyi for her observation. I would like to provide information. 

Services for people with disabilities are available at that airport. However, if you do not demand for them, they do not give you. Some of us know our rights. Some people have observed when they travel with me that I use a wheelchair and I will always get a wheelchair waiting for me when the distance is long. They even have a carrier, which can bring you from the ground to the level of the plane. However, they do it selectively. That is for Uganda. 

Other countries are very sensitive. In South Africa, if they know there is a disabled person on the plane, they will even tell you, “Madam, wait here, we are coming to pick you”, and then they take you in a special car. In Uganda, we have these services but it is very selective. What she is saying is correct because even if you are disabled, there is a carrier to take you up to the plane. 

Madam Chief Whip, maybe we need to ensure that the people working at the CAA are able to notice that this person needs assistance. Recently, they even opened an office on your left, which is dealing with issues of special needs. Therefore, there is a critical need for Uganda to wake up. We passed the Building Control Act here but regulations are not out up to today and issues of disabilities were included therein. 

Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give is about selective treatment. Even with the lifts; I demand that I want to use the lift and then they ask, “Who is this one demanding?” I tell them, “I am a Ugandan, I need to use it and I know where it is”. I even point to them where the lift is and I am taken to the lift with a wheelchair and somebody takes me up to the plane with my luggage. Therefore, I think it is just an issue of negligence and not renovation. Thank you.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I would like to thank you, hon. Asamo and hon. Nzoghu. I just want to state that this is a temporary inconvenience. 

Hon. Nzoghu wants me to tell you the exact date when the renovations will end. I am not in a position to tell you today. However, I am sure that the minister in charge has a programme and he knows when the airport renovations will be stopped and when the site will be handed over to Government.

Your question was why we should not make special arrangements for people, as you have observed in other areas. Before you stood up, I had committed myself to instruct the hon. Bagiire to go to the ground. By so doing, he will be able to detect whatever is not going right, so that he can advise the team on the ground to rectify anything that they will have discovered. 

I am not in a position to give many details but, Mr Speaker, the inconveniences are regretted. We have to make sure that we do all it takes to ensure that our people travel in a very comfortable way. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you hand over a road to a contractor to build it, it is the responsibility of the contractor to make a diversion. If you hand over a site like the airport to a contractor to build something, it is the responsibility of the contractor to find convenient ways to replace what was in existence. 

This is not a matter that we should waste time on. Just make sure that ramps are provided quickly. It is not a matter that should be debated. It is only decent that you do that. Ramps are the easiest thing; timber-made ramps are easy to do. Why are they making people suffer like that? Sometimes you make life so difficult. 

2.23 
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

As of Sunday, 7 January, about 16 heads of cattle were stolen from Adilang Subcounty, Agago County, Agago District. Eleven of them have been recovered but about five of them are yet to be recovered. As I speak, a few minutes ago and also early this morning and yesterday, I spoke to the LCV chairman of Agago District and the LC III chairperson of Adilang Subcounty, which borders Abim, Karamoja region. They are in Kotido trying to recover these other five that are missing out of the 16 that had originally been stolen.

Mr Speaker, we spoke about drought and drought mitigation plans previously. I am being very careful not to stereotype the whole of Karamoja, but what is happening in Karamoja now is that there is drought generally in the area and the herdsmen are moving away from their area looking for greener pasture, water, among others. As a result, they are grazing their animals - because they do not have land for grazing - in people’s gardens, where we had planted trees, among other things. This is a big concern. 

There are rumours, even when I was there for Christmas, that some of these herdsmen are carrying guns. This is causing a lot of fear. Therefore, other than the animals being stolen and crops being destroyed, people in the region are living in fear. 

Mr Speaker, this is a problem that I have experienced from childhood where every time when there is drought, our brothers come to the area. I understand the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Government has had a plan in place. It is a big problem. It is paralysing the administration of the district as most of the leaders are running around trying to settle the issue. I think this needs to be addressed by the minister responsible so that our people understand how to deal with this matter.

Another issue is that previously, the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces (UPDF) was stationed in the areas of Lamwon, Lawereng in Adilang Subcounty. I understand they have now been transferred from the area and this has given room for some of these cattle rustlers to enter the area without restraint.

Mr Speaker, I thought I should bring this matter to the attention of Parliament because it is causing a lot of fear. It is still at the beginning and I think it can get worse because last year, we had a situation where some people were killed. Thank you.  

2.26
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, a lot of effort has been made to make sure that communities are sensitised to live in harmony with their neighbours. I have participated in many of those meetings. I promise that we shall continue to engage our brothers to make them appreciate the fruit of good neighbourliness.

The Minister for Karamoja Affairs and the Minister for Water and Environment are not in this House. Probably, they would have told us the current programme that they have to make sure that we have enough security on the ground, including the police and UPDF, and the plan to ensure we have enough water in Karamoja. Mr Speaker, I will inform the ministers concerned.

MR JULIUS OCHEN: Mr Speaker, last year we discussed the issue of Karamoja, particularly with the neighbours. Government responded by saying that they were taking action to address the inadequacies of water in the area. 

Kapelebyong County borders a big chunk of Karamoja. Listening to the Government Chief Whip giving clarification to what my brother raised, I would have been more comfortable if the Government Chief Whip briefed this Parliament about the extent of Government’s response towards addressing the water crisis in Karamoja and the neighbouring districts, right from Acholi up to Kapchorwa. I pray that the Government Chief Whip gives us a detailed briefing as to what extent Government made an attempt to address this problem last year. 

As I speak now, I am going to meet the Karimojong from Bokora. We have scheduled a meeting tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. between Kapelebyong and Abim. I expected the minister to have assured Ugandans about the level of response in terms of water in Karamoja and the neighbouring districts, so that when we are engaging our brothers from Karamoja we know the exact level of intervention from Government.

This year, again the same Karimojong are coming for water and we do not deny them because they are our brothers -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on clarification but now you on-

MR OCHEN: Mr Speaker, I would like the minister to clarify in that direction because it is important. That was last year -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then raise the question.

MR OCHEN: Mr Speaker, I still ask the minister to go into detail to explain to this Parliament the level of their intervention as Government.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I am sorry, colleague, that you had high expectations but I was responding to Dr Makmot because he raised some specific issues. However, your concerns are very wide. As you are aware, the issue of Karamoja has been discussed for many years. President Amin and other Presidents tried - You are aware from where we started to date. 

I have personally participated in that region for eight years. I can tell you that the situation is improving day by day. I am sorry that I cannot at this particular moment give a detailed report as we have ministers holding these portfolios. Before you came up, I had requested that I inform the ministers in charge because the matter is multi-sectoral. It concerns water, security and local government since we normally use the elders to get everyone to come together. 

Since it is multi-sectoral, allow me to inform those concerned to come and give us a detailed report about what is on the ground and then we will see where the gaps are and devise means to bridge them.

2.31
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance. 

While the whole country was enjoying the festive period in December and the end of the year, my people of Mbale were mourning. They lost their livelihood and businesses in an inferno that gutted a carpentry workshop and the buildings close to the workshop. All the machinery in Nkoma was burnt down to ashes. As if that was not enough, the people of Bugwere Market also lost their merchandise in the fire. 

I am appealing to Government to come and help the people of Mbale like they have done in other places. I am glad that the two ministers of finance, planning and economic development are here. They helped people of Park Yard and Owino markets. The people of Mbale will also appreciate if you can come to our aid. Thank you. 

2.33
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Sorry about what happened to the people of Mbale; it is very unfortunate. We will study the case and come up with a solution. However, colleagues, our only challenge is that the Treasury is not expanding and there are quite a number of demands. However, we shall take that as part of our pressure on the Treasury. This is because we cannot see our people in unfortunate circumstances like that and we do not react as a Government. 

I would like to appeal to you, my colleagues, that we must teach our people how to protect themselves against fire. It is not very expensive to protect our businesses against fire. If they had small a fire extinguisher, maybe the story would have been very different - (Interjections) - As I said, I do not know the case and I am only giving guidance. 

I am told that it happened at night. That is very unfortunate. We do not expect people to – As I said, without prolonging the argument, let us study the case and then we shall see how best to help our people who were unfortunate during the Christmas holiday. Thank you.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 157 (2) AND (4), AND 184 (2) AND (4) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

2.36
THE GOVERNMNET CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I would like to designate the following Members of Parliament to serve on the Committee on Science and Technology under rule 184 (2):

1. 	Hon. Robert Sekitoleko Kafeero – Chairperson 
2. 	Hon. Fred Bwino Kyakulaga – Vice Chairperson 

The members are hon. Wamala Nambozo -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, that list is mixed; it is not one committee. Would you like to come back to it? I can see the first person is on physical infrastructure, the next ICT, then natural resources - 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Those are their previous committees.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are those the previous committees? So, which is the current committee?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I beg your pardon, Mr Speaker. Hon. Kafeero Sekitoleko Robert was on the Committee on Physical Infrastructure but now he will serve on the Committee on Science and Technology. 

The Committee on Science and Technology was a standing committee but when we revised our rules, it was made a sectoral committee. Therefore, we had to get the following Members to serve on this committee: 

    1. Hon. Fred Bwino will continue on the committee as vice-chairperson; 
    2. Hon. Wamala Nambozo, who was from the Committee on Physical Infrastructure;
    3. Hon. David Ronnie Mutebi from the Committee on Natural Resources;  
    4. Hon. Peter Sematimba will continue to be on the Committee on Science and Technology; 
    5. Hon. Lawrence Onegiu from the Committee on Natural Resources; 
    6. Hon. Cissy Namujju from the Committee on Foreign Affairs; 
    7. Hon. Anthony Ssemuli will continue in the committee; 
    8. Hon. Mwine Mpaka from the Committee on Gender; 
    9. Hon. Timuzigu Kamugisha from the Committee on Trade; 
    10. Hon. Charles Ngabirano from the Committee on Natural Resources; and 
    11. Hon. Nabeta Igeme from the Committee on Natural Resources.
I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the names. I put the question that those Members constitute the Committee on Science and Technology.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, after the amendment to the effect that the Committee on Science and Technology was made a sectoral committee, there were Members who were serving on two standing committees and our rules do not accept that. I have now designated them to one standing committee. I beg to designate the following Members to different standing committees:

1. 	Hon. Denis Obua, Committee on HIV/AIDS;
2. 	Hon. Fred Bwino, Committee on Human Rights;
3. 	Hon. Innocent Kamusiime, Committee on Equal Opportunities;
4. 	Hon. Doreen Amule, Committee on HIV/AIDS;
5. 	Hon. Alex Burundo, Committee on Equal Opportunities;
6. 	Hon. Wamala Nambozo, Committee on HIV/AIDS;
7. 	Hon. Denis Sabiiti, Budget Committee;
8. 	Hon. Richard Gafabusa, Committee on Equal Opportunities;
9. 	Hon. Cosmas Elotu, Committee on Human Rights;
10. 	Hon. David Mutebi, Budget Committee;
11. 	Hon. Lillian Nakate, Committee on Equal Opportunities;
12. 	Hon. Geoffrey Macho, Committee on Equal Opportunities;
13. 	Hon. James Waluswaka, Committee on Human Rights;
14. 	Hon. Charles Ngabirano, Committee on Rules and Privileges;
15. 	Hon. Peter Sematimba, Committee on Human Rights;
16. 	Hon. Anthony Ssemuli, Committee on Rules and Privileges;
17. 	Hon. Mwine Mpaka, Committee on Equal Opportunities;
18. 	Hon. Cissy Namujju, Committee on Rules and Privileges;
19. 	Hon. Lawrence Onegiu, Committee on Rules and Privileges;
20. 	Hon. Timuzigu Kamugisha, Committee on Government Assurances;
21. 	Hon. Robert Sekitoleko, Committee on Rules and Privileges;
22. 	Hon. Betty Awor Engola, Committee on Government Assurances;
23. 	Hon. Hellen Kahunde, Committee on Government Assurances;
24. 	Hon. Rose Mutonyi, Committee on Government Assurances

I beg to designate.

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, I seek clarification from the Government Chief Whip. I heard some names of honourable members being designated to the Committee on Human Rights. However, this committee already has 26 members and I know that there are also other committees which are heavily subscribed to. The clarification I seek is whether this new designation of Members to these committees has taken into consideration the existing membership of the same.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Yes, we have done so. We know our quota and that is what we have followed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. I put the question on the names of Members who have been designated to the respective standing committees. I put the question for your approval. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. According to the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, whenever committees of Parliament are given an assignment, they are supposed to produce a report within 45 days. Remember that on 27 and 28 November 2016, there were massive massacres of people in Kasese by Government. Mr Speaker, your Chair then directed that the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs goes to Kasese and investigates the circumstances under which the people were killed. It is now over a year and the report of the committee is not yet out.

Last year on 27 November 2017, the people of Kasese who lost their dear ones wanted to hold a memorial service and they were dispersed. They are now asking themselves where they will get a remedy when the report of Parliament is not yet out but also when people who want to mourn their dear ones are depressed. What is the way forward on this? People in Kasese are still crying and mourning. Where is the problem?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the chairperson here? Are you the chairperson? 

MR MBOGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I would like to give to my colleague is that just as he has said, our Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs travelled to Kasese, picked the information and after that, we analysed it. What is left is simply for us to be given a slot on the Order Paper and we present the report. Therefore, this means that our report is ready. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Designation from the Independents.

2.46
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the Rt Hon. Speaker, I would like to designate the following –(Interruption)– 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The vice-chairperson has given a response. Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence that you give guidance on this because we are not really feeling okay in the region. Given the circumstances, one year is too long compared to the 45 days within which they were supposed to produce the report. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence and beg that you give direction on this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable vice-chairperson, could you please finish with this matter and bring it back to the House. How much time do you need?

MR MBOGO: Mr Speaker, the report is ready. If you can give us a slot next week on the Order Paper, we can present it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the report cannot be ready if it is not supplied to the Clerk? If the report is ready, it gets ready by being submitted to the Clerk and not by being signed by members and kept in some - 

MR MBOGO: Mr Speaker, we finished the signing and everything. If you can give us a slot next week, we can present it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the copy? Please, submit a copy to the Clerk and then it will be added onto the business that we will have.

MR MBOGO: We are delivering it to the Clerk.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What kind of transport do you need? (Laughter)

MR BARYAYANGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to designate the following Independent Members of Parliament to the following sectoral committees: 
 
    1. Hon. Jacklet Atuhaire, MP Sheema, Committee on Science and Technology;
    2. Hon. Waira Majegere, Bunya County East, Committee on Science and Technology;
    3. Hon. Joshua Anywarach, Padyere County, Committee on Science and Technology;
    4. Hon. Ishma Mafabi, Youth Representative, Eastern Uganda, Committee on Science and Technology;
    5. Hon. Julius Opondo, Bujumba County, Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; and 
    6. Hon. Michael Mawanda, Igara East, Committee on Foreign Affairs.

Mr Speaker, still on your behalf, I would like to designate the following Independent Members to the following standing committees:
    1. Hon. Jacklet Atuhaire, MP Sheema, Committee on Equal Opportunities;
    2. Hon. Waira Majegere, Bunya County East, Committee on Human Rights;
    3. Hon. Joshua Anywarach, Padyere County, Committee on Human Rights;
    4. Hon. Annet Nyakecho, Tororo North County, Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Diseases; 
    5. Hon. Ishma Mafabi, Youth Representative, Eastern Uganda, Committee on Government Assurances; and 
    6. Hon. Michael Mawanda, Igara East, Committee on Government Assurances. 

I beg to designate. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the names of Members who have been designated to those committees. I put the question for the approval of those names to be in those committees.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have health activists from Uganda National Health Consumers Organisation and Action Group for Health, Human Rights and HIV/AIDS (AGHA) Uganda. They are here to observe the proceedings of this House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

We also have this afternoon exchange students from the United States of America attached to the Uganda Christian University in Mukono. They are here to observe our proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

2.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (COOPERATIVES) (Mr Frederick Gume): Mr Speaker, the sugar industry is one of the fastest growing industries in Uganda, contributing over Shs 290 billion in taxes annually. It also employs over 60,000 Ugandans directly and indirectly. The industry also produces over 100 megawatts of electricity from biogas, of which over 40 megawatts are supplied to the national grid. 

Currently, there are 30 licensed sugar mills in the country although only 11 are in operation while the rest are at different stages of development.

Mr Speaker, over the last 10 years, sugar production has been increasing by nearly 12 per cent annually, making Uganda the only sugar-surplus producing country in East Africa. 

Sugar prices are majorly driven by sugarcane prices. Eighty per cent of the cane supplied to the factories comes from out growers. The price of cane moved from Shs 85,000 last year to Shs 175,000 in 2017. Early this year, sugar prices hit a maximum of Shs 8,500 in some parts of the country. This was majorly caused by prolonged drought that stretched for a period of nine months from 2016 to 2017. The drought led to the reduced supply of sugar for crushing, thus reducing sugar output. 

The prolonged drought did not only affect sugar prices, but most of the agricultural food crop prices increased; for example, at that time, maize flower was selling at Shs 1,200 and it increased to Shs 2,500. Beans also increased from Shs 1,500 to Shs 4,000 per kilogramme; a bunch of matooke increased from an average of Shs 8,000 to Shs 25,000; rice increased from Shs 3,000 to Shs 5,000 per kilogramme; and Irish potatoes increased from Shs 80,000 to Shs 150,000 a sack. With the end of the drought, prices of agricultural products are slowly stabilising. 

Honourable colleagues, in early December 2017, we held a meeting with the sugar millers to resolve the high sugar prices. As a result of this engagement with the millers, sugar prices both at the factory gate and retail reduced from Shs 8,500 in May 2017 to Shs 3,600 per kilo for bagged sugar and Shs 4,500 for premium packed sugar currently.

In the past few days, I have read in the newspapers allegations that Cabinet had approved importation of duty-free sugar. In response to these allegations, the ministry clarified to the public that such an approval had never been granted by Cabinet. Importation of duty-free sugar will not only hurt the sugar industry but also the out growers of sugarcane whose livelihood entirely depends on supply of sugarcane to the factories. It will also affect electricity distribution and other industries that depend on supply of sugarcane to the factories. Importation also affects electricity distribution and other industries that depend on by-products of sugarcane such as distillers of spirits, other beverages, bakeries and the animal feed industry.

Colleagues, to minimise the volatility in the sugar subsector, the ministry is working with this august House to improve the Sugar Bill with the view of fast tracking its enactment. When the Bill is enacted and implemented, it will lead to stability in the sugar subsector.

Currently, the ministry continues to monitor sugar supply stocks from millers, distributors and retailers to ensure that the retail price of sugar remains stable. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, that is a ministerial statement and under our rules, it attracts limited debate and debate starts now on that statement.

3.02
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minster has given a response to an issue that I thought needed something urgent. The statement of the minister is talking about a Bill whose contents we do not even know. Would he like to tell us how that Bill is going to help to sort out the price of sugar? What is the provision of the Bill that is going to sort out the price of sugar? 

The minister has gone ahead to give an excuse that the prices of a whole lot of other goods went high. I think he has missed the point. Would you like to tell us what you are doing to bring down the price of sugar? Thank you.

3.03
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minster for that eloquent submission. My only problem is with the structure of his presentation because when I was trying to put a feel to his presentation, it occurred to me that he was doing more of lamentation.

Honourable minister, the issue is very clear. What is it that you or your ministry is doing about the high sugar prices? I was expecting the minister to cluster his interventions into categories - the short term, medium term and long term. Mr Speaker, just as you know, these interventions were clearly missing. 

Honourable minister, sugar is not a luxury but a necessity. People in the pharmaceutical industry also need sugar as well as those in hospitals. We need very clear terms. 

In addition, by short-term interventions I mean, what is it that your ministry can do in terms of reaching out to the people right now. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.05
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am finding difficulty in taking in the statement by the minister because of the way it has been presented. It is not convincing on whether it will help us get out of the problem of high sugar prices.

The minister stated that the problem has been due to drought that affected sugarcane, but his solution is that there is a Bill, which is supposed to come to this Parliament. Now, I am failing to understand how this Bill is going to help us sort out the problem of drought so that we can increase on sugarcane production and have more sugar.

The other challenge is that the prices of sugar are not the same across the country. In some parts of the country, it is high but it is low elsewhere. In his statement, that does not even solve the problem.

Therefore, honourable minister, I think this statement that you have read was not well researched. We want you as a minister to come with a solution that these are the actions that you have taken to reduce the prices of sugar that are skyrocketing in the short term, medium term and then long term. However, whatever you presented here I think is a raw deal for this Parliament. I would want the minster to immediately come and give us a statement that convinces the nation and the world. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.07
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have read the statement from the minister but I do not think it a serious statement at all. I come from one of the sugarcane growing areas with many out growers. However, with this kind of commitment and statement, I think the sugar problem is far from getting over. 

I have interested myself in speaking to the sugarcane manufactures particularly the sugar factory in Lugazi. I would like to state here and assure this House that the production of sugar in this country is not insufficient at all but the management of the distribution chain is still the major problem. I would like to assure this House that I am reliably informed that there is a major disparity between the ex-factory and the retail prices that are not based on business mathematics but on selfishness. This is due to lack of a policy that can ensure that customers are not exploited. It was a major mistake for Government to set prices in a free enterprise economy. This is because even when the supply is stabilised, there has been reluctance to get down these prices.

There is another issue that we need think about seriously. If you recall, in 2011 when we had the Mabira Forest saga, Government encouraged out growers to get into sugar production as one of the steps towards increasing production. They even assured people that they were going to get them incentives and support them. I can reliably say that nothing of the kind has been done and indeed these out growers are up in arms with the millers. 

I think if we are to solve these problems, we need to get committed. Otherwise, these short term prescriptions for a long-term problem when the market is growing shall not get us very far. Thank you.

3.09
MR EMMANUEL KALULE-SSENGO (NRM, Gomba East County, Gomba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am one of those who are not satisfied with the minister’s statement. In the first place, he has not told us whether they have taken steps to increase production. Now, even if they increase production, sugar production does not grow overnight; it will take a lot of time to grow.

The minister said that they are not prepared to import because producers are going to complain. In the statement, I had expected him to tell us whether the producers are deliberately hoarding this sugar so that the prices go up but he did not say anything about that. Therefore, I was of the view that in order to alleviate the suffering of our people, let the ministry allow people to import sugar in the short run while the production is being stepped up so that once the production is satisfactory, then we stop the imports. 

I do not see any problem in allowing our traders to import sugar. We have ever done it in the past and the situation normalised. I have a feeling that some people have an interest in these high sugar prices because this has been going on for a long time and nothing has been done. There is no clear explanation. 

Mr Speaker, I would request that the Government allows people to import sugar so that the prices can come down. I thank you.

3.12
MR ABACACON GUTOMOI (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the minister was not very serious because the people’s concern out there is: why is it that after every general election, prices of sugar go up? If you remember very well, honourable minister, this saga did not start with the last general election; it was even worse in the 2011 elections. 

It was also serious recently. You remember that some Members of Parliament tried to import sugar from outside - hon. Okot Ogong and hon. Kahinda Otafiire were victims – just to try to mitigate this situation. They are still suffering with the problem of that importation. 

Therefore, when you tell us you are coming up with a Bill, I do not know how long it takes to grow sugarcane. If it is true there is lack of land, I think these people have gone ahead to get land in Amuru, unless that has not been successful. So, will that address the sugar prices in this country? 

More so, it happens immediately after the general elections and here you are talking about the drought. During the wet season, what happens so that sugar prices are not high in all the parts of this country? The prices increase only after the general elections. Can you explain that to the country? What you are telling us is abnormal indeed and not acceptable. Thank you very much.

3.13
MS DOROTHY NSHAIJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the minister for having accepted to answer the statement that was requested for by a fellow Member of Parliament. However, I need clarification from him about two issues.

One, I know that because of the economy of this country, the prices of all the products are being set by the forces of demand and supply. This is because we are a laissez-faire country, where the Government does not set the prices of the product but the forces of demand and supply set the prices. In his statement, he has told us that it is only Uganda in the East African region that is producing enough sugar and has surplus to export. I would like to know, if we have good production and even surplus, how comes the price of sugar is still high when we have surplus, which we export outside this country? 

Secondly, he talked about the problem to be sorted out by the Bill and yet I know that within the Bill, they wanted to reduce the number of factories in an area for a certain reason. We have previously heard here that some people said Members were given money to support that Bill in order to increase on the number of factories in this country. This is because there were people who wanted to monopolise the production of sugar. I would like to get clarification from our honourable minister on how that Bill is going to sort out the problem if we are producing enough. We have adequate supply but the prices still remain high?

Lastly, he talked about drought and according to my understanding, I know that when there is drought, it is a good time to harvest sugarcane. Now, I do not know how that is going to cure the problem of high prices when you are talking about the Bill. I thank you.

3.16
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister has made a statement in regard to sugar prices and he hinted on sugarcane prices having been raised. I would like to disagree with the minister. I represent a constituency, Masindi District, whose main cash crop is sugarcane. The minister stated that sugarcane prices per tonne rose from Shs 85,000 to Shs 175,000. Mr Speaker, I do not know where the minister picked that from; possibly, from one side.

In Masindi, sugarcane prices rose from Shs 128,000 to Shs 141,000. I would have expected the minister to clarify that and inform the country that these prices are not standard throughout the whole country. That would have helped us to look at the issues and find out why sugar prices have remained high. I know that the cost of producing a tonne is much higher and so the minister needs to really take keen interest in looking at those indicators and telling us why the sugar prices have risen.

The minister has talked about the issue of handling the prices. However, he is not telling us that as we speak now, there is illegal sugar being imported into the country. As we speak now, some factories are threatening to close just because of this illegal sugar being brought into the country and yet the cost of producing a tonne of sugar in the country remains high and these factories cannot compete on the open market. Can the honourable minister help us investigate the sugar being imported into the country and sold at a lower price?
 
Mr Speaker, the minister has also talked about the drought hitting the country and yet we have sugarcane in abundance. It takes 18 months for sugarcane to be ready to produce sugar. Actually, there is a variety which gets ready at 16 months. As we speak now, in Masindi the sugarcane at times remains in the plantation for even 24 to 26 months because the factory cannot absorb all the sugarcane that we are producing. Now, for the honourable member to say that we import sugar from other countries, it will mean that we shall be doing a disservice to our farmers. 

I wish the Government would go ahead to make sure that you help these manufacturers to absorb the sugarcane being produced in the country so that we support the farmers. For us to import would mean that we are actually going to move away from the local content policy, which supports our local farmers to be able to produce for these factories. Therefore, I disagree with the honourable member who proposed that we import sugar. 

I know we have sugar. We have been exporting sugar to South Sudan, Democratic Republic of Congo, Rwanda and even to Kenya at a lower price. Now, how do we start turning around to say that we should import? Mr Speaker, that would actually be killing the local farmers. We should not think of importing what we can produce in the country yet other countries are safeguarding their farmers and local producers. Why should we go ahead to give our money to other people? 

Honourable members, I implore you not to support the idea of importing sugar. We have enough sugar and we have the capacity to produce. (Applause) The factories which are in this country can produce sugarcane. Let the factories be empowered to produce more to full capacity.

Mr Speaker, I expect the minister to respond to these issues but in future, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should come up with a sugarcane Act. As we speak now, we do not have any law safeguarding sugarcane. Actually, we grow sugarcane at our own risk. Even the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) programme does not provide seedlings. The National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) does not have the capacity to produce seed cane. Actually, the seed cane is imported from other countries, and this should go on record.

Our Government should, therefore, look around. If this is an industry which is supporting the country’s economy, we should invest in it and make sure that we stop importing seed cane. We have our technical people. The researchers at NARO should be given that opportunity, and they have the capacity to produce the seed cane. They have the capacity to even treat the seed cane. When we had Booker Tate, the British company which took over to reconstruct and rehabilitate Kinyara after the war, it put in place a research centre to treat the sugarcane and made sure that when you are planting, you plant when it is clear of any disease. 

Mr Speaker, I would expect the minister in charge of trade to respond to these issues and clear the scenario because I do not see any crisis. We have only failed to manage the industry. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when you have the member for Masindi District speaking for that long, I get tempted to start regulating time because we need to close this within the time provided for in the rules. Can I have the member for Manjiya County using the time more economically, please.

3.23
MS JOHN NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister’s statement leaves a lot to be desired. When you go through the statement, he says that he held a meeting in early December 2017 with the sugar millers and an attempt was made to reduce the prices in May 2017. This leaves one wondering whether this time round the 2017 calendar year underwent a mutation and began operating in reverse, so that a meeting was held in December and price reduction was realised in May. This is the lie of the devil. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, you realise that around the same time the skyrocketing prices of sugar were being attributed to drought, around the same time our neighbours, Kenya, – incidentally, I come from the border – also had serious issues of sugar shortage and they were importing from here. You remember the noise that came from the Opposition that was championed by none other than the leading Opposition leader, Raila Odinga, and our President responded by saying there is free movement of goods and services, including sugar, courtesy of the East African Protocol that was signed. That was the time when we had drought here.

Mr Speaker, the minister has fallen short of enlisting other factors that are responsible for the shortage of sugar hence the skyrocketing prices of sugar. One of the factors should have been hoarding. There could a deliberate effort by these millers to hoard sugar to dictate prices so that they make a killing. 
He mildly mentioned electricity distribution. I expected him to castigate our minister here who promised an immediate reduction in the tariffs of electricity but they have not reduced. This could be a factor as to why the prices remain high. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.26
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First, allow me to appreciate the minister for the report. 

I would like to speak as an accountant, knowing very well that when you are coming to a unit cost of an item, you have to make certain considerations. You are talking of a kilo of sugar, for instance, and there are certain considerations that you have to take. First, you have to think about the cost of labour. The people who are working in Kakira, Mayuge, Kaliro and the like are always crying that they are being underpaid. It means the person who is in the sugar factory is making a lot of profit and should not deserve to charge us highly.

Secondly, there is the cost of power. You said very well that these factories are generating over 100 megawatts of power. That would have helped us to lower the cost of electricity. You can imagine, they are the ones supplying power to the country, therefore the cost of electricity is already knocked off. So, where is this price coming from? Is it a ghost price, because most of the costs of production are really low?

The other issue is taxation. We have not sat here to increase any tax on sugar from the time I came to the Tenth Parliament. That should be building towards the high prices –(Interjections)– Did we increase? I think this must be looked at seriously. 

If you talk about drought, that was an issue last year. Uganda is naturally gifted; rain always falls and whenever I go to my constituency, it rains around Kakira. Therefore, where is the drought coming from? (Laughter) I think there is a problem. I am not saying that the minister is the one responsible, but something has to be done about this.

There has also been this fighting between factories. Kakira is blaming Mayuge and Mayuge is saying it is Kaliro. There was a Government policy that if you are opening a factory, you do not open it a stone’s throw away from the existing factory. Therefore, if these ones are opening near the old ones, who allowed these ones to open? I think someone has to take responsibility and something has to be done. 

My recommendation stands like this: First, the issue of hoarding is very difficult to deal with; the only cure is that we must open the borders and allow for importation of duty-free sugar.

Secondly, we should close the borders and not allow anybody to export sugar from Uganda to any country for some time and you will see what will happen. These people who are hiding sugar are somewhere – (Interruption)-

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: I think the Government must get interested. If as a factory the sugar you produce here and export to Kenya is cheaper than the sugar you are selling on the market here, there must be a problem. If your cost of production is down and you are forced to export and you are exporting it cheaply and here it is expensive, where is the problem?

MR AOGON: Thank you for that information –(Interjection)– Before you come up with further information, let me first concretise this. 

Honourable minister, we need to close our borders. No sugar should go out of the country when my people are malnourished because there is no sugar. We should not export sugar now. Secondly, we must allow duty-free sugar to come into the country. We will have known where people are hoarding sugar from. This hoarding business cannot help us. 

These days when I go to my constituency, I find people eating sweet potatoes with water and there is no tea. When you ask them what the problem is, they will tell you, “You see, doctors are saying you should not take a lot of sugar” and yet the problem is that they cannot afford sugar. 

3.30
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. Allow me to thank the minister for his statement in respect to the sugar prices.

Mr Speaker, with all due respect to the concerns that have been raised, including the fact that the statement is wanting, allow me to take a controversial position and if it offends anyone, I apologise in advance.

Mr Speaker, as captured in the minister’s statement, the sugar price has increased from around Shs 8,000 or so - I am not quoting the specific price. The issue I see here is that we are talking of low income consumers who generally buy a kilogramme of sugar for purposes of consumption - for tea and other things - as opposed to sugar for industrial production. 

I appreciate that we need sugar at a low cost for production purposes. However, if you look at the international trend from a health perspective, the World Health Organisation is currently advocating that the rate of consumption of calories per day should be decreased from 10 per cent to five per cent. In Canada, where I was, right now because of diabetes, sugary drinks are being discouraged; it is a policy of government to discourage people from consumption of sugar.

To the contrary, I seem to see us advocating very seriously that these prices should be lowered. What I see in lowering the prices is more consumption of sugar. I have read research by Makerere School of Public Health which says that from 2018 to 2030, there is going to be an increase of 69 per cent of type 2 diabetes in Uganda and generally in sub-Saharan Africa. This is a very alarming problem. This should be a concern for the Government and Parliament; we should try to reduce the consumption of sugar especially this local consumption as opposed to sugar for other products or medicines, among other things.

Therefore, my controversial position is that if you look at the UN or the best practices from other countries, I think that the price increase, if we have not taken that step, is a blessing in disguise. The minister’s statement that is lacking is also a blessing in disguise because by keeping the price of sugar high, we are in effect saving very many lives because type 2 diabetes is a very serious problem. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.34
MS ROBINA SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to the positive criticism of the minister’s statement by the honourable members. I would like to say that the statement, like one of the honourable members said, leaves a lot to be desired. When I read through the statement, I saw a lot of defence mechanisms embedded in the report. 

We would have expected the minister to critically analyse the causes of the rising sugar prices and not to contradict himself in the statement. He mentions that we are the best in Africa in production, there is a twelve per cent increase and that we also have a lot of surplus and we can sell outside. However, he then goes on and dwells on the fact that there was prolonged drought and also defends himself by mentioning that potatoes, bananas and so on were also in shortage. This august House would have brought this up as well if it was a big issue.

I think that he should go back and critically assess the causes, look at the effects and come up with practical solutions and strategies on how we can help our communities to access sugar at a reasonable price. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have exceeded the time for discussion of the ministerial statement. I am going to allow the minister to respond.

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (COOPERATIVES) (Mr Frederick Gume): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I have taken note of all the observations. They are worth considering especially at this critical time when we are discussing the Sugar Bill.

The other issue, which I will not take lightly, was the issue that was raised by my honourable colleague when he said that the statement falls short of the calendar. I would like to re-state what I read for my honourable colleague: “In early December 2017, I held a meeting with the sugar millers to resolve the high sugar prices. As a result of that engagement with the millers, sugar prices both at the factory gate and retail reduced from Shs 8,500 in May 2017 to Shs 3,600 and Shs 4,500 for premium packed sugar currently”. Therefore, “May” and “currently” are different things. 

What I am trying to say in the above statement is that there was an effort emanating from the meeting that reduced the sugar prices from Shs 8,000 in May to currently Shs 4,500. Therefore, it is not negativity in the calendar assessment –(Interruption) 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for giving way. I would like to seek clarification from the minister. We know that there is a high demand for sugar in this country and having heard from the submission of Members, particularly from my colleague from Agago, indeed the health issue is of paramount importance.

I would like to seek clarification from the minister and Government because there is already pressure for the consumption of sugar in terms of the large quantities needed for commercial purposes and probably as a country we need it for profit-making. Why hasn’t Government, therefore, taken on the alternative, which is healthier, and that is bee-keeping, to produce enough alternatives to sugar for local consumption and leave sugarcane as a profit-making venture in this country? We could put beehives in all the forests in this country to even prevent those who are cutting trees and we produce enough honey as an alternative, which is healthy. 

MR GUME: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my honourable colleague for seeking that clarification. Honey compared to sugar; that would be a way to go but it also has its own stages. 

We have also taken note of the health hazards raised. I have also taken note of the cost unit analysis, the issue of raw materials from the out growers, and the overwhelming view that sugar is hazardous to our health. I have also taken note of the overwhelming view that it is not important for us – because it will not be good for this economy - to import sugar which is duty free at the expense of the one manufactured locally. 

Therefore, all in all, we are going to compile all these details, submit them to the committee and come up with a comprehensive report. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I apologise to Members who are not able to speak but there are other matters coming up.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.38
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I lay on the Table the report as stated on the Order Paper and the seven trophies won by the Parliament of Uganda during the Eighth East African Inter-Parliamentary Games, may I request, with your permission, the honourable members who represented this Parliament and made it possible for us to be crowned as the champions of East Africa in 2017 to rise up for recognition.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please rise. Honourable members, this was not for all Members of Parliament to rise. (Laughter) I have seen the honourable member for Kwania, who has never even touched a football, also rise. (Laughter)

MR OBUA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. For the record, the honourable member for Kwania participated in the tug of war. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there also a trophy for tug of war?

MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Parliament of Uganda sports delegation to the Eighth East African Inter-Parliamentary Games held in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania between 1 and 11 December 2017 for the record of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, this is a report we will not find time to debate; it is an information report. Can you say something very briefly? I will bend the rules for you to just be able to give a short report on what happened.

MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, in a nutshell, parliaments within the East African Community, under the auspices of the East African Community (EAC) Secretariat and the East African Legislative Assembly, conduct annual inter-parliamentary games. All the parliaments within the EAC region participate in various sporting disciplines as agreed by the Speakers of the respective parliaments within the partner states of the EAC. For the last five years, Parliament of Uganda has always been crowned the champions. (Applause) 

These games are held in line with the theme, “Widening and deepening the East African Community integration” using sports. Members of Parliament, accompanied by a regulated number of staff, meet on a rotational basis and compete in various disciplines. The disciplines are netball for the ladies, football for the men, tug of war, golf, among others.

I should put Parliament of Uganda and Uganda on notice that arising from the fact that this particular tournament is held on a rotational basis, most likely in 2018 the host will be Uganda generally and the Parliament of Uganda in particular. That will be decided when the Speakers of the respective parliaments in the member states of the EAC meet and resolve on the venue. In 2017, we were in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania; in 2016 we were in Mombasa, Kenya; in 2018 it will most likely be Uganda. 

In a nutshell, that is what I can say. However, I take this opportunity to thank you and the Parliamentary Commission. Without the Parliamentary Commission, I strongly believe that our Parliament would not have been participating in these games every year. Last year, we were about 40 MPs but the Parliament of Kenya sent a delegation of 216 Members of Parliament. Despite the fact that they were 216, the 40 Members of Parliament from Uganda were able to bring all these trophies and they made Uganda proud as we were crowned the champions of East Africa. 

With those few remarks, Mr Speaker, I lay on the Table -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, they are already on the Table; you do not have to. It is just for exhibition; we have already seen. It is not a document that you can lay on the Table. They are already on the Table and we recognise that they are already there.

MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, this trophy was won in the women’s tug of war by Parliament of Uganda. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was that by the honourable member for Kwania? (Laughter) 

MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, the second trophy was won under the discipline of athletics, women; the third trophy was won by team Uganda, football (men). The fourth trophy was won by the Parliament of Uganda, golf (female); the fifth trophy was won by the Parliament of Uganda golf team for both men and women (overall). The sixth trophy is for the netball, female. 

Mr Speaker, with your permission, this is the mother and father of all trophies, therefore allow me invite Commissioner Emeritus, hon. Jalia Bintu. This is a trophy for the overall winner of the 2017 EAC Inter-Parliamentary Games, which is the Parliament of Uganda. 

MS JALIA BINTU: Mr Speaker, I have the honour to lay on the Table the overall winner’s trophy in the East African Inter-Parliamentary Games, which is the Parliament of Uganda. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The right request should have been “I beg to present to Parliament the trophy.” You cannot lay that on the Table.

MS BINTU: Mr Speaker, I beg to present to Parliament the overall winner’s trophy during the East Africa Inter-Parliamentary Games.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations! (Applause) Thank you, honourable members who participated, for making this Parliament and this country proud. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.48
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Mr Speaker, I need a clarification here. I am told that I should respond to issues. I do not know whether I am laying – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, to lay.

MR OGWANG: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a response to issues raised by the natural resources committee of Parliament towards preparedness of the oil and gas subsector for the country to achieve first oil in 2020. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the appropriate committee to look at whether the responses satisfy what they initially raised as a committee. Thank you. 

3.50
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the bi-annual Inspectorate of Government performance report to Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to look at it and advise us on its content.
 
MOTION TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL 
(THE PATIENT’S RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES BILL, 2017)

3.51
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to move this motion under rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament: 

“WHEREAS Article 94 (4)(b) of the Constitution of Uganda enjoins a Member of Parliament to move a private Member’s Bill;

AWARE THAT the Constitution provides that Uganda shall be governed based on principles of national interest and common good enshrined in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy and under Objective XX, the State shall take all practical measures to ensure the provision of basic medical services to the population;

FURTHER AWARE that Article 8A of the Constitution enjoins Parliament to make relevant laws for the purpose of giving effect to the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy including Objective XX;

NOTING that the Ministry of Health has developed a Ministry of Health Client Charter wherein the ministry has committed to ensure that each client receives client-focused, quality, equitable, professional and transparent services without discrimination and further practice a rights-based approach to healthcare so as to improve the quality of life of all Ugandans;

FURTHER NOTING that Ministry of Health recognises that clients’ rights include the right to services, information, non-discrimination and participation, to be treated with respect and courtesy, informed consent, confidentiality, timely intervention, privacy and safe environment hence the need to codify these rights in the laws of Uganda;

COGNISANT that the clients also have obligations and responsibilities including complying with the prescribed treatment, inquiring and arranging for the cost of  treatment, taking care of health records in his or her possession, taking care of one’s health, caring for and protecting the environment, to respecting the rights of other patients and health providers, among others;

REALISING that the charter and directives authored by the minister are guiding but not legally binding and therefore, do not have enforceable assurances that the patient will receive the deserved quality health care;

FURTHER realising that there is need for a law to be enacted to ensure that the patients’ rights are catered for as well as ensuring that the obligations and responsibilities of the patient are also well articulated in the law for a clear and smooth relationship between the patient and healthcare givers;

NOW, THEREFORE, this motion is moved with the following prayers:
1. 	That this House grants me leave to introduce a private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled, “The Patient’s Rights and Responsibilities Bill 2017”, a draft of which is hereto attached and is hereby laid on the Table.

2. 	That this House orders the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the draft Bill on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. You have not moved the motion.

MR AKAMBA: Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Motion seconded by the members for Ngora County, Agago, Manjiya, Mitooma and Oyam districts. Would you like briefly to speak to your motion?

MR AKAMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The patient’s mandate is to enjoy rights accrued from various legal obligations that either Uganda has signed or ratified as it continues to become a member of civilised states on the international scene, or has associated within policy, strategies or plans as it aspires to increase household incomes so as to improve the wellbeing of its citizenry. On the contrary, these laws are yet to be entrenched in Uganda’s domestic legal context for legal recognition and implementation.       

Article 8A(1) of the 1995 Constitution as amended provides thus: “Uganda shall be governed based on principles of national interest and common good enshrined in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy.” I hasten to note that Objective XX provides thus: “The State shall take all practical measures to ensure the provision of basic medical services to the population.” Objective XIV (b) states, “all Ugandans enjoy rights and opportunities and access to education, health services…” 

Clause (2) of Article 8A imposes a duty on parliamentarians to make laws to give force of law to clause (1). To this end, I implore my honourable colleagues to take on our responsibility that the supreme law of this land charges us with in the aforementioned Article. 

Article 79(1) is to the effect that, “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda.” Clause (2) thereof provides thus: “Except as provided in this Constitution, no person or body other than Parliament shall have power to make provisions having the force of law in Uganda expect under authority conferred by an Act of Parliament.”

The Ministry of Health adopted a patient’s charter as of October 2009 that stipulates that clients receive client-focused, quality, equitable, professional, transparent service without discrimination and thus practising a rights-based approach to healthcare so as to improve the quality of life of all Ugandans. The Ministry of Health recognises the client’s rights to include a right to services, information, non-discrimination, participation, to be treated with respect and courtesy, informed consent, confidentiality, timely intervention, privacy and a safe environment hence the need to codify these rights in the laws of Uganda.

It should be noted that the clients also have obligations and responsibilities, which include: to comply with the prescribed treatment, inquire and arrange for the cost of treatment, take care of health records in his or her possession, take care of one’s health, care for and protect the environment, and respect the rights of other patients and health providers, among others.

However, the charter and directives offered by the ministry are guiding but not legally binding, and therefore, do not have enforceable assurances that the patient will receive the deserved quality healthcare. Therefore, there is need for a law to be enacted to ensure that the patients' rights are catered for as well as ensure that the obligations and responsibilities of the patients are also well articulated in the said laws, for a clear and smooth relationship between the patient and the health giver. It is widely recognised that promoting and protecting human rights is crucial in achieving peace, sustainable human development, democracy and security, and that these aspirations and common goals are matters of national importance. 

Whereas Article 16 (1) of the African Charter on Human and Peoples Rights provides thus: “Every individual shall have the right to enjoy the best attainable state of physical and mental health.”, sub article (2) of the same states, “State parties to the present Charter shall take the necessary measures to protect the health of their people and to ensure that they receive medical attention when they are sick.” Fast-tracking the enactment of the Patient’s Rights and Responsibilities Bill, 2017” means that we are domesticating the aforementioned article enshrined in the African Charter of Human Rights and Peoples Rights.

Mr Speaker, whereas Article 25(1) of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights provides, inter alia, that everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and wellbeing of himself and his family, enacting this law places Uganda in the league of states that are placing patients at the centre of health care. With this, we shall achieve health for all, our Vision 2040 and Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) No.3 of 2030. 

Rights make it clear that violations are neither inevitable nor natural but arise from deliberate decisions and policies. By demanding explanations and accountability, human rights expose the hidden priorities and structural bottlenecks behind violations and challenge the conditions that create patients’ rights violations that have for long gone unpunished. It is just and equitable, therefore, that this law, seeking to empower all of us who are patients and patients in waiting is fast-tracked and enacted.

I call upon colleagues to support this motion for it concerns all of us and all Ugandans. We need a law in place to provide for the patients’ rights and responsibilities. Apparently, there is not any in Uganda. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is there a seconder of this motion who is present? We will take one seconder and then the others will just debate. They will be the first to debate.

4.02
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my colleague for the presentation. It has been very clear. 

I would like to talk about four things only and then I sit. First, health is a right; that means we do not have to play with it. As we talk now, Mr Speaker, assuming you were sick, there would be nobody seated right there and this House would be at a loss. The entire country would be in trouble because issues that are being discussed here would not have linkage with the outside world. 

Secondly, even God is concerned about the health of His people. I just want to read only two verses from the Bible so that we understand and be at peace. Isaiah 1:17 says, “Learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed…plead for the widow.” That is what the Bible says. The people who are suffering right there in those health facilities are actually the poor, the widows. By the way, as we sit here, Mr Speaker, we are all candidates of sickness. That is why we are saying that this law will help us sort out quite a number of issues. That is why I came up to say that we must all stand and support this Bill.

Proverbs 31:9 says: “Open thy mouth, judge righteously and plead the cause of the poor and needy.” There are very many people in this country who are always being detained in the health facilities. I presume, Mr Speaker, even in Omoro you shall have actually saved some people who would not pay their bills in those facilities. This law will help us address some of the challenges that we have in this country.

Thirdly, we talk about the East African Community. The EAC Treaty 1999, Article 118(b), says, “promote the management of health delivery systems and better planning mechanisms to enhance efficiency of health care services within the Partner States.” Uganda is bound by this because we are a signatory to this treaty.

Mr Speaker, I do not want to take a lot of time talking about everything that everybody knows, that this Bill was needed yesterday and why we need this law in place now. I am pleading with colleagues who are here that it is high time all of us supported this Bill and at the end of the day, we must actually be willing to approve this law when it comes on the Floor. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. The first people to start this debate will be the Members who are listed to be seconders of the Bill. We are only allowing one seconder to speak and others will now speak in the debate.

Honourable members, the motion that I now put for your debate is that the hon. Akamba Paul, MP Busiki County, be granted leave by this House to introduce a private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled, “The Patient’s Rights and Responsibilities Bill, 2017”, a draft of which is attached; and further that the publication of the Bill, upon approval of grant of this leave, be met by the responsible authorities. That is the motion I propose for your debate and debate starts now. 

I would like to start with the Members who are listed as seconders of this Bill. We shall then listen from the ministry that is responsible for this, then from the Minister of Finance and then I will open the debate if necessary. 

4.07
MR ANDREW KALUYA (Independent, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here to second the motion. I will start by giving the justification as to why we need this Bill.

A recent budget analysis report by African Group for Health, Human Rights and HIV/AIDS (AGHA) Uganda, states that the country’s allocation to the health sector has vacillated between eight to nine per cent as opposed to the 15 per cent recommended by the Abuja Declaration. As we prepare to appropriate the national budget to the health sector, this law can be used as an accountability tool where patients can demand for better health services.

While Government is in the final stages of tabling the National Health Insurance Bill, 2014 for the first reading, patients that shall be contributing want to have a law that shall assure them of value for money. 

Mr Speaker, the Committee on Health is also in the final stages of presenting to the House the National Health Laboratory Services Bill, 2016. It is said that 70 per cent of services that take place at the hospitals depend on laboratories. Legislative approaches are anchored on patients’ right to demand for better health services that are of quality. 

Multi-drug resistance cases are more expensive to our economy because they strain the small health sector budget and also fail patients from saving or working because long and productive time is spent on seeking treatment. This Bill will also help us secure households from catastrophic expenditures. The benefit of recognising patients’ rights in our legal framework not only mobilises development partners to invest in our health sector but also Uganda’s economy shall improve. This is because the level of accountability the law shall impose on health facilities, the health workers and patients directly improves household income by keeping everyone in good health.

Mr Speaker, this law will also help us to curb the violation of patient rights and patient detentions. Cases of wrong diagnosis and subjecting patients to operations or treatments they would otherwise not have received are increasingly becoming common. A case in point is what happened in 2017 when Mengo Hospital was suspected to have conducted a health camp that never met the requirements and as a result, poor citizens died and there is no recourse in the law. Many similar cases are reported but most are claimed to be accidents or natural causes of death.

Mr Speaker, further justification is that the detention of patients in hospital for having insufficient means to pay their medical bills has become a common practice. In some instances, vulnerable people are detained for long periods in health facilities and subjected to abuse from health workers, including denial of vital services. This is not only deeply psychologically distressing but potentially disastrous economically and can result in some of the poorest people sliding further into poverty. A recent Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) report of 2016 shows an increase in poverty levels from 19 to 28 per cent.

Mr Speaker, this practice of detaining people in hospitals for non-payment of medical bills deters healthcare use, increases medical impoverishment and is an infringement on human rights. In Uganda, the majority of the population is unaware of their rights or that detention in health facilities for non-payment of fees may be both prescribed under domestic law and constitute an interference with rights enshrined in international treaties to which our country is a party.

I will give an example, Mr Speaker. Newspaper reports in Uganda suggest that detention of patients for non-payment of medical bills is so common that many citizens wrongly believe that hospitals have the right to detain them. Victims of medical detentions tend to be the poorest members of society who have been admitted to hospitals for emergency treatment and detention can push them and their families further into poverty. They may also be subjected to verbal or physical abuse while being detained in health facilities. 

The practice of detaining people in hospitals for non-payment of medical bills deters healthcare use, increases medical impoverishment and is a denial of international human rights standards, including the right not to be imprisoned as a debtor and the right to access to medical care. At the root of this problem is the persistence of health financing systems that require people to make high out-of-pocket payments when they need healthcare and inadequate governance systems that allow facilities to detain patients.

There have also been high profile instances of politicians securing the release of disadvantaged detained patients or constituency voters and such demonstrations of apparent philanthropy have been misinterpreted to be an added cardinal role of an elected politician. I think all my colleagues can agree to that. In 2016, for example, one politician in Kenya was reported to have entered several hospitals and handed over cash to pay for the release of a number of patients, including an 89-year-old woman who had been detained for three months.

In order to eliminate medical detentions, some countries have introduced specific legislations, for example the hospital detention law in the Philippines, while others such as Kenya have used case law. In Turkey, a political decision to ban medical detention launched the country’s successful Universal Health Coverage (UHC) reforms. Universal health coverage cannot be achieved when people are experiencing financial hardships through their inability to pay for healthcare. Therefore, by definition, any country that allows medical detention is failing to achieve UHC.

Mr Speaker, there is civil case against International Hospital Kampala (IHK) instituted by Mr Obiga’s sister,  – Rose Obiga – and Centre for Health, Human Rights and Development, which is a civil society organisation. According to court records, upon completing treatment, Mr Obiga paid Shs 20 million of the overall medical bill of Shs 39 million and asked the hospital to allow him pay the balance of Shs 19.5 million while he was at home. However, according to Mr Obiga’s sister, the hospital billing manager, Ms Faith Kandere, told the family that their patient would not be released unless they produced a land title and two post-dated cheques as security for payment pf the outstanding bill. This can be traced on the Monitor website. 

In a documentary film, The Road to Health (2012), the practice of patient detention in northern Uganda through the eyes of Esther Ayugi is documented. After being turned away from public providers, Ayugi turned to care offered by a gynaecological surgeon in private practice, but she was unable to pay the entire bill. The surgeon’s response to the US$ 65 bill shortfall was to lock her up together with her son in his clinic. Esther would be released only when her family paid the difference or when her son worked it off. Esther’s son was put in charge of guarding his own mother and other detained patients. If any patient escaped, he was charged the day’s wage.

Mr Speaker, unsurprisingly, hospital detention practices disproportionately affect the poorest members of society. Many reported cases are the result of unavoidable emergency cases which tend to –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you need to summarise.

MR KALUYA: Yes, I am winding up. Mr Speaker, hospital detention practices are often very heavy-handed with medical staff or guards employed to watch over detainees. There is no legal or moral justification for health facilities to detain people in their premises, in effect holding them hostage until their families settle their bills. 

Sections 2 and 3 of the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act say that detaining a patient over non-payment of medical bills amounts to torture. The Constitution, which is the supreme law of Uganda, states under Article 23 that detaining a person is a violation of their personal liberty. Article 24 and Article 44 of the Constitution state that detaining someone amounts to inhuman, degrading and cruel treatment. 

The detention of poor patients is indisputably a violation of human rights, including the right to liberty and freedom from arbitrary detention as outlined in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Health professionals who detain patients also violent medical ethics, which obligate physicians to ensure that “the health of my patients will be my first consideration. I will not use my medical knowledge to violent human rights and civil liberties.” 

I, therefore, would like to strongly support and call upon my fellow colleagues to support this motion for the betterment of our patients. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I just want to guide how we are going to handle this matter after the two ministers have spoken on other aspects. The Constitution is clear; Article 94 enjoins this Parliament to make its Rules of Procedure. However, in clause (4), it directs what those rules must include and in (b) it says the rules must include the right of a private Member to move a private Member’s Bill. This is now put in our rules, - rules 120 and 121 - providing the procedure.

The question that you should ask is: is there a gap in the laws of this country that is to be cured by this? Secondly, will it fit properly within the existing legislation? Thirdly, does it violate any provision of the Constitution which prohibits a Member to deal with a matter of that nature? If it is in conformity with these tests, then you have no reason but to grant the Member leave to present a private Member’s Bill. That is why I need to hear from the minister in charge of the sector and the minister in charge of the money that there is no conflict and then we will proceed.

4.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the Member for coming up with this private Member’s Bill. However, there are various serious implications if we moved on with this Bill at this point.

We in the health sector - myself specifically - have not had a chance to even look at what the Bill entails. My iPad, Mr Speaker-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, this is not a Bill yet. This is just a motion that the Member be granted leave to present it.

MS OPENDI: It is a motion, Mr Speaker, but normally it has some detailed draft Bill, which he was referring to, and he told me about it just as I was walking into the House. 

You will note that in this country, primary health care is free; it is provided free of charge. However, tertiary care is not wholly free. This brings in another complication because Members are aware that we are now in advanced stages of moving forward with the National Health Insurance Bill, which we are bringing to this House. It will address some of the concerns of-(Interjection)- No, I am informing you, although it has not come. Our challenge has been that the insurers, employers and the finance ministry had their issues but we are now all on the same page and the final draft is due to be presented before Cabinet.

The point that I am making here is that this Bill will have serious financial implications which, as you all know - The Minister of Finance will speak about that. However, most importantly, I would like to state that when you move with this Bill the way it is, then we have to have another Bill-(Interjection)- Okay, the motion. If we moved forward with this motion and then moved on to have the Bill, - the patient’s rights Bill as you call it - then we have to have a health workers’ rights Bill -(Interjection) – Yes!

Therefore, Mr Speaker, this is going to create some bit of a problem within the sector. Let us understand that we have the clients’ charter in place. Currently, to us that is quite sufficient and detailed. If I had been informed prior, I would have laid it on the Table. The clients’ charter is detailed and the various regional referral hospitals and health facilities have different clients’ charters that they have been developing and the ministry has been approving them. Therefore, we are not comfortable with this motion. Thank you.

4.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we have heard from the Minister of Health regarding the technical issues and how that can be handled. However, in our opinion, if the Bill is talking about the rights of patients -(Interjection)-  the motion - the  finance ministry will have another opportunity to see it. This is because the only way we can raise this issue of financial implications in terms of stopping the motion or the Bill of a Member from moving forward is if it is going to increase the charge on our Consolidated Fund.

All this can only be looked at when we look at the Bill and see whether it has that. However, at this time, the motion is talking about rights. If the Member can work closely with the health ministry when developing the Bill before it comes to this House, so that all the issues of the ministry are incorporated, for us at this particular time we would have no problem. This is because we have not seen the real issues in terms of the charge on the Consolidated Fund.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the only issue that could have shot down a proposal of this nature is if the proposed motion would attempt to bring a Bill that would violate provisions of the Constitution, particularly Article 93. From the statement of the honourable minister, it does not seem to do that. Therefore, there is no prohibition for this matter to go forward. (Applause) I open debate. Now that all of you want to speak, can I just put the question? (Laughter)

Honourable members, I will put the question to this motion. I will put the question that this House grants the hon. Paul Akamba, Member of Parliament for Busiki County, Namutumba District, leave to introduce a private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled “The Patient’s Rights and Responsibilities Bill, 2017”. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leave is granted and the Clerk is ordered to facilitate the publication of this Bill in preparation for its transmission for first reading. Do this in consultation with the ministry so that all the issues are ironed out at the drafting stage, so that by the time you come here we agree and move this matter forward. Congratulations.

Honourable members, I had altered the Order Paper to accommodate a statement from the minister. However, apparently, we missed the point where it should have come. Maybe this should be the proper time when it should come and then we go to the motion. Honourable minister, the statement was requested yesterday from Nakaseke specifically. 

Honourable member for Bukonzo West, this matter has been resolved very well so it is okay.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, hon. Paulson Luttamaguzi, Member of Parliament for Nakaseke County South, informed the House that eight people had died in his district and 22 others are in an isolation unit as a result of the outbreak of the Crimean Congo haemorrhagic fever.

Mr Speaker, the Crimean Congo haemorrhagic fever is a viral zoonotic disease that is caused by infection with a tick-borne virus. The hosts of this Crimean Congo haemorrhagic fever virus are mostly wild and domestic animals including cattle, sheep and goats. Once these animals become infected after being beaten by the infected ticks, the virus remains in their bloodstream for about a week after infection, allowing the tick-animal-tick cycle to continue when another tick bites.

When humans come into contact with the infected ticks or direct contact with the blood or tissue of an infected animal, they get this virus. It can be transmitted from one person to another and therefore is an infectious disease.

Mr Speaker, in Uganda the risk of acquiring and spread of the Crimean Congo haemorrhagic fever is high among communities within the cattle corridor, as I did indicate yesterday. Uganda is also known to be one of the endemic countries.

Mr Speaker, specifically to the issue that was raised yesterday; according to the surveillance and laboratory report, the suspected case was a nine-year-old male pupil from Kasiiso Village, Bamugolodde Parish, Butuntumula Subcounty in Luweero District. This nine-year-old was a herds boy. He developed symptoms of nausea, diarrhoea, intense fatigue, appetite loss and a mild grade fever on the 17 December 2017, which progressed to a severe high grade fever the next day.

He was presented at Bamugolodde Health Centre III on the 18 December 2017 as an outpatient case and was later admitted at Abasi’s Clinic between 19 and 22 December 2017. On 22 December 2017, he was referred by this clinic to Kiwoko Hospital in Nakaseke District where he was isolated, as is the practice for the management of suspected viral haemorrhagic fever cases. Samples were collected from the child and sent to the Uganda Virus Research Institute. 

You should note that there is no treatment for this viral haemorrhagic fever. Therefore, supportive treatment for fever, diarrhoea, nausea and appetite loss were provided to this young boy and the patient responded positively. On 27 December, we received results from the Uganda Virus Research Institute which tested positive. However, because of the improved medical condition of the patient, samples had to be re-picked and sent to the Uganda Virus Research Institute.

On 4 January 2018, subsequent tests on the viral load concentration from the Uganda Virus Research Institute turned out negative. Therefore, on 5 January 2018, the patient was discharged from Kiwoko Hospital and from the isolation facility.

Additionally, blood samples were collected from all the six close contacts, including the mother who was attending to him, and submitted to the Uganda Virus Research Institute. All tested negative for the Crimean Congo haemorrhagic fever. It is therefore not true that eight people died from the Crimean Congo haemorrhagic fever and 22 are in the isolation unit as stated by the hon. Luttamaguzi yesterday. All the six contacts of the suspected cases were never isolated and as we speak now, there is nobody in the isolation unit. It was only that young boy who was discharged.

I would like to reassure my colleagues and the public, especially the communities in Luweero and Nakaseke districts, that there is no threat whatsoever and thus no cause for panic. Our team of experts is on the ground in the two districts of Nakaseke and Luweero to continue with surveillance and technical support. The teams are working closely with the district leadership to sensitise the population generally about this haemorrhagic fever.

Mr Speaker, under the One Health approach, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Ministry of Tourism are working closely to deal with resistant ticks and tick-borne diseases in the country.

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Health, with support from the Centres for Disease Control, Atlanta, USA has developed strong mechanisms and systems to detect, prevent and respond to disease outbreaks in this country. It is for this reason that Uganda was the first African country honoured to host the Global Health Security Agenda meeting, which took place in October, 2017. A number of ministers attended including a representative from the USA Government. This was the first time that this meeting was being held in Africa. To us it was an honour in recognition of Uganda’s efforts in improving its surveillance systems and also, most importantly, dealing with various viral haemorrhagic fever outbreaks.

You recall that when this conference was taking place in October 2017, we had the Marburg outbreak in Kween where three deaths occurred. All these were from one family, and the outbreak was controlled in a record time. We did inform the country when we had this Marburg outbreak in Kween District. The country was declared free from this Marburg viral haemorrhagic fever on 8 December 2017.

As guided by the World Health Organisation, the Ministry of Health follows defined procedures and all these must be satisfactorily addressed before any outbreak is declared. Outbreaks should only be declared with accurate information to avoid scenarios that can cause social unrest and huge economic loses to the country. 

In the same vein, I would like to implore our leaders and all stakeholders to desist from making statements that may alarm the population. Always allow the relevant authorities to do their job before making inconclusive allegations. You recall that last week, the district chairperson for Nakaseke convened a press conference and declared the outbreak. To us this created a lot of challenges in the community and in the country. We need to stick to the rules before outbreaks are declared in the country.

We would like to reiterate the ministry’s commitment towards provision of the highest possible level of health services to all people in Uganda through delivery of promotive, preventive and curative services at all levels. If you have any strange disease in your districts, please bring it to our attention so that we can be able to go down and verify the information. We have a strong surveillance teams, Village Health Teams (VHTs) in most of the districts and they have phones. We also have the District Health Officers (DHOs). Let us use the existing systems and not cause alarm in the communities. Mr Speaker, I beg to report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much, honourable minister. Honourable members, you recall that this matter arose from an urgent matter raised by hon. Luttamaguzi. It then caused some distress in the House and the minister’s attempt to explain was not even received very well. I asked her to get time, consult and come back and brief the House on what actually happened in Nakaseke. She has made it clear what happened in Nakaseke. Therefore, this matter is not for debate.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: I stand on a point of procedure, Mr Speaker. When the Member of Parliament from Nakaseke raised this issue yesterday, the minister stood up and denied. She said that there was nothing. Now she has come and admitted that there was somebody who was isolated and there are people who are looking after this boy. Yesterday, she could not admit at all. 

She is now even saying that people should not come to the Floor of Parliament to bring up these issues. Imagine, if the member from Nakaseke had not brought up that issue yesterday, would the minister have known? Would you have known that there is a problem in Nakaseke? Would you have known if the honourable member had not brought this issue on the Floor yesterday and the Speaker directed you to go and come up with a statement today? We would have not known that there is a problem. 

Therefore, when a Member of Parliament brings up an issue, please take it in good faith because now you have told the Members that there is a problem in Nakaseke.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That procedural issue was resolved yesterday. That is why the minister was tasked to go back and come back. She has come back and this is the statement. We have no means, honourable Member of Makindye, of finding out whether what the minister has said is true or false. I am now going to ask you, member for Makindye, to go to Nakaseke and come back tomorrow and say the minister has not told the truth. (Laughter)

MS SARAH NAJJUMA: Mr Speaker, on the issue that was raised by hon. Luttamaguzi yesterday, that was the first outbreak where we got 24 people who were admitted in the hospital and we lost nine lives out of the 24. The ministry is aware of that. Even those people had those signs that were in the first outbreak-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When was that?

MS NAJJUMA: That was in late July. We received support from the Ministry of Health and World Health Organisation. The hospital administrator wrote to the minister and that is why we received the support. That was in July and we lost different people from different villages like Kyampisi-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please, that one was in July. We are talking about this one.

MS NAJJUMA: The report the minister is talking about is current. As Members of Parliament, what is hurting us is that they come out publicly and deny the existence of the disease. If one person was tested positive, do they want the whole district to test positive to declare that the disease is there? We do not know what they are talking about. If a patient tested positive, that means that the outbreak is there. Maybe it is continuing from July up to date. Therefore, we would like the ministry to come out and take their responsibility. They should do the sensitisation. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR BUKENYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to thank the minister for the statement but also thank my sister for giving me the chance to give information.

Mr Speaker, there have been two outbreaks; the one of July and the recent one of December. From the declaration of results from wherever they are processed from, it was announced as another positive case of Crimean Congo haemorrhagic fever.

The struggle now is between the Ministry of Health and Nakaseke District administration. The district wants assistance from the ministry to do sensitisation, health workers’ mobilization, among others, so that they can be prepared because this is the second time. However, the ministry is denying them funds and also refusing to accept the existence of Crimean Congo haemorrhagic fever and yet this is the second time and they are just identifying another case. That is the information, I would like to give.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In this Parliament, we present the issues from our constituents. Hon. Luttamaguzi is not in the House, – this is in the interest of justice – but he would have given more information in addition to what the Woman MP has provided.

Mr Speaker, in the circumstances and considering what the chairperson of the Committee on Health has submitted, would it not be procedurally right for this Parliament to move that the Committee on Health goes to Nakaseke and establishes what is on the ground? They can then report back to this Parliament. Here, we do not pretend about health issues. That is the procedural matter and I am seeking your indulgence, Mr Speaker. The committee can do it and save lives before people die in hundreds. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, the in-house committees of this House do not have to be moved by this House. It is their responsibility. Do you need a directive from the Speaker for the chairman of the health committee to constitute the committee to go to Luweero or Nakaseke? No. That is what they should do. They do not need a directive from the Speaker or the House to do what they should do ordinarily. Please, chairman you have listened, proceed as is required. It is your mandate to do so. Do not wait for whipping. 

MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, I am very happy that the minister has at least come out to say the truth. The child being talked about is from my constituency. Yesterday, I was having a lot of problems when there were results from Government institutions showing that this child was suffering from that disease and yet the minister stands here and says there is nothing like that.

Can I appeal to the Leader of Government Business to tell them that if they do not know anything, let them say nothing and first find out?  (Laughter)  This is because it brings problems to us. Imagine if it was your child and the whole Parliament of Uganda stands up and says there is nothing like that so you should not talk about it. 

I am therefore happy that the honourable minister has at least admitted and said the truth. However, next time, if they are not sure, let us not talk about it. I thank you.

DR BUKENYA: Mr Speaker, I would like to say something about what you have instructed. This information is from our research desk in Parliament and we are on it. We shall be able to come up with something. We are following and are in contact with people of Kiwoko and Nakaseke. I have a lot of communications, which I have intercepted using technology, which will make it difficult for the ministry to understand. Those people need protection. They are scared that if they come out clearly, they will be harassed. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can hon. Nzoghu come and thank the Speaker for the wise ruling?  (Laughter)

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is no reason why the ministry would know that there is an outbreak in any part of the country and the ministry keeps quiet and does not declare. 

Mr Speaker, I got information on the 26th of December. I am holding the portfolio of the Minister of Health, so I am speaking here in two capacities. When we received this information, I was informed - because the issue was whether to declare or not. Then they said, “No, the boy is progressing well and responding to the treatment of the symptoms and therefore, we need to follow the process before we declare an outbreak.”

Therefore, samples had to be again taken after the boy was responding very positively to the treatment. When they took the samples and returned the results, they proved negative. Therefore, Mr Speaker, it is not true that I did not know. That I came here and denied what I said yesterday. I would like to repeat that we do not have any case of the Crimean–Congo Hemorrhagic Fever (CCHF) in Nakaseke or Luwero District.

Therefore, we welcome the committee to do its work and we wait for the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have the committee chair who says they are already on this matter; let them come back and then we will be able to move. Right now, we are not able to move very well. The minister’s statement is received; let us pose it here. The chairman, Committee on Health is on the matter, let him come back and advise us on what actually is happening with this matter in Nakaseka and greater Luwero. Thank you. 

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT INVESTIGATES THE MISMANAGEMENT OF PRE-SHIPMENT VERIFICATION OF CONFORMITY (PVOC) BY UGANDA NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion was presented yesterday and I proposed the question for debate. I have read the motion and it states facts. It provides documents that need to be used in the course of investigations and the recommendation for the motion is that Parliament assigns a relevant committee of Parliament to investigate into circumstances of award of contract for the pre-shipment verification of conformity to JEVIC Company. 

Substantially, the motion is asking this House to ask an in-house committee to investigate this particular matter and come back to us on what they have found. Does this motion need to be debated now or can we wait for the findings of the committee and then we debate those findings?

That is the procedure because it is asking the committee - because if it was asking for a select committee, we would say well, is there a need for a select committee or do we give it to the in-house committee just like the issue of this health thing –(Members rose_)

Honourable member, the Speaker is speaking. The committee will come back and advise us. Now, this motion, therefore, stands substantially referred to the committee responsible for this sector which will report back.

Therefore, I will just put the question for adoption of the motion and send it to the committee. I put the question to this motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE ACQUISITION AND UTILIZATION OF $200 MILLION LOAN FROM THE PTA BANK

4.52
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Ms Angelline Osegge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I present the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the acquisition and utilisation of $200 million loan from the PTA Bank, I beg to lay at the Table the original copy of the report and a copy of the minutes of the proceedings of the committee. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, the Public Accounts Committee had the privilege of doing this report as directed by the House. This report has been ready since July 2017 and I am glad to be presenting it today.
Mr Speaker, by way of introduction, the Public Accounts Committee carried out an investigation into the acquisition and utilisation of the $200 million loan in accordance with Article 90(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rule 156(c) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

The investigation was prompted by the public outcry that National Medical Stores (NMS), one of the key beneficiaries of the said funds had not received its portion and therefore could not purchase drugs for health facilities for this financial year 2017/2018.

Whereas the said loan had been acquired to provide funds for the NMS in order to provide the said medical supplies and despite receiving the money, the ministry did not provide the said funds to NMS. Left unchecked, this life-threatening situation could cause a health crisis in the country.

As a background, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development tabled a request by Government to borrow $200 million from Eastern and Southern African Trade and Development Bank (PTA) to finance development expenditure, imports and replace part of the high interest domestic borrowing on 3 March 2016. 

The loan proposal had originally been rejected by Parliament on 7 January 2016 but the ministry of finance changed the objective and the title of the loan, prioritising provision of medical supplies to get the approval required on 26 April 2016. Indeed, during the debate, the Minister of Health, in support of the loan submitted thus: 

“National Medical Stores for this particular quarter is going to receive less than Shs 14 billion. Therefore, we are starting to see no drugs, gloves and eventually we shall lose lives. Therefore, by Parliament passing this motion, although to some extent some of the money will go to consumption, Shs 82 billion will go to save lives.”
 
The minister continued:
“We know that saving a life is the highest ethical act one can ever do to human kind. Therefore by passing this loan, you will save lives and increase access to safe medicine and vaccines.” That is from the Hansard of the Parliament of Uganda of 26 April 2016.

Mr Speaker, this was what Parliament observed in rejecting the loan initially; 
“That Uganda is a member of the IMF and qualifies to borrow to boost Government reserves to finance shortfalls in the balance of payments, if there is an urgent balance of payment deficit needed. However, this is not urgent since as at December 2015, the reserves were worth 3.9 months of imports. This therefore, did not demonstrate any urgency to Uganda as its imports cover is above three months of the import cover benchmark of the IMF.”  

Parliament recommended that Government should always try to avoid commercial loans to finance balance of payments due to the high costs involved and yet IMF has a rapid credit facility that is concessional. As a member of IMF, Uganda had access to this facility which carries zero interest rates, a grace period of five-and-a-half years and a final maturity period of 10 years.

Mr Speaker, on 2 February 2016, the Governor, Bank of Uganda wrote to the minister, objecting the move by the minister to resubmit the loan proposal – you will find this in appendix 1 of our report. He stated that the primary motivation for contracting the PTA loan was to stabilise the exchange rate in the face of temporary shocks yet Balance of Payment problems which were supposedly the reason for borrowing were not purely temporary. The Governor strongly recommended that the borrowing should not proceed given that Bank of Uganda had sufficient foreign exchange reserves to support this intervention. He stated that the current reserves in the bank’s coffers amounted to $2.8 billion and did not require additional resources mobilised from the PTA Bank, especially a loan for this purpose. 

The Governor was concerned that the proposed PTA loan may appear to offer benefits to the budget in comparison to domestic borrowing because of the lower interest rate of the former. However, this could be misleading because domestic shilling costs of servicing the PTA loan are dependent on the changes in the nominal exchange rate. Further depreciation of the exchange rate over the maturity of the PTA loan would raise the shilling’s costs of borrowing from the PTA Bank, thereby reducing the benefit relative to the borrowing from the domestic market.

Presenting the same loan proposal for the second time on 6 April 2016, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development only changed the title and identified provision of medical supplies as a priority together with the Ministry of Works and Transport and Rural Electrification Agency (REA). You can find that in Appendix 2 on page 3. 

The loan proposal was, therefore, referred to the committee on National Economy and approved by Parliament on 26 April 2016. Subsequently, a loan agreement was signed between Government of Uganda and the PTA Bank on 26 June 2016. 

In his brief to Parliament, the minister noted that despite the interventions made by the Central Bank, the exchange rate continued to be unstable, thus necessitating this loan. The minister stated that the PTA loan would come in to stabilise the foreign exchange and help government departments which use forex to purchase services and products. The loan amount was $200 million and the kind of facility was revolving. He informed the House that the interest rate on the loan would be 4.6 per cent per annum and the facility would be available for three years. There would also be a roll-over option for three months for each draw down and there would be a draw down fee of 0.5 per cent. 

Mr Speaker, I do not think it is necessary to go through the terms of reference as given by this House. I will go the objectives of the loan as approved by Parliament.

Objectives of the loan

    1. The first one was to finance a shortfall in the domestic revenue which at the time was projected to be Shs 288 billion.
    2. To substitute domestic borrowing amounting to Shs 280 billion.
    3. To finance the supplementary expenditure that was approved by Parliament that required additional financing amounting to Shs 156.37 billion
    4. To finance expenditure pressures resulting from the exchange rate, depreciation experienced during the financial year 2015/2016.

The committee findings

Mr Speaker, the committee made the following findings – we interacted with the various entities, including Bank of Uganda and this is what they had to tell us as far as the procedure for acquiring and disbursement of the loan is concerned.

Account by the Governor Bank of Uganda

He informed the committee that the loan was disbursed as follows;

    i) Process of transferring the $200 million by Bank of Uganda

    a) On 22 August 2016, Bank of Uganda received instruction from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to open a holding account for trade finance facility denominated in US dollars. The account was opened as per the instruction and the letter confirming the account number – that number on the report – was sent to the Accountant-General on 23 August 2016.
    b) On 11 November 2016, $56,460,976.71 was transferred from the trade facility account to the Uganda Consolidated Account. Therefore, the account was credited with Shs 197,938,069,101. 
    c) On 18 November 2016 $15 million was transferred from the trade facility account to Uganda Consolidated Fund. The Consolidated Fund was credited with Shs 55,895,589.439. 

Mr Speaker, I do not know whether I should go through these figures. They do not seem to be necessary.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Deal with the figures.

MS OSEGGE: Okay. There were five debits of $20 each on the trade facility account for bank charges. 

Therefore, the trade facility account received a total of $97,951,719 which was transferred to the Consolidated Fund between 18 November 2016 and 26 May 2017 and $100 was paid in bank charges to Bank of Uganda. Prior to the first payment by PTA Bank on 20 October 2016, the trade facility account had a balance of zero and after transfer to the Uganda Consolidated Fund Account, it was left with a zero balance, again. With the exception of the $100 paid in bank charges, all of the funds received from the PTA Bank on the trade facility account were transferred to the Consolidated Fund Account.

The Auditor-General highlighted the following:

    i) Process of disbursement of funds

According to records from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, funds would be released to the institutions through normal government release procedures. Institutions spend based on any foreign exchange shortfall and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requests PTA Bank to reimburse the holding account known as the trade finance facility account which was opened as a transit account at Bank of Uganda. This would be used to reimburse the Uganda Consolidated Fund Account with Uganda Shillings equivalent. There is a table there as far as the money that were received are concerned. Mr Speaker, I would request that Members look at it.

I would like to go to the receipt of funds by intended beneficiaries, Mr Speaker. The National Medical Stores (NMS) was one of them and this is what the committee established. 

In the financial years 2010/2011, 2011/2012 and 2014/2015, NMS suffered budget cuts totalling to Shs 36,446,251,373 by quarter four. 

In financial year 2015/2016, there was severe depreciation of the Shilling against the US dollar. This diminished both the funds appropriated under Vote 116 for financial year 2015/2016 and sums carried as indicated above. 

The situation was brought to the attention of the ministries of health and finance. NMS requested for a sum of Shs 68 billion in financial year 2015/2016 to be able to cover the gap created by the depreciation of the shilling, as attached in Appendix B. 

On 30 November 2015, the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury (PS/ST) acknowledged the funding constraints and advised that a funding facility was before Parliament for approval, which would be used to address the ministry’s funding gap referring to the PTA loan. (Appendix D)

On 10 May 2016, National Medical Stores (NMS) reminded the PS/ST of the funding deficit of approximately $68 million and requested for a supplementary budget. The PS/ST informed NMS that the money would be availed in the financial year 2016/2017. (Appendix E)

On 6 June 2016, the PS/ST advised NMS that the resource required would be available in financial year 2016/2017.

 On 17 August 2016, as a follow up of this letter of 16 June 2016, the PS/ST requested NMS to submit procurement contracts for items with foreign currency requirements for financial year 2016/2017. 

National Medical Stores provided the contract by a letter dated 17 August 2016. Upon request by the Ministry of Finance, NMS resubmitted copies of the same contract documents by a letter dated 13 September 2016.

However, the said funds have to date not been provided-(Interjections)- by that time. This fact was brought to the attention of the Ministry of Health and the PS/ST on 27 March 2017. 

The committee notes that all subsequent communications from ministry of finance to NMS did not mention the loan facility which had earlier been referred to. 

In a letter dated 27 April 2017 to the honourable Minister of Health, copied to NMS, the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development stated that a sum of Shs 7 billion had been provided as a supplementary in 2016/2017 and that Shs 20 billion had been provided to NMS as arrears in 2017/2018. 

He further advised that NMS should get medicines on credit worth 41 billion for quarter four of financial year 2016/2017, which then would have a first call of the Budget Fund for financial year 2017/2018 as arrears.

In NMS’ letter dated 8 May 2017 and 31 May 2017, it was explained that the effect of the above guidance by the honourable minister would be to deny health facilities medicine in financial year 2017/2018 since NMS had already reached its limit of getting drugs on credit. The Ministry of Health got to know that the loan was approved and it is still awaiting receipt of the said funds.

In the first quarter of 2017, NMS received Shs 127 billion which was over and above the expectation. Later, however, NMS got to learn that the funds were front-loaded but it was part of the appropriated money for NMS to enable them to pay off its outstanding suppliers. 

The PS/ST confirmed that the interpretation of NMS was correct and that Government would avail additional funds in 2017/2018 budget. However, NMS reiterated that the effects would be failure to procure medicine for all health centres II, III, IV and for the next financial year until Shs 41 billion is provided.

The PS/ST requested for all the contracts executed in foreign currency and they were provided by NMS. National Medical Stores then took it that the said documents were required for purposes of disbursing the $68 million as they required.

About the Shs 68 billion supplementary funding that was passed by Parliament, the PS indicated that this was due to acute financial stances that necessitated them to get a supplementary budget. However, although it was passed, NMS did not get any supplementary funding in the year 2015/2016. 

In 2015/2016, there had been a promise that the money would be availed in the financial year 2016/2017. National Medical Stores was thus in a precarious situation. The Ministry of Finance wrote a letter that the 41 billion would be availed in the next financial year, that is, 2016/2017. This is a confirmation that the money had not been given to NMS.

The second supposed beneficiary was Rural Electrification Agency (REA). The Rural Electrification Agency received communication from the Ministry of Finance that funds under the $200 million PTA loan were being processed and in this regard, was asked to submit its contractual obligation in foreign currency, which they did. 

Rural Electrification Agency was supposed to receive $2.88 million. The committee however noted that REA had no project that was directly funded by the PTA Bank. The presentation of the minister was that REA was supposed to receive $2.88 million. But the finding of the committee was that there was nothing funded by this loan in the programmes of REA.

The third beneficiary was the Ministry of Works and Transport; Government of Uganda procured a consignment of road construction maintenance equipment from China in 2011, which was distributed to district local governments and municipal councils. The equipment was mainly for light road maintenance works.

However, several complaints were received from the users about the unsatisfactory performance of the equipment, which was attributed to incomplete road units and compounded by the absence of trained operators. 

In order to address the above challenges, His Excellency the President pledged in 2014 to procure and equip districts with robust equipment from Japan, capable of undertaking rehabilitation and maintenance of roads. Consequently, the Government of Uganda through the Ministry of Works and Transport, entered into a sales contract with M/S Sumitomo Corporation in September 2015 to supply road construction or maintenance equipment from Japan at a cost of JP¥17,799,443,895. Fifteen per cent counterpart funding was JP¥2.6 billion, which was equivalent to Shs 72 billion or $26 million. 

The loan financing agreement between the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Japan Bank for International Cooperation was signed on 9 September 2016. The Ministry of works got Shs 31.5 billion equivalent to approximately $9 million. Out of the $26 million, the Ministry of Works and Transport was asked by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to provide contracts, which were foreign in nature and the information was submitted.

The Minister of Finance urged that although there were four original objectives for the loan as stated above, the main objective was to supplement foreign exchange requirements. Given that this loan was approved in April 2016, the disbursement could only be applied to the funding of the 2016/2017 budget.

He further submitted that this was a budget support loan to fund activities involving foreign exchange transactions and contained in the 2016/2017 approved budget. This was not additional funding above appropriation, or funds for a specific vote.

Mr Speaker, allow me to skip the modalities for disbursement. I will go to page 13.

Although the ministry of finance informed the committee that the above was used as a sample for reimbursement to indicate that the Government had spent a minimum of the disbursed expenditure and not that the funds were meant for these entities - in the committee’s opinion, it exhibited dishonesty. 

The statement does not give Parliament a clear picture on how to monitor the loan performance because the minister had earlier stated that the purpose for fronting those Agencies was for purposes of traceability of the funds. It is not possible to trace money where it is not. The table I have skipped indicates the money that should have been received and there is a next table entitled “Disbursement as at 17 July, 2017.”
Mr Speaker, allow me to go to the observations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MS OSEGGE: A review of the documents availed to the committee revealed the following:

    1. The percentage indicated was 4.6 per cent while the draw down interest was 0.97 per cent, making a total interest of 5.55 per cent which was not made clear to Parliament. At the time of requesting for approval of the $200 million loan from Parliament, Government, through Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, provided contract documents of the beneficiaries as conditioned by the lender, that is - health (drugs and medical equipment), transport (road and earth moving equipment) and rural electrification (government counterpart contribution).

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development justification for funding to the committee on National Economy was to finance a shortfall in domestic revenue, projected at Shs 288 billion and substitute domestic borrowing of Shs 280 billion to finance the supplementary expenditure that was approved by Parliament that required additional financing amounting to Shs 156.37 billion and to finance expenditure pressures, resulting from the exchange rate depreciation experienced during financial year 2015/2016.

On receipt of the loan facility, instead of prioritising already stated beneficiaries namely health, roads, earth moving equipment and rural electrification, the money, after being transferred to the Uganda Consolidated Fund, was instead used for general budget support and not specified entities.

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provided a breakdown of the disbursement of $143,951,719.58 by 27 June 2017 and the end date of the committee inquiry presented $199,999,513.480 that was by 14 July 2017. 


Mr Speaker, despite several demands, the committee was never availed with the specifics on how the disbursed amount was spent by the end of 2016/2017. 

The committee further observed that the Speaker, on Tuesday 11 July 2017 presented to Parliament a list of loans from the President inter alia, objecting to a similar loan of $200 million intended for fiscal management, a purpose similar to the loan in question.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the committee draws the following:

    1. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, by false pretence, impressed upon Parliament in the justification for the loan approval, stating that the critical area for funding was medical supplies by NMS, thus Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development received money fraudulently.
    2. Although the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had received the said funds, they had not released Shs 68 billion to NMS as earlier on claimed by the ministry.
    3. After more loan funds were released, the concerned beneficiaries were neither informed nor given the funds.
    4. The loan proposal had originally been rejected on 7 January 2016 by Parliament, but the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development changed the objective of the loan, emphasising medical supplies to get the approvals required on 26 April 2016.
    5.  In a letter to the Speaker on 15 March 2017, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development lied that the necessary contract had not been provided by NMS to enable the necessary funds to be disbursed.
    6. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development did not reply to the letter of the Governor of Bank of Uganda, rejecting the loan proposal, despite the concerns clearly raised.
    7. The Permanent Secretary and, Secretary to Treasury (PS/ST) lied to the committee that the loan was received to stabilise the exchange rate with the consent of Bank of Uganda.
    8. The Accountant General objected to the loan proposal through a letter written to the PS/ST, indicating that the loan was not favourable because of its high interest.

    9. The PS/ST, being former chairman of the Board of Directors of the PTA Bank, insisted on acquiring the loan, despite the emphatic objections from the Governor, Bank of Uganda, the Accountant General and the Director of Economic Affairs.
    10. Domestic borrowing would have been cheaper than the 4.6 per cent, per annum interest paid on the PTA loan, in addition to other costs of borrowing.
    11. Uganda, as a member of the IMF, qualifies for access to the IMF rapid credit facility that is concessional and carries a zero interest rate, a grace period of five and a half years and a final maturity period of 10 years, as opposed to the PTA loan obtained at the interest of 5.55 per cent without a grace period.
    12. Upon the committee’s intervention, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has finally committed to provide the requisite funds to NMS in a letter to all accounting officers dated 7 July 2017.

Key Recommendations

    1. For misleading the House to believe that the most critical funding objective was medical supplies, lying to Parliament in writing that NMS had never provided the needed supply contract to enable disbursement of the funds and further duping Parliament by repackaging the same loan, thus obtaining money by false pretence, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Matia Kasaija, should be censured.

    2. The committee on National Economy should adopt, as part of their procedure, a requirement to interface with the Governor, Bank of Uganda while considering loan proposals.

    3. For lying to Parliament and for super imposing his authority portrayed by insisting on the loan acquisition against strong advice in writing by the Governor, Bank of Uganda, the Accountant General and the Director of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance and superintending the gross diversion of public funds, Mr Keith Muhakanizi, the PS/ST should be relieved of his office.

    4. The IGG should further investigate the PS/ST for possible conflict of interest, collusion and connivance considering that he had aggressively insisted on acquiring the loan with prior knowledge that he was a former Board chairman of the PTA Bank. A report on the findings should be submitted to Parliament within 60 days from the date of adoption of this report.

    5. The committee recommends that Parliament directs that the $200 million be recovered, reconsolidated and applied for the sole and full purpose for which Parliament approved the loan. A report to this effect should be submitted to Parliament within 60 days from the date of adoption of this report.

    6. The Executive should be more systematic while processing the presentation of loan requests to Parliament to avoid the embarrassing recall of some of them as Parliament witnessed on Tuesday, 11 July 2017.

    7. The committee further recommends an amendment of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 to include that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should quarterly report to Parliament on the financial and fiscal performance of public debt.

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. chair. Is that the full text of the report? I see another document attached to this report. Do you have knowledge of it because it is for you to reintroduce the subject and call upon that member?

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, it is provided for in the Rules of Procedure of this House that a member is free to dissent from the majority report. Although this was done outside the timelines, out of courtesy, I will allow the member to present the minority report.

5.29
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to present a Minority Report of the Public Accounts Committee on the Acquisition and Utilisation of the $200 million loan from the PTA Bank. 

While I thank the chairperson of the committee for presenting the report to this August House, I have several grounds of dissent, which some members of the committee considered as diversionary and a misrepresentation of facts. 

I would like to dissent from the main report of the Public Accounts Committee especially in terms of its observations and recommendations and the grounds are the following: The first is about the poor evaluation of evidence and records. The second is that there was wrong interpretation of facts in the main report and my areas of dissent are as follows:

In Observation(3)(1), the chairperson talked about the percentage indicated as 4.6 and the drawdown interest as 0.95 per cent, making the total loan interest 5.55 per cent, which she said was not made clear to Parliament. However, I would like to point out that this percentage was in the report that was presented by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and so it is not true that there was a misrepresentation. 

In observations two and three, I would also like to dissent - I agree with the observations two and three because the purpose of the PTA loan facility was to support stabilisation of the Uganda Shilling against the USA dollar. At the time, the economy was crumbling and undergoing pressures arising from exchange rates depreciation. The immediate key priority therefore, was to address this paramount problem for the benefit of all Ugandans. The documentation to this effect was presented to Parliament and it was supportive to one of the objectives of the loan.

I would further, like to dissent on recommendation four, which says that on receipt of the loan facility, instead of prioritising the already stated beneficiaries which were health, roads, earth moving equipment and rural electrification, the money after being transferred to the Consolidated Fund, was used for the general budget support.

I would like to point out that at the time, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented to the committee a document that indicated that the major priority was the stabilisation of the Uganda Shilling against the dollar. The ministry even used documents from eligible institutions, which would later receive the money as part of the budget; this was one of the methodologies used and I find it appropriate.

When you read observation six, which reads: “Despite several demands, the committee was never availed with specifics on how the disbursed amount was spent” you realise that it contradicts the stated facts in observation five because the ministry had already provided documents with those facts and so how did the committee do investigation to get to the amount of Shs 143,951,71.58 billion? 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provided the committee with all the relevant documentations as stated in observation five. 

I will not comment on observation seven. Let me go straight to the conclusions. The first conclusion was that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, by false pretense impressed, upon Parliament the justification for a loan approval stating that the critical area for funding was medical supplies by National Medical Stores (NMS) thus the ministry received money fraudulently. Mr Speaker, there was no false pretense. 

From the observation I have made above, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provided requisite documentation to support the major purpose of the PTA loan facility and there was no false pretense at all. The chair and other committee members could have used another word to capture that situation. 

In observation two, it is stated that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had not released Shs 68 billion to NMS as earlier claimed by the ministry. I would like to state that NMS received the entire allocation as appropriated by Parliament although this was done late. 

In observation three, it is stated that after more loan funds were released, the concerned beneficiaries were neither informed nor given the said money. Mr Speaker, the concerned beneficiaries received funds as appropriated by this very Parliament.

In regard to observation four, it is stated that the loan proposal had originally been rejected on 7 January 2016 by Parliament, but that the Ministry of Finance changed the objective of the loan emphasising medical supplies to get approvals on 26th April. However, I would like to state that the purpose of the loan remained the same and the Minister of Finance was brining additional information, which I found very appropriate for the House to pass the loan from an informed position. 

In observation five, it is stated that in the letter to the Speaker on 15th March, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development lied that the necessary contracts had not been provided by NMS to enable the necessary funds to be disbursed. This is not true because the said documents were already part of the report submitted by the minister to this very Parliament.

In observation six, the main report states that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development did not reply to the letter by the Governor, Bank of Uganda rejecting the loan proposal and concerns. Mr Speaker, Bank of Uganda does not need to consent to any borrowing that is approved by Parliament –(Interjections)– I have commented on all that. For example, I have talked about the letter, but because of time, I am not reading dot by dot. I expect members to have copies of this report and to be following my presentation.

Observation seven states that the Secretary to Treasury lied to the committee that the loan was received to stabilise the exchange rate with consent of Bank of Uganda. On this, I have already told you that Bank of Uganda does not need to consent to any borrowing that is approved by Parliament.

I would further like to dissent on observation eight where it is stated that the Accountant-General objected to the loan proposal through a letter indicating that the loan was not favourable because of high interest rates. The alternative finances, Mr Speaker, to the requirements of various agencies would have been to borrow from domestic market, but which was at higher rates compared to the PTA loan. 

It is also stated in observation nine that the former chairman, board of directors insisted on acquiring the loan citing emphatic objectives from the Governor, Bank of Uganda and Accountant-General despite those reminders. Mr Speaker, the secretary to the treasury was the Chairman of the Board of Directors of the PTA Bank between 1998 - 2OO4 and served in that capacity as a representative of the Government of Uganda and not PTA Bank.

In observation ten, the committee’s main report says that domestic borrowing would have been cheaper than 4.6 per year interest paid on the PTA loan in addition to other costs of borrowing. Mr Speaker, this is not true. Domestic borrowing has never been any lower than the rate reflected above; it cannot be.

Then in 11, the main report says Uganda as a member of International Monetary Fund (IMF) qualifies to access, from that very IMF, a rapid credit facility that is concessional and carries zero interest rate at a grace period of five and a half years and a final maturity period of 10 years, as opposed to the PTA loan, at an interest rate of 5.5 per cent without a grace period. The above is true but it would have taken ordinarily a very long time to access yet the urgency or the need of the money for the stabilisation of the economy at that time was paramount. That is why this process was fast-tracked.

Mr Speaker, allow me to move to the key recommendations and my area of decent in there. The general report recommends that for misleading the House to believe that the funding objective was medical supplies, lying to Parliament in writing and stating that NMS has never provided the needed supply contract to enable disbursement of funds and further duping Parliament by repackaging the same loan thus obtaining money by false pretense, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Matia Kasaija, should be censured.

Mr Speaker, the Minister of Finance did not obtain money by false pretense because all the documents concerning the PTA loan were provided to Parliament during day and when Parliament was in session. Therefore, he cannot be censured. We should instead be thanking the minister for quickening the process of realising of exchange rate stabilisation.

When you look at two, it is stated that the Committee on National Economy should adopt, as part of their procedure, a requirement to interface with the Governor, Bank of Uganda while considering the loan – see 2 and 3.
On this, Mr Speaker, the secretary to treasury and the Accountant-General provided all the necessary documents and used the loan proceeds as appropriated by this Parliament. These people should instead be rewarded because they did great work especially at that time when the economy had deteriorated.

In recommendation four, the main report says that the IGG should further investigate the secretary to treasury for possible conflict of interest, collusion and connivance considering that he aggressively insisted on acquiring the loan with prior knowledge that he was a former board Chair of PTA bank and that a report on the findings should be submitted to Parliament within 60 days from the date of adoption of this report. 

Regarding this, Mr Speaker, I would like to state that there was no conflict of interest because at the time of acquiring this loan, the secretary to treasury had ceased to be a Board member of the PTA Bank and was working in Uganda and serving the interest of Ugandans whose interests were at the forefront of the secretary to treasury at that time. Therefore, one cannot say that he had conflict of interest. He only worked there like some of us did before we came to this Parliament.

In recommendation five, the main report states that Parliament directs the $200 million to be recovered, reconsolidated and applied for the sole and full purpose for which Parliament approved the loan and a report to this effect should be submitted to Parliament within 60 days from the date of adoption of this report.

Madam Speaker – I am sorry for using the words, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought you were remembering your wife or something. (Laughter)

MR SILWANY: My apologies, Mr Speaker. Anyhow, in regard to this, I would like to say that the purpose of the loan has already been fulfilled and the entire agencies - Rural Electrification Agency and the National Medical Stores has been provided with resources and that is on record.

Mr Speaker, with that, I beg to move that House adopts the minority report. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair for this very detailed and comprehensive report and thank you honourable member, for raising the minority opinion and for presenting it to the House.

Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is that the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the acquisition and utilisation of $200 million loan from the PTA bank be adopted.

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the Committee of Public Accounts for presenting a detailed report and the member, who has presented the minority report.

Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your guidance. As the proceedings were going on in the committee, I remember we interfaced with the different stakeholders including Bank of Uganda and NMS as mentioned in the report. And if you looked at the current report that has been presented by both sides, you realise out of 34 Members of the committee only 15 Members signed it yet as Members who participated in the proceedings of the committee, we should have shown interest in the reports by way of appending our signatures. This was important because it would have given credibility to the report. 

When you look at the recommendations in the report - there are people who have made names in this country and I am not shy to say that hon. Matia Kasaija has served this country.

Mr Speaker, I need your guidance. Are we proceeding well even when our Rules of Procedure state that a third of the members of the committee should sign the committee report? I am only seeking for your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. There was a point of order.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The point of order I am rising is in respect to our Rules of Procedure, which state that when the committee is performing its functions and there emerges the majority and the minority reports, the majority report is to the effect that those members who agree and are more than the one who disagree, then that is the basis of the minority and the majority report.

The honourable member has stated that they did not access the report for them to append their signatures yet there are two reports - the majority and the minority.

Therefore, is the Member in order to have abrogated her role, as a member of the committee, by not appending her signature to either the majority or the minority report, while knowing the two reports were not the same? 

Is it in order for the honourable member to have actually run away from her responsibility as a member of the committee and then bring a baseless claim here? Is it in order, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Usually, when people are absent at critical moments, they never want to reveal the fact that they were not there; they are normally shy. Otherwise, this seems to be a different case where a Member who was not there to sign the report now comes to openly tell us that she was not there to sign the report. (Laughter) You should have been very shy, honourable member, to let it pass because you were not there, and possibly, that is why you did not sign. You should have let it pass quietly so that we do not bring you on the spotlight by wondering why you weren’t there. (Laughter) 

What you have said is to point out that you were not there but 17 Members signed the report, not the number you have stated. When we include hon. Silwany, it makes it 18 Members. Even if he did not sign the main report, he has signed the minority report, which forms part of the report to Parliament. Therefore, 18 Members of the total have signed. Quorum is a third. This report is properly before Parliament and so we are proceeding very well. (Applause)

On the procedural point you raised, I think I have already ruled on it also based on the ruling on the order raised by my friend from Busongora County North. Was there another issue you wanted to raise? – (Ms Santa Alum rose_) - I did not see you rise. It was the Member for Mbale Municipality that rose. Is it a separate matter?

MS ALUM: Mine was on procedure. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure.

MS ALUM: Mr Speaker, this report is very important and with very serious recommendations. When I look around, the House does not have quorum. Given the importance of this report, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to read it but come debate it properly later? This is because we are tired of people playing with the money for Ugandans. We are tired of people every time stealing –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now you are debating. (Laughter)

MS ALUM: Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, Mr Speaker, that we debate the report tomorrow?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had actually wanted to hear the opinion of the minister. The secretary to the treasury and permanent secretary of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not a Member of this House and he cannot speak in this House. However, since the minister is here and some very serious statements have been made, maybe I could hear from him preliminary – and we see how to proceed with the matter. Procedural point? Okay.

MR KAKOOZA: Before he comes, Mr Speaker, I have no problem with this report but I have a problem which we must put on record before we adopt the motion and I beg that you guide the House. When you look at the introduction, the Public Accounts Committee carried out investigations into acquisition and utilisation of the loan - Rule 147 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, which was mentioned and if I read it verbatim, says -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, rules have changed in the course of -

MR KAKOOZA: No, Mr Speaker, I have the new Rules of Procedure of Parliament and Rule 147 –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did they quote the new rules?

MR KAKOOZA: Yes, they quoted Rule 147 of the new Rules of Procedure of Parliament –(Interjections)- no, the citation in the Constituent is correct but the rule that was quoted is Rule 147 of the new Rules of Procedure of Parliament. If I may read it verbatim –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think by the time they were writing this report the updated rules were not there.

MR KAKOOZA: This is what I am saying. We have to correct it for purposes of the record of the House –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That one is consequential. We know what happened.

MR KAKOOZA: The second procedural matter, Mr Speaker, is that either we adopt a report that Parliament has to investigate as police, prosecute and pass a judgment - because the serious allegations we are talking about are really saying we investigate, prosecute and pass a judgment. When we pass a judgment - I am finding it very funny that we can investigate and pass a judgment at the same time. I would like to seek your guidance about these matters before we adopt the motion for the debated.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have proposed the motion for debate and even when Parliament is going to adopt this, it has authority to make changes on the recommendations as it deems fit. Therefore, we are not going to pre-empt any process here. This is what the committee has proposed.

MR KAKOOZA: Much obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If they have made an error, it will be revealed in the course of the debate. Not so?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, this is a very important report – (Interruption) 

MR MAJEGERE: I had been given the Floor. (Laughter) Thank you, Mr Speaker. When you listen to what they have read, there is a clear sign that the loans are being mismanaged yet Parliament has passed very many loans here. 

Mr Speaker, don’t you think it would be procedurally right that they compile the reports on other loans, giving us the status of each loan in terms of its performance, so that we debate when we know how the loans are being managed? From what we have heard, with due respect to my younger brother, the hon. Solomon Silwany, it is like the report he was reading was prepared by another person. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a rule against insinuation of improper motives and you are a senior Member of this House. Please, avoid such things. Respect each other.

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I conclude, I would beg that a report on all the loans we have passed here – giving the status of each – is presented on the Floor of Parliament so that we debate from the point of knowledge.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think it is important that we attend the sittings of this House. Those reports have been presented in this House twice. (Applause)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, this is a procedural point. This is a very important report and when you look at the recommendations, they are quite important and touching. Couldn’t it be procedurally right that before the minister speaks, we have a full House so that members can hear what he is going to say because there are issues that touch him? When you look around, the number is less than two-thirds.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: All I am saying is that the minister is here. These issues have been raised. I am just saying, if he has anything to say, let him say and we move. If he does not have anything to say, we see how to move. Honourable minister, do you have anything to say briefly?

5.57
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and the author of the minority report. This is a very fundamental and serious report. It touches my integrity. I have served this country diligently for the last 50 years. At this age of 75 years –(Interjections) - I told you last time –(Laughter)– when I am approaching the age limit, fortunately, which you people took a wise decision on by lifting it.

However, on a serious note, this is a matter for which I want to be given an opportunity to explain thoroughly and fully. I would like that we create good time; I bring all the evidence and facts. Where I have faulted, I will apologise but where I am sure I have done what I ought to have done, I will be firm.

Therefore, Mr Speaker and colleagues, I request that you give me an opportunity to give my response on Tuesday next week. I have sent a response to your office and I have asked my secretary to load it onto the iPad. 

I would like to request you to look at that response, which I will enrich over the weekend so that when we come here and to dispose of this matter next Tuesday, everybody will be satisfied, including I. Whichever decision you take, I shall be satisfied. (Applause)

Therefore, in short, I ask that you allow me to come back on Tuesday to make my response before we dispose of this matter then. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members -

MS NAMAYANJA: I am seeking clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is nothing to clarify on, honourable member. He has requested that he comes on Tuesday. Now what is there to clarify?

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, he appeared before the committee and -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, this is the House and not the committee. The reports have already been presented; both the majority and minority one. The hon. Wamanga-Wamai has made the same request. Hon. James Kakooza and hon. Santa Alum are all saying we should defer debate; debate shouldn’t start now.

What the minister is saying - because some of them were saying we start tomorrow - is that we give him a little more time and we start on Tuesday. He is not saying it should not be debated. This will enable us all to be at par. 

Therefore, take this time and look at both the main and minority reports so that on Tuesday when we come –(Interjections)- please, honourable members, the matter will come on Tuesday; we have already deferred debate on the Bill to Tuesday. What was the title of the Bill? (Interjections) The Laboratories’ Bill and it has been deferred to Tuesday. However, this matter will also come on Tuesday so that we see - if we want to start with it, we will do that. If we want to finish with the Bill, we shall do that first before going to the reports.

Honourable members, it is 6 O’clock and this House is now adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00.p.m.

(The House rose at 6.02 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 11 January 2018 at 2.00 p.m.)
