Thursday, 8 July 2004

Parliament met at 2.37 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. Today our special guests in the Strangers’ gallery are our children from Sir Apollo Kaggwa Boarding Primary School, Old Kampala, in Kampala Central Division. You are most welcome. (Applause). They are accompanied by their teachers. You are also welcome. 

Honourable members, today we are without one of our colleagues, hon. Eresu. He lost his dear mother, Elizabeth Anulu and burial will take place tomorrow in Kaberamaido. I think it is proper that we observe a minutes’ silence.

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Well, that is the communication I had today. There is no standard communication; really it depends on the circumstances.

2.40
MS JESSICA ERIYO (Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was a Member of the Select Committee on the Humanitarian and Security situation in Acholi, Lango and Teso. Unfortunately, as the committee’s report was being wound up yesterday, I was not around because my child was sick. I would like to request that I give a brief on Adjumani’s security and humanitarian situation just for the information of Parliament. I also have a map of Adjumani, which indicates the position of Adjumani in Northern Uganda. I know this map was clarified by my colleague, the Rt hon. First Deputy Prime Minister but also this map will be very useful to Members of Parliament because it has the dates on which recent Lords Resistance Army (LRA) attacks on Adjumani have been so that members will appreciate the suffering of the people in my District. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, just to give a visual picture of Adjumani in relation to the Northern Uganda. Where is it?  

MS ERIYO: I would like to lay a brief report, which indicates the number of people who have been displaced in the district, the names of villages and the details, the extent of the problem as far as security is concerned, and services like health, education, and food. It also indicates the amount of food that we have received from the district through the Office of the Prime Minister, and the challenges we face.  

While in the district I also went to the areas, which have been deserted and took their photographs. Members will also look at the schools, health centres and refugee settlements that have been abandoned. We have a number of refugees in my district and these are suffering double tragedy, and they have been displaced. All this is detailed in this report, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay it on the Table. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Honourable members, some of us considered Adjumani as part of West Nile and West Nile meant west of the Nile. But yesterday some of you received information that although Adjumani was part of West Nile, actually it is found east of the Nile and it is almost part of Gulu. Therefore, when you talk about problems in Gulu, you might as well consider Adjumani as part of Gulu. This map is intended to give you a visual picture of the location of Adjumani so that whatever is there can also be considered in trying to solve the problem to include Adjumani. Copies will be given to all members for your records.  

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from hon. Patrick Mwondha.

2.44
MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am bothered. The Office of the Attorney-General is a constitutional Office. The Attorney-General is supposed to be the chief legal adviser to the Cabinet and this House. I am worried that we do not have a visible Attorney-General. Ever since the demise of hon. Ayume, he has been replaced in this House with a new Member for Koboko, who has already been sworn in. I wonder why the President is taking so long to perform his constitutional duty. We have been accused in court of proceeding on wrong premises. We are yet again to proceed on wrong premises, especially, in the absence of a visible Attorney-General. 

I do not accept the argument that the Solicitor-General is in place and therefore we can proceed. The Solicitor-General has no seat in this House.  Really, if the transition is to be handled properly, I would appeal to the President to appoint an Attorney-General as soon as possible.

2.46
PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I feel compelled to bring this matter although you committed the main substance of the issue to a committee of Parliament.  

Some time last year you provided clarification on the election of local councils and when you look at roadmap and the national Budget there is no provision for elections of local councils next year. People out there are now confused as to whether the present local councils will serve for four years as provided for and be elected next year, or whether their life will be extended. 

The recent problems in the Constitutional Court made it very clear that if the Constitution says two years, it is two years. We get very concerned because we do not know what to tell our people when they ask us on the status of the local councils. Since the other time you gave us some guidance, I ask that you guide the House on this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Although the point you have made is valid, I think we should address this point when we are dealing with the Budget. We have not yet started dealing with the Budget but when we do, the appropriate committee dealing with the Electoral Commission should put that question to them. But I think here nobody may answer it; let us leave it for that occasion when we are considering the Budget, but the point is valid. 

As for the roadmap, I said it is not the final roadmap. We have also to consider it; you may find that it may go up to 2006.

2.48
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I am privileged to be a Member of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee and I want to bring to the notice of this House some relevant material. Uganda being a member of the African Union, on Tuesday this week, the UN Chief Kofi Annan made a very good statement, which is good for the consumption of legislators like us. Now that we have a big task ahead of us, and if I may quote him - this was on Tuesday in Addis-Ababa where African leaders met - including our President, retired Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. Kofi Annan said; 

“There is no truer wisdom, no clear mark of statesmanship than knowing when to pass the torch to the new generation”. And he goes on to say, “And no Government –” (Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification. Is hon. Odonga Otto quoting Kofi Annan or hon. Aggrey Awori who made the same quotation in the House? I remember hearing those words from hon. Aggrey Awori. So, I want to know whether he is quoting hon. Awori or Kofi Annan.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think at the end of the quotation, he will have to give us the source.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much.  Mr Speaker, I was still quoting and I will tell the source to my good friend, hon. Nankabirwa. The quotation continues, “… and no government should manipulate or amend a Constitution to hold office beyond the prescribed term limits that they accepted when they took office. Let us always remember that Constitutions are for the long-term benefits of the society not the short-term goals of the rulers. Let us pray that the days of indefinite one-man or one-party Governments are behind us.” 

This can be obtained from the website on the proceedings of the AU Summit in Addis-Ababa and specifically the address of Kofi Annan. Mr Speaker, I felt this is very important, it is even in today’s newspapers –(Interruption)

THE SPEKAER: Is it very urgent or important?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, it is important, I do not know if it is urgent –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I said, is it very urgent?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, it is very urgent because that is where we are heading, and as I sit down I just want to remind the august House that this is a million-dollar quotation from the UN Secretary General Kofi Annan, and as legislators warm up to get into the blast furnace, we should learn to benefit from advice of those who have served the world and not just a constituency. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Can we proceed on to another item?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRADE (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Mr Speaker, until March 2004 vanilla had become a household name in Uganda and was often referred to as black gold or the “darling cow”. From late May 2004 to-date, vanilla farmers are witnessing price shocks resulting into suspicions among the stakeholders, that is, farmers, traders and exporters, and each seem to be pointing an accusing finger to the other. 

Whereas the sudden price fall has left most farmers and exporters puzzled as to what could have happened overnight, it should also be admitted that the price increase was abnormal and could not be sustained by the consumers. For example, the world price rose from US $110 per kilogram to US $500 per kilogram in a period of three months. The price trend in Uganda in the last four years has been as shown hereunder:

In the harvest season of June/July 2000, the price was Shs 3,500 per kilogram of green beans; in June/July 2001, the price was Shs 7,000 per kilogram of green beans. The following year in June/July 2002, it was Shs 25,000 per kilogram; in June/July 2003, Shs 50,000 per kilogram and in December 2003, Shs 100,000 per kilogram.  

What we are now experiencing are the forces of demand and supply trying to stabilize the prices although our farmers may find it difficult to believe the price fall from about Shs 100,000 per kilogram to the current Shs 7,000. The anxiety now is how long the downward trend will last, let alone vanilla being a high labour intensive activity as exemplified by hand pollination. It may not be easy to give a convincing explanation to this phenomenon.  

World commodity markets:

Mr Speaker, the current crisis facing the vanilla industry is characteristic of any commodity traded under futures and options that is, forward contracts as prices tend to be determined by the offers received by the brokers. The prices usually tend to be fairly speculative and, therefore, between harvest and the buying season, the brokers on the other side undertake market intelligence in an effort to establish the possible levels of production. In other words, the quantity to be purchased depends on the offers available and brokers can, therefore, back out whenever the market trend appears to be unattractive. 

Generally, the vanilla market is divided into two. One is the food flavour market and two is the industrial/extraction market, which takes a large percentage and is dominated by USA. The food flavour market has been small and concentrated in Europe and Japan.  

For a long time the world production of vanilla came from Madagascar, which contributes over 60 percent of the world supply, while the remainder was coming from India, Papua New Guinea, Fiji and Uganda in the recent times. On the demand side, the major markets have been USA, the European Union and Japan, with USA taking 50 to 60 percent. The above scenario depicts dangers of concentration of powers and the likely impact that can arise in the event of a sudden mismatch. Michael Porter’s five forces model, however, attempts to explain the situation: barriers/threat of entry, bargaining power of the suppliers, intra-industry rivalry, the bargaining powers of the buyers and the threat of substitutes. 

Intra-industry rivalry:

Within intra industry rivalry, brand identity appears to have been very significant. Madagascar had emerged a leading supplier of high quality vanilla and given her share in the world market, it was very significant. However, when the country experienced the devastating effects of cyclones between 2002 and 2004, production was greatly affected hence the reduced world supply and thus contributing to the price hike. It, therefore, demonstrates the effects of dominance in the market place whereby the presence or absence always exerts a significant impact. It is true that many farmers and exporters benefited from the Madagascar crisis thus witnessing price boom and apparently the boom is now over, hence the shocks.

Bargaining powers of the buyers and threat of substitutes:

The rapidly increasing prices could not, however, be sustained by the consumers and therefore the big buyers in USA and Europe started backing out. The overall result was of a substitute of vanilla, that is synthetic, showing price sensitivity of the customers.

Bargaining powers of the suppliers:

In the period that ensued the supply volume could not be increased overnight and this attracted new players in the industry like Indonesia, Mexico, China, Comoros, Malawi, Kenya and Turkey. Available information indicates the Madagascar crisis is over and the country has resumed production with this year’s output expected at 1,500 tonnes, up from 400 tonnes. If this is so then we should expect further price decline before eventually settling. 

The current world prices are between US $40 to US $45 per kilogram, compared to last season when vanilla was being bought at between US $400 and US $500, and Ugandans were selling at Shs 100,000 per kilogram. The above scenario means that prices have fallen ten times and farmers are now selling at Shs 7,000 per kilogram and the price may settle at around Shs 5,000 per kilogram. 

It is also apparent that the major importers had stocks of vanilla from the last season and when vanilla became very expensive due to income inelasticity, the consumers started switching to synthetic vanilla. The importers could not make new purchases hence forcing the prices down. The prices indicated on the Internet are rather misleading because they are for the last season’s crop, which was purchased expensively.

The implications of the above development may range from loss of revenue, employment and closure of some industries that is bound to affect the socio-economic lives of many Ugandans. Vanilla though exported unprocessed, had emerged as the highest paying product and its magical rise in revenue earnings from US $1.26 million in 1998 to US $11.948 million in 2003, cannot be over emphasized.  According to Taimex (U) Ltd, a vanilla exporter, a farmer can still break even at Shs 2,000 per kilogram. Therefore, farmers need to appreciate that when Uganda became a known player in the vanilla industry, in 1988, the gate price was Shs 1,500 per kilogram. One acre of vanilla supports 400 plants, each of which produces two kilograms per annum. This means that from an acre, one can harvest 800 kilograms per annum. At a cost of Shs 7,000 per kilogram, the farmer can fetch Shs 5.6 million per acre per annum. 

I am reliably informed that the cost of production, minus guarding the gardens, is Shs 1.2 million per acre, per annum. This leaves a margin of Shs 4.4 million as profit.

The strategic options for Uganda:

Mr Speaker, in the short to medium term, the options for Uganda should include:

1. Hold on to the cured stock in proper storage. The longer the vanilla stays, the stronger the vanilla.

2. Maintaining high quality of the product for when new uses of vanilla are found, prices will depend on quality. Such a producer will still be able to sell and this, therefore, calls for maximum observance of code of practice. During Madagascar’s crisis, Uganda was being viewed as a possible alternative source of high quality vanilla. Therefore, the country could still export vanilla if it can position herself in this regard. This will depend largely on the co-operation of all the stakeholders and the enforcement mechanism. 

It is important to point out that Uganda has in the past been blacklisted for poor quality vanilla because the beans were immature, due to premature harvesting and contained foreign bodies that is, small nails deliberately impregnated into the beans to increase the weight.

3. Vanilla farmers should embark on diversification. This is an eye opener, and such shock can happen to any product be it industrial or agricultural since consumer tastes and technological inventions are constantly changing. Fruit and vegetable production is one such alternative.

4. Farmers in the vanilla growing areas should be trained in curing, as they cannot hold onto the green beans. Therefore, government through its agencies/institutions like PMA, NAADS, development partners and projects like APEP and the private sector and associations like UVAN, VANEX et cetera are urged to urgently look into this possibility as vanilla is still the most paying unprocessed commodity. Six kilograms of mature green beans at Shs 7,000 per kilogram have the value of Shs 42,000 or US $23, and yield one kilogram of cured beans, which goes for US $40 to US $50, yet the curing process is simple and does not require machinery.  

5. Lastly, a company known as Black & Brown has already shown interest in investing in processing vanilla into its final products. The company has already set up structures in Ntenjeru.  

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the price shock is largely an economic behaviour that should be expected in any commodity trading, and with careful planning, the impact could be contained. The situation, therefore, calls for calm and aggressive sensitisation of the public. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister.

3.07
MR MUTEBI KITYO (Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister for the statement he has given to Parliament. 

Honourable members, the price of vanilla, particularly last year, went up because of two reasons. The first reason was that Coca-Cola, California started producing vanilla Coke and they needed a lot of vanilla to produce it. 

Two, the three big companies which are buying vanilla, the Marc Comic, Shanic and Zinc and Krest, started competing against each other and escalating the price.

Last year in September when I took two kilos of vanilla as samples for an agricultural show, each kilo was bought at US $400, and I wished I had taken more. But the problem was that the three companies started to talk to each as to why they should continue to compete against each other and they came to the conclusion that they reduce the price of vanilla from US $390 per cured kilo of vanilla to only US $130. That is why the price drastically went down.

The price was then fixed at US $130 and US $80 for second grade vanilla for last season, that is, between December and April. The crop now being harvested is not yet on the market. It is with the farmers. 

Another, additional problem is that the food dealers have started using synthetic vanilla, which is produced in the factory; after this vanilla became so expensive for them to afford and be able to break even.

The local problem now, and why farmers are demonstrating, is because the local buyers started making advance payments on the farm for the vanilla to be harvested between now and October. Many farmers were given things like Pick Ups and heavy advance payments of up to Shs 5 million. The local buyers have made a cartel to chase away buyers from Kenya because they think these Kenyan buyers will buy their vanilla, which they had paid for in advance. I am sure the Kenyan buyers would have paid the farmers a little more but because these people are worried that they had paid the farmers, they are trying to chase them away.

The problem we have here is that the Government of Uganda has never taken interest in vanilla. In fact in 1993 and 1994, some government officials were decampaigning vanilla because they thought children would not go to school but stay at home pollinating vanilla in the farms. If it were not for Aga Sekalaala and Tamale Musoke, who continued to encourage farmers to grow vanilla, this Parliament would not be talking about vanilla now. I think what the Government has to do to solve the problem at hand is to help the vanilla farmers come together and get the capacity and be able to buy their own vanilla. If they could buy their own vanilla, they could even stock for the future.

The price will definitely go up; the up and down trend is part of the market forces. Without that, we shall continue to get these shocks. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.11
MRS SARAH NYOMBI (Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have one major concern to put to the Minister. He categorically put it that Uganda has in the past been blacklisted for poor quality. What is the responsibility of the Uganda Bureau of Standards whereby we reach an extent of exporting vanilla with nails? Actually this once happened with maize and coffee. We had stones in coffee and it is also one of those factors, which put our produce at a disadvantage. 

Is there a measure that the ministry is taking to force the Uganda Bureau of Standards to check the quality of our produce?

Secondly, I want to make an appeal because vanilla is the only crop we have hope in. We have coffee wilt, banana wilt; it is all happening in Ntenjeru. Now the chance we had with vanilla is also shattered. How could we be helped? Government should take the responsibility of fixing minimum prices for our produce, be it coffee, cotton, or tea. Vanilla is not out of business. Please, Government do something; our people will die poor. Thank you very much.

3.14
MR JOHN WAGONDA-MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the honourable minister for his statement about vanilla and the falling prices, a matter that we raised on this Floor. At least he has kept his promise to give a reply, and I commend him for that. 

However, Mr Speaker, I do not know what his source of information is for the price of vanilla, which he quotes as being about US $50. I have information to the contrary from Nielson Massey Vanillas Inc. of the United States quoting the Foregate price as being US $400.

Besides that, I would have been happy if the honourable minister had clarified the role of his ministry in finding market for the produce of this country. The farmers in my village take on crops as popularized by government extension agents and they equally expect government to play a role in finding markets for them. At that rate of US $480 per kilogram in line with the practice that has been pertaining of the exporters and the farmers sharing, the price of vanilla would not have fallen below Shs 36,000. 

Mr Speaker, I take exception to what hon. Kityo has said, that because some buyers had paid in advance, they are now chasing away other buyers from the market. Where do they get such authority? Why do they not deal with individuals, to whom they paid their money rather than intimidating other players in the market? Surely, we cannot say that these are market forces when other participants in the market are being forcefully denied access to the farmers. Indeed, if the prices were as low as the minister says they are, how come buyers from Kenya are willing to pay up to Shs 50,000 or even more for the crop and yet they are being denied access to the crop? Are we going to protect the few buyers who profit from the sweat of the farmers? As a Government we owe protection to the farmers who are actually doing a lot to popularize this crop vanilla.

Mr Speaker, definitely, I would invite the minister to give assurance to our farmers that government will find a market for them.  

May I also take this opportunity to seek assurances, there have been moves to popularize the growing of Moringa, and a lot of farmers have invested in growing it. Are the farmers going to come to the same fate as those who are growing vanilla? If the market cannot be found by the Government, why should government start popularising these crops and actually take land, which would otherwise be used for the production of food crops?

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, and hon. Wagonda-Muguli, in 1987 and 1988, I remember in the Army we were told to grow a lot of Piri Piri (pepper) and around Magamaga the entire hill and other areas grew a lot of Piri Piri. The economics of pepper - nobody even got a single shilling. Now of recent there has been the economics of vanilla and Moringa. So, can anybody especially hon. Nduhuura really tell me the economics of the forces of supply and demand that cause a price to fall from Shs 100,000 to Shs 5,000? He is talking of Shs 7,000 but Madam Ssebagereka the other day on television was talking of Shs 4,000 and Shs 5,000; I watched her. Can you tell me what type of economic forces of supply and demand can cause such a change of price? What do you want the peasants of this country to do in light of the liberalised economy?

MR GAGAWALA: Mr Speaker, I would like to enrich my colleague from Mukono, Buikwe, that it is the responsibility of the Government of Uganda to protect the weak citizens of society particularly the peasants. If the colonial government who were really hyenas to these peasants decided to protect the peasants of Uganda by forming the marketing boards so that they would form – I am not taking you back to the boards but I am saying firmly and pointing to the Minister of Industry that it is the responsibility of the Government of Uganda to protect the peasants of Uganda against the sharks in the market who are exploiting the people. What is happening with vanilla is just a small thing. It is happening in cotton ten times over, it is happening in coffee ten times over, and it is happening to the fish industry ten times over. Basically the peasants of the country are being taken for a ride and being exploited heavily. I think it is the job of the Ministry of Industry to seriously address the problem, which is affecting the people. 

It is the responsibility of the Ministry of Industry to organize the people so that they can have better bargain power in the market. If we just leave it to nature our people are slowly going to loose out and this country is going to be taken over. I thank you.

MR WAGONDA: I thank my colleagues for the information given.  

MRS RAINER: Thank you very much Wagonda-Muguli for giving way. Last year when we were harvesting cotton in Pallisa and different buyers came in, just because of the competition that was rising, one of the buyers hired the Uganda Police to terrorize the farmers - and this is a government institution. He went around with the Police so that no other buyer was allowed to buy the cotton. He is known as Mr Bruce, from South Africa. So, we feel that government is not really lending a hand to the farmers and the people who we profess have the powers down in the villages.

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, the minister referred to suspicions between the farmers and the buyers but he really did nothing to alley the suspicions of the farmers that there are some high-ranking officers who have actually infiltrated the Vanilla Exporters’ Association. The peasants are concerned; how come the buyers are now being given armed personnel who are not from private security agencies but from government in order to chase away other buyers from Kenya? What do you expect the farmers to think? 

I think the Minister owes the country and these farmers an explanation. After all, why is there a Ministry of Trade and Industry and whatever it is? It is supposed to take care of the interests of the farmers of this country. Otherwise, I might be persuaded to go by the comments of one leader in this country who has evaluated and concluded that the Ministry of Trade is not operative. I know that it is operating and that is why the minister is able to come up with that statement. But I think he can enrich that statement further and give a more satisfactory explanation to the people of this country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are remaining with five minutes, according to our rules. Although this matter will go to the appropriate Committee of Trade and also that of Agriculture to be exhaustively handled, I think it is proper that we give the member, who raised this matter, the Floor. Proceed. 

3.26
MR ANTHONY MUKASA (Buikwe County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I raised this issue after my voters had approached me about the falling prices of vanilla. I thank the Minister for having come up with the statement. But as he said, it is very difficult to convince the ordinary farmer that the price of vanilla fell from US $400 to US $40 this season. It is unbelievable and unacceptable – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not know whether you read foreign papers? I do everyday. The problem facing Madagascar is exactly what we are facing here. What they have decided to do is stop exporting it for some time. So, this problem of vanilla is not only in Uganda. I read the Nation everyday and this issue was there three days ago and the price was reduced to one third. That is the position elsewhere. 

MR ANTHONY MUKASA: Thank you, Mr Speaker for that information. However, what I am going to state are the reasons my people are advancing pertaining to the present situation. They are saying prices could have fallen but they could not have fallen to that level. They are saying there are some high-profile Ugandans who have started growing vanilla, including Members of Parliament, Ministers, other high-ranking Ugandans, and therefore want to discourage the poor farmers to get out of the business –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am personally touched when he says among the new entrants in the vanilla business are Members of Parliament. I happen to be one of those who have heavily invested in vanilla. I would like to ask the honourable member to clarify and be succinct as to whom exactly he is referring to. Who has entered the market that has discouraged the rest of the other peasants from growing this very lucrative crop?

MR ANTHONY MUKASA: Mr Speaker, my growers of vanilla are saying one of the reasons the vanilla price has fallen to as low as Shs 5,000 is because some high ranking and high-profile Ugandans, including me, have started growing vanilla. And because we have found that vanilla is very expensive, we are trying to monopolize the business of growing vanilla so that we discard of the ordinary farmer.

They are also saying there is some connivance between –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Order! Order please.

MR ANTHONY MUKASA: There is some connivance between the exporters of vanilla and some other would-be buyers. They want to buy the crop at that low price so that the farmers get discouraged and later people remain in the business. 

Before the Minister read his statement I whispered to him that people are saying because there is some connivance –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, the honorable member holding the Floor keeps on saying “people are saying”. Is what they are saying the truth, according to your own judgment? If it is the truth, tell us and present the facts on the ground other than telling us “people are saying”. Clarify on that.

MR ANTHONY MUKASA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The words I am saying are words from people in my constituency and I want the minister to say they are right or not. My people are saying they want to be kicked out of business and this is why some officers, as my brother hon. Wagonda-Muguli has stated it, a group of people prevented buyers from Kenya who were willing to offer Shs 50,000 for a kilogram of green vanilla. If the price had fallen so low, why is it that at this material time some of the leaders in this country went out and brought people from Kenya to come and pay Shs 50,000 for a kilogram of vanilla?  

Honourable minister I want you to throw some light on this. Is it true that people from Kenya have been prevented from coming to Uganda to buy vanilla at Shs 50,000? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should conclude because according to the rules, this should not take more than 30 minutes. This is not a matter, which we can conclusively deal with here. I would suggest that both the Committee on Trade and the Committee on Agriculture handle this matter and then they give us recommendations that we can adopt. Thank you.

MR KAGIMU: Mr Speaker, I am asking that the minister could issue a similar statement on coffee because coffee is more serious than Vanilla. (Laughter). And I put in a question but for a year it has never been answered. So, I am appealing to you that the minister could issue a similar statement on coffee. Thank you very much.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS DELIVERED TO PARLIAMENT ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT ON 4 JUNE 2004

(Debate Continued.)

3.34
MR SULAIMAN MADADA (Bbale County, Kayunga): Mr Speaker, allow me to begin by saying that, “There would be no yesterday without today. Neither would there be tomorrow without today.” When I listened to the President making his Address on the State of Nation, he ably gave us the historical background of the NRM struggle. I appreciate and I think there is a lot that we need to learn particularly in this season when we are preparing for a transition. 

But more importantly, I said, there would be no today without tomorrow. Somewhere he mentioned the vision and I also took time to read the same statement the previous year and he mentioned that lack of a shared vision was a problem to this country. This statement puzzles me. One, I know this country has ever sat down to develop Vision 2025. I would like to think that this is very important for us to look at and examine as leaders and we own it as a shared vision of this country. If it is no longer holding water, we discard it. Therefore, it is important that we address this Vision 2025, a prosperous Uganda, a harmonious nation. I think this is very important to us.  

The President was able to talk about the markets and this is a big challenge to us. Our technocrats would be able to look at this issue. Apart from making these statements, the Government technocrats would help this country to look at the issue of the markets. What we are talking about today, even about vanilla, is the issue of market and there is what we call the export promotion council. When you say we need to have export-led growth, I think we need to look at the market as a big issue and we should have the technocrats advising the farmers in time. I am happy that the minister was able to bring the statement here but it is also important that in every ministry, the PRO department should be able to give timely information to the farmers because speculations are very dangerous and they are discouraging our farmers. I think this is very necessary because when you listen to the media, you hear people talk about leaders not caring because responsible government officials have failed to come out with information. This is very important.

The other issue was about the market at home by increased population and the President was also able to refer to the population of China and India. In 1965 the population of China was about 729 million people and to-date it is about 1.3 billion people. Also India had 495,000,000 and today it is beyond one million. I want to look at the history of this country that by 1959, the population of Uganda was about 6,000,000 people.  To-date we are about 24.7 million people. But as we look at this population, we need to analyse other factors related to the population. We need to look at the composition, the quality and how the population is formed. I look at my position in Bbaale constituency and I know by statistics that about 52 percent of the population of Uganda is below 14 years of age and these are economic dependants. A head of a family in my constituency is managing 20 people in one home. So, the Minister of Planning together with the Population Secretariat, as we address the issue of population, should also look at the structure of the population and the composition –(Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, my honourable colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, my colleague made a statement about his constituency that has puzzled me a bit. He said that the head of a family is managing at least 20 people. I am just wondering because in the circumstances like we have in the North, where relatives run from rural areas to relatives and you can find 20 or so people, that is explainable but in Bbale County where – because this means each household has on average about 20 people. I am just puzzled! Is it the question of polygamy across the board there or what? (Laughter).

MR MADADA: My colleague, you wanted clarification from me. One of the factors is that what you have mentioned. A Hajji like me would have three to four wives. But also the scourge of HIV/AIDS, you note that many young mothers and fathers are dying at an early age and this population of orphans is depending on relatives and this is possible. Therefore, as we look at the population, I can see a lot of burden. The working force is so little but the dependants are so many and when addressing the issue of poverty, we need to look at the people producing and the people consuming. Otherwise, the marginal propensity to consume is becoming bigger than the marginal propensity to save. Eventually, we have a problem of poverty in the community.

The other issue I want to mention is the legislative programme. The President came out and said we have about 86 Bills to address in addition to the other 18 and I think this was a very challenging issue both to the Executive and Parliament. My appeal here, therefore, is that this is a big load that is awaiting us to lift. Thus, we need to be time conscious maybe as a challenge but we also need to work harmoniously to ensure that this load can be taken on. 

On the issue of education, the President ably noted the increase of students and pupils both at primary and secondary level and as you remember, in the President’s manifesto, there was a promise of 100 secondary schools at every sub-county. I think we are moving in the right direction. But my appeal here, therefore, is that as we increase these secondary schools, we would look at even the existing secondary schools that are in miserable state. I have several times listened to the Minister of Education when I have a single secondary with two government teachers on payroll. Therefore, as we look at this matter of increasing the number of secondary education, we need to look at the capacity of putting in place enough facilities. You even get surprised when UNEB comes to close secondary schools for lack of laboratory services. You wonder who is supposed to equip these laboratories? Therefore, there are a lot of issues to be sorted out along that line.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to end by saying that looking at the President’s speech is in the interests of this country and calls for collective effort from all arms of government. Therefore, I appeal to all arms of government to come together to ensure that this is translated into reality. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You are being given seven minutes. Yesterday we said hon. Babu would speak after hon. Madada.

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE, HOUSING (Capt. Francis Babu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I would like to support the motion moved by hon. Hyuha. I want to contribute and also talk about a few points that other members have been raising. I thought I would start with foreign affairs.  

An honourable member yesterday gave the impression that this country does not have a policy for foreign affairs and that disturbed me a little because since this Government came into power, certain things have happened and today we have the East African Community of which we are the Chair.  I think two days ago they had a meeting of the African Union, we are part of the people who form the African Union. In fact, we are now on the Bureau of the African Union. The other day our head of state was invited to the G8 meeting in the United States and our relationship with all these countries seems to have improved. In fact it has improved because we have reasonable foreign policy to work with everybody in the world as our partners.
 
The image of this country has changed to an extent that you no longer go through immigration in one of these developed countries and they make you stand behind the queue. At one time you had to hide yourself. Today we are a proud people who can go to any country, once you have the right documentations you are welcomed and you can go to any country. It is an achievement. Therefore, the foreign policy of this country in the last few years has been improving from one level to another. It is important for us in fact as members of this august body to give the impression to our partners who have got embassies in this country that we appreciate our relationship, and they should not think that we actually do not appreciate the kind of friendship they have extended to us. 

Recently, South African changed their visa policy towards this country; Uganda is one of the few African countries whose nationals can go to South Africa without a visa. I think these are important points that we must register. They are also important to show that our foreign policy has actually changed. Today a Ugandan is somebody who can go to the United States with a visa and will be welcome; some of them are working there, some of them are working in Britain. There are people working all over the world, including some countries in Africa.  

The other point I want to talk about is poverty. I was amazed that people do not realize that poverty on this continent, Africa, is practically across the border. Most of our countries have more or less the same figures. If you went and got statistics from the studies carried out by UNDP and the World Bank you will find that the African countries are more or less on the same level. This is because of a lot of reasons.

Today the oil alone, if we took petroleum as a product, you will find that it has increased prices to an extent that it has caused shocks to all our economies on this continent, including those that are producing the oil. There are other economic shocks that have come up and we have been absorbing them slowly but they affect us directly or indirectly.  When a State of Nation Address is read and somebody talks about trying to find the new innovations that can help us to improve our economy, like adding value to our products that seem to be losing value all the time on the international market - I keep on hearing, what is this value addition? It is obvious, if we can add value to most of our crops, including vanilla, which has just been talked about earlier on, probably we would fetch slightly more money from the market. Probably we would be able to sell it to the Americans at a different level.  

But we would have known that with the prices going higher and higher, these people would sit down and find other methods and find other products, which they could use and they continue to do so. The only product they have failed up now to compete with is petroleum products. Otherwise, most of the other products including our copper, including a lot of metal substances over the years have dwindled in the costs in their selling prices.

DR NKUUHE: As you are a member of the Executive, are you aware that the ministry responsible for adding value, which is the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry is the least funded of all the ministries and that the President has actually put it on record that the ministry is dead? Therefore, how do you expect to add value when you do not fund the one in position to add value?

MR WADRI: I would like to inform the minister that even an alternative to petroleum products has already been found. In Brazil, as we talk now, there are a number of vehicles that are driven using alcohol.  

CAPT. BABU: I would like to thank the honourable members for their information and I would like to clearly say that I understand the distribution of our budget across our ministries. I understand the problems we have in distributing this money and giving it to different ministries and obviously, if there was a source of more money, each ministry would get more. Unfortunately, we do not have that source. 

For the vehicles using alcohol, having been flying aeroplanes for many years, I saw the alcohol cars many years ago. In fact, the country that fully developed them better, and I just want to inform my friend here, was Brazil. Brazil did quite some work on this and they brought alcoholic cars. Unfortunately, the unit cost of alcohol eventually in its production is still more expensive than petroleum products -(Interjection)- and if it were cheaper, petroleum products would have lost their value at this particular moment but this is something that we must learn and something that we pick up as we go along. They have tried electricity, they have tried hydrogen, they have tried alcohol, and they have tried different other things. They have even tried nuclear power to drive vehicles. 

In fact, the only thing, which is nearer to petroleum products, is the one used by electricity with batteries. This is so far the one, which is promising. So, if the price of oil continues going up the battery car is going to be cheaper to run and the oil will start losing value. Thank you.

MR SEBALU: The information I would like to give is with regard to the issue raised about the cars driven by alcohol. At the rate of alcoholic consumption in this country, the people would out-compete them and the cars would not move on the roads. (Laughter).  

PROF. OGENGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My colleague, hon. Johnson Nkuuhe, tried to bring out a point about value addition and I thought that maybe in the process of you answering him, you would bring that out too. But when you add value you do so; you do not add value to nothing. Our biggest problem is what we could produce potentially; we have just sat down and lamented, we are not producing. Cotton, 10,000 bales used to be half a million, now we are focusing on adding value to 10,000 bales, my brother! Why do we not produce a million bales and add value as we move along?

CAPT. BABU: I thank you very much, Prof. Ogenga.  Mr Speaker, the time has really come but adding value does bring about changes. If we can add value to cotton and the cotton producer knows there is a market to buy this cotton, they would produce this cotton. The question here is the chicken/egg situation. What comes first? In my sincere opinion, I think if we can create a market for our people be it a local market, be it an international market and we can add value to the products we have, the farmers will go ahead and produce these crops that we are talking about.

I want to talk about the markets available: African Growth and Opportunities Act (AGOA), EBA and the Japanese market. I am imploring everybody; we should distinguish among all these opportunities, which have been given to us by the developed countries. Because I keep on hearing, when people stand up they talk about AGOA and then they talk about Tri-Star. These are two different things. The African Growth and Opportunities Act is an Act of United States, it is an opportunity given to us. If we have got any product to sell, we can go to that market. 

The Europeans have given us Anything But Arms and if we can sell something in that market we are free to do so. If we have a problem here, we should talk about our problem rather than – in fact I heard somebody saying AGOA is Tri-Star. The African Growth and Opportunities Act is not Tri-Star; Tri-Star is a company and government’s support of Tri-Star, that is a business support.  

In any entrepreneurship, it is obvious that if you want to support and change your economy, you are bound to support some of these industries and there are so many industries that have been supported here. We have supported the sugar industry, we have supported different industries and the other day they supported textile industries. The question is, can we sustain the support to these industries so that we can create wealth, at the same time create jobs, and at the same time make our economy move a little bit faster? The answer is yes. The question is, how we do it?  

The reason I brought this point out is because yesterday I was watching one of these television programmes and somebody was relating AGOA to Tri-Star. They are two different things and the quicker we can get out of this, the better. You can talk about Tri-Star as a company, you can talk about the support government is giving to Tri-Star; this has nothing to do with AGOA. AGOA is an opportunities Act, which helps us to trade in the American market.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to end by really appreciating this State of the Nation Address because one of the things that I liked in there was this new committee that has been set up by Britain to study African problems. I am also to note that one of the people in that committee is a Ugandan, and I hope that this committee will be able to advise these European countries on the problems that we face in these Third World countries. It is these problems that we need to solve and we are getting there. Once we can have a fair partnership, a lot of our problems will be solved. But we cannot continue at the rate we are, to grow our crops and they continue controlling the prices for these crops, we need to find new innovations. 

Therefore, I would like to request honourable members that if the innovations, which have been given by government are not enough, I would like to hear new ones. Probably this House can give us those innovations and direct us in the right directions. Mr Speaker, I thank you.

4.03
MRS GERTRUDE KULANY (Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. It is true this country has gone through transformation and we see a lot of developments. I want to applaud the Government for that. Kapchorwa is not exceptional. As we speak now we have a new road up to the district headquarters. But I want to inform the House that two-thirds of the road is not complete and I hope this road will reach the border with Kenya.  

Mr Speaker, it is true the economy of this country is improving but what is disturbing me as a Ugandan is, who is driving this economy? You will find that actually the people in charge of this economy are not indigenous Ugandans but mostly are non-Ugandans and we are boasting that we are doing very well! It is not surprising that when you go to the villages, poverty is still biting. So, it means we, the indigenous Ugandans are still in a very poor state and yet at the same time we get information that government has borrowed a lot of money from IMF and the World Bank. Who are the beneficiaries of this money and what are we going to do about these indigenous Ugandans?
 
So far Ugandans have learnt to go to school. We cannot say that because they are illiterate they cannot run this economy. So, I want to appeal to government; much as we are proud that the economy is moving, it is not us the real Ugandans driving this economy –(Interruption)

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like some clarification on the statement, which the honourable Member has highlighted to the effect that, “Who runs the Ugandan economy?” Is she actually talking about the whole economy or she is trying to refer maybe to the industrial sector? The whole cash economy may mainly be industrial because even the monetary economy has an agricultural sector, the industrial sector and the service sector. Are you talking about the whole economy of Uganda because if it is the whole economy of Uganda, I do not think that question should arise; Ugandans must be controlling this economy? I want some clarification.

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. I want to suggest that she accepts what I am going to say that there are a number of reasons why the economy is growing and why the growth is controlled by Ugandans. One of them is because the Government, which is led by Ugandans, put in place policies that actually manage to curb some of the things that made the economy not to grow. 

For example, they put in place control of inflation and that managed to ensure that inflation throughout the country did not rise above 6 percent, or whatever it is. That means all our people can buy the goods at a similar price throughout the country.

Another reason is that the Government put in place control of the shilling. This unprecedented printing of the notes, which previous governments used to say, “If there is no money, print it” - and the Government put in place measures to make sure that we printed the amount of money that was commensurate with our production. So, this is why I say and I would like you to agree with me that actually it is Ugandans who are controlling this economy.  

Lastly, let me just say that the British economy, for example, is one of the strongest in the world and was for a long time; but it was not controlled by the British people. The money, which went into Britain, was not necessarily British money.

MRS KULANY: Mr Speaker, I have been asked for a clarification. For example, if you go to the agricultural sector, who is in charge of the sugar industry? Go to the services, who is running MTN? Go to the fish industries, who are the people running it? So, you would find that the Ugandans are actually playing a very small role. And again this AGOA, who is running it? It is not Ugandans. So, all these are disturbing issues and we should not pretend that they are not affecting us.
 
Mr Speaker, yesterday hon. Awori said Eastern part of Uganda is where poverty is highest. I want to concur with him. It is true and it is not surprising –(Interruption)

MR MULENGANI: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the honourable member for giving way. I am a bit perturbed by the fact that if we are talking of liberalisation, if we are talking of privatisation and we are talking of pulling in investors, then we should start criticising people who have the capital that are actually employing thousands of Ugandans. This is a competitive world. If we have talked of liberalising that means any Ugandan with capital is, therefore, allowed to come in and invest heavily. But in the circumstance that we do not have the Ugandans, the economy must continue running.

It is the more reason that at the moment we have the likes of the Madhivanis who are actually providing basic commodities like sugar, we have the likes of Kananathan who are employing the Ugandans, we have the likes of the Methas of this world, we have the Karim Hirjis in this country and the Sudhirs who are actually making serious employment that can even provide for tourism accommodation in this country so that the economy can move ahead. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR SEBALU: Mr Speaker, the brief information I would like to give is that for an economy to attract investment you need to have attained a certain level of economic stabilisation, and that is what Uganda has attained.

PROF. KAGONYERA: I thank the honourable member. I want to quote one specific example. There are two coffee co-operative organisations in Eastern Uganda, one is in Mbale and the other is in Kapchorwa. One is Bugisu Co-operative Union and it has a foreign investor who has brought in money and it is doing very well. The other one in Kapchorwa has no foreign investor and it is not doing anything. I wonder whether the honourable member is helping the situation by criticising the involvement of foreigners in our economy. 

The second piece of information, Mr Speaker, is that this Parliament approves all the loans we get and before they approve the loans they look at the projects on which the money is going to be spent. It is this same Parliament, which is supposed to oversee whether that money has been spent properly. So, the honourable member should blame herself for not knowing whether the money we borrow is put to good use or not. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS NAMUYANGU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to inform my colleague that it is not true that it is only foreigners who have invested here. We have examples of people like Wavamuno who is managing GM TAMPECO and other companies. We have people like Mulwana and many other Ugandans who are involved in projects like making wine, and so many other companies.  

I also want to use this opportunity to answer hon. Awori. He said we have very few industries in the east. I want to put it on record that eastern region is second to central in terms of the number of industries. It is in this regime that even districts like Busia have had industries. We have one of the biggest fish factories in Busia District.

PROF. OGENGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will be given opportunity to make your contribution because now she is flooded with –(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA: Yes, it would help the debate because the information that has been given probably does not help us to appreciate the situation we are in. I think what the honourable member is saying is not politics but the facts on the ground. We can talk about the second highest number of industries being in the east; just today in the newspapers there is an article of how the RDC of Jinja clashed with one of the LC III chairpersons. The LC III chairperson, who was talking for the people of Jinja and who did not have a job to defend in respect of painting a beautiful image of government, said that 75 percent of the industries in Jinja are either in receivership or they have closed. And for us to sit here and say, “We have so many industries in the east”, we are not helping ourselves. 

The question that we must fundamentally ask is that, are we doing those things that we must do so that our people actually benefit? It is not enough that one of those two coffee co-operatives works and the other one does not. The information I want to give you is very simple. We are a country that must invest in agriculture and invest seriously in order to transform. I am glad that in the President’s speech - when I come to my contribution I will point it out. But as long as we contribute two percent of our national budget to agriculture, we will sit here for 100 years. China, which is mentioned, here invested in agriculture; India invested in agriculture and in its own people. The foreigners are just going in now. They supported their own people and they have transformed.
  
MRS KULANY: Mr Speaker, I want to make it very clear that I am not against liberalisation. What I am saying is that the black Ugandan must be lifted up. When we get money you must look for these blacks. I am sure they have the potential to do what others are doing at the moment. That is what I am trying to say but I am not against any foreigners investing in this country. What I am saying is that a lot of attention has been paid to people who are not indigenous Ugandans.

I was talking about Eastern Uganda being a very poor region. It is true! At one time I was in the Prime Minister’s office, I came across a map showing micro-finance institutions in this country.  The whole of Eastern Uganda, from Kapchorwa to Arua, there were no micro-finance institution and it is not surprising that these people are poor. They have no access to loans or credit. So, when we mention this, we are not talking politics, we are talking serious matters affecting our people. Mr Speaker, I hope that this loan, which is in the Ministry of Finance, shall be extended to the Eastern region especially to make sure that they catch up with the rest of this country. 

In conclusion - (Interruption) 

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Kulany for being magnanimous and allowing me to make this statement. But some time ago we published a report about micro-finance institutions in this country. It is true that there are certain parts of this country, which had not had the opportunity, but it is also equally true that we have a deliberate programme called the micro-finance outreach programme, which is allowing the Government to reach out to those areas, which have not been reached.

Number two; the Government micro-finance section is less than 10 percent of the micro-finance industry in Eastern Uganda. There are plenty of NGOs that have reached many of these areas with regard to micro-finance. 

And finally, although the micro-finance support centre is now in the Ministry of Finance, the Prime Minister is in charge of co-ordinating and monitoring what happens in government. We would like to receive you, honourable members, in our office as early as you are able to come and we make sure that the right conditions are created for you to have micro-finance support from the Government side. But as for the NGOs side, we do not have direct control over them. But I can assure honourable members that the NGOs look out for those disadvantaged parts of Uganda and they extend this micro-finance support out to them. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS KULANY: Mr Speaker, in conclusion, on security, I want to say that as far as my region or where I come from is concerned, it has improved and we are grateful for that. But of recent the LDUs they had recruited to protect people against cattle rustling in their training camps, over 150 of them ran away from the camps because they were starving. So, I want to request government that they should feed these young Ugandans who have volunteered to defend this nation. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.21
MR FRED BADDA (Bujumba County, Kalangala): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am also standing to support the motion and I would like to thank the President for his good Address to the Nation. However, I have a few comments starting with page 4 where the President said he would like to add value to products and he said that he was now concentrating on coffee, cotton, bananas; and honey and he requested for our support. 

I would like to comment that if the President wants our support he would really involve us through the Cabinet to know what he is planning for us. An example is this one of vanilla. We would really have known, we would have got an institution to work as an early warning centre so that the farmers are helped before we campaign. Before we help the President to mobilise for production we should know what will happen in the near future because we have the marketing system that can really help to inform us what would happen in the near future. That way when we help the President to mobilise we will not be frustrated and look small before the farmers.  

He also talked about fish and he said he is satisfied with the way fish is being processed. I feel there is still more that can be added because what we are doing now is just removing bones and the scales and then we take to the market. We can still do much more by even canning and spicing so that we earn much more for the country and the farmers as well.

About education, UPE has really achieved reasonable success. However, in my constituency I have been frustrated and disappointed by one programme called “multi-grade” programme in the Ministry of Education. It is a pilot project; it has been piloted since 1998 and it is six years old but still a pilot project. This is a project, which has been copied and transplanted in words from Ireland and Colombia. It is a system where one teacher in one room teaches more than one class. This was a way of trying to avoid this teacher ceiling, where you have a small number of children in a class like 25 pupils in primary one, two and five and, therefore, you get one teacher teaching three classes at the same time. This has been a pilot project since 1998 and there are five schools –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask my honourable colleague just to make me understand how this thing works. Does he really want to say that this teacher gets the primary one, primary two and primary three classes and puts them under the same roof at the same time and teaches them the same thing? Is that what you mean?

MR BADDA: Absolutely, that is what I mean and it is called, the “multi-grade” project.

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, we do not have any Minister from Education here. Maybe the chairperson can confirm whether that is the case because members are disturbed, they do not understand. Are you aware of this programme? This time you are talking as the Chairperson of the Social Services Committee.

MRS HYUHA: Mr Speaker, honourable members, what I am aware of is that the Ministry of Education has been having programmes for the more disadvantaged areas. One of them is what we call ABEK, the Alternative Basic Education for Karamoja. This programme was designed to manage the situation there because children would run away from school. What happens is that a teacher follows these children to their homes, and even the parents benefit. Regardless of who is in that home, this teacher must design a programme to teach them all.  

Another one is what he is talking about. Probably given the hard conditions to convince teachers to go to this island, it is possible. Even here I can design a programme to teach this class regardless of levels of education. But it depends on the method you employ in that class. It is possible.  

THE SPEAKER: I think honourable members, as you see, this is a very serious matter, which we are not aware of. The matter should be followed up in your committee and then you give us a report later. It is a new programme; we did not know about it unfortunately.

DR NKUUHE: Mr Speaker, this thing is not as new as you think because we visited Kalangala and we saw the system work. I had experienced it in many countries where in a community of very few students - in fact in North America it used to happen - they would take them to a Church hall and then they teach two or three classes in one hall. But there the issue is that the students teach each other. So, the teacher is just a facilitator. But I think for Kalangala –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: For nursery level we understand; but we are talking about primary three, four and five.

DR NKUUHE: Yes, you can combine. For Kalangala the critical issue is not the multi-grades but actually the way they are looking at their development because they are trying to force development when the people are going the other way. They are trying to force people to settle on land when actually they are settled by the fishponds. So in fact what you need to do is put resources and facilities where the people are and, therefore, you can aggregate them and the classes will be bigger. But this business of scattering them, I do not think it is going to be sustainable, honestly.

MR BADDA: Thank you, honourable member, for supplementing. But even our Hansard records have it. At one time I expressed concern about the teacher ceiling because we were having very few teachers prohibited by this ceiling. The hon. Minister in charge of Primary Education came here and told us about this “multi-grade” programme that is being piloted in Kalangala in five schools. 

My major concern is not about this project being there or not but equipping it. If you are bringing this project, you should come with proper skills and aids. The teachers that are being used in this programme have never been given any special training at all for the last six years and if you are doing this project, you are supposed to be using special training aids. These aids have never been availed and I am also concerned about the piloting. How do you pilot for six years and nothing has been changed? Is it still good to call it a pilot project? Are you still piloting – for six years - without having any change? That is my major concern, which I would like to be clearly followed up.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I got also concerned about the conclusion of this speech. When the President said that we had handled about 11 Bills and we had an outstanding number of 18 Bills, and on top of those we were going to receive some –(Interruption)

MRS HYUHA: Mr Speaker, I wanted some clarification because the honourable member is raising an issue, which concerns me, as a Member of the Social Services Committee, and also the mover of the motion. So, I need to get clear clarification and you have just recommended that Social Services needs to make a follow up of this problem. One of his immediate concerns is about the teachers’ ceiling. I do not know whether in training and then you are talking of teaching aids, regarding this programme –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, he is talking about people who are participating in this scheme but are not trained. Although the scheme was introduced it is being done by volunteers who have no method of conducting it - this particular, special project.

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to hear from the honourable member because we have been voting money in order to encourage teachers –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But the honourable member is going to come to your committee. As I have said, this is a very important issue, which should not be dealt with in this programme of the President’s speech. It has only been identified and members are interested to know this in detail. This can be done when you are dealing with the policy statement of the Ministry of Education.

MRS HYUHA: Okay, I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR BADDA: Thank you very much. In conclusion, I was saying that preparing the Cabinet knowing very well that we could perhaps handle an optimum of about 25 Bills in a year, or 20 or below 20, how come they prepared 86?

THE SPEAKER: I think what the President was saying was that during the year they intended to produce about 80 Bills. It is not that the 80 are there and we have to handle them. But their policy statement the Cabinet has indicated that during the year they may have to introduce those 80 Bills.

MR BADDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, I had thought that maybe it was a trick to bring all of them at once and to make the term longer. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: So you want another term?

4.33
MRS MAGOOLA ZIRABAMUZALE (Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to join others in thanking the President for his State of the Nation Address. 

I want to start by congratulating the President and government for the UPE programme, which by the end of last year became a big success when the first batch of the primary 7 students sat. This year we received their results and there was good performance in comparison with other classes, which we had had before this UPE. The comparison was that they performed well whereas we all had fears that these classes were going to perform poorly.

Another thing is that he put us in a clear picture that Universal Secondary Education is in the pipeline. I would like to urge that it is worked on so that within a short time our UPE children can join the Universal Secondary Education.  

The efforts of His Excellency the President on market access and value addition on to our crops, I think is going to do us a lot of good when success comes our way. I am sure people will benefit a lot when we have brought our crops, to have valued added to them. 

Mr Speaker, there was something to do with the transformation of the Ugandan society. I can see that there are efforts being made by the Government and more especially by the President to do this. My fear or where I am disturbed is that transformation for my Basoga in Iganga District may take time to come if we do not improve on the instruments that we use, more especially when it comes to agriculture. Our people are still using the hand hoe; there is not much that one can do with the hand hoe, say, to do extensive agriculture. I am not quite sure that we can produce a lot when we are still using a hand hoe. I would like to urge government that tractors and ox ploughs are given to the people either on credit or good will so that we can help people do a lot more on their gardens with those machines, other than the hand hoe. I am quite definite that if people were assisted to use such machines they would be able to produce a lot more and a lot would come into their pockets. 

I want to say that commercialisation of agriculture does not mean that we remain with a hand hoe, but with what I have urged the Government to get. I am sure we can commercialise our agriculture and the benefits would be a lot more than we are getting right now. I thank you.

4.38
MR BADRU KATONGOLE (Kyaka County, Kyenjojo): Thank you very, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I thank His Excellency the President for having made a very explicit State of the Nation Address. 

I start by appreciating His Excellency the President’s intended intervention that is supposed to assist scientists pertaining to their innovations, those who want to commercialise them will be assisted to commercialise them, and putting in place a fund to pay those who will not be interested in commercialising their innovations.  

Mr Speaker, one area I want to touch that is in the State of the Nation Address is safe water coverage in rural areas. The President has put it at 58 percent but, unfortunately, I would say that my district of Kyenjojo would require affirmative action because according to the Ministry of Water figures, water coverage in that district is at 49 percent only. However, the district disputes the figures by the Ministry of Water and says coverage according to them is at 39 percent. Yesterday I heard hon. Muruli Mukasa saying the Government has done very well in the provision of water for production in respect of cattle. I do not want to disagree with him. The general picture is that, yes, government has done a lot. However, when you go in for specifics it is not the case because five dams and four valley tanks were serving my county in the 1960s but because of the neglect of the seventies and early eighties these dams got silted up. 

Recently government visited about 12 sites with the intention of sinking valley tanks. When I checked on the Directorate of Water Development of recent, I was told that although they had already arranged for a consultant in this financial year, their budget has been cut and they will not be able to get this water. I would only want to beseech government that it should look into this matter. As a matter of concern, my people have been waiting for water for their cattle for over 30 years and if they cannot get it now then they may have to lose hope. We have started to petition government and we hope by the time we reach the desk of the Ministry of Water, government would have made some re-consideration of the matter.

Then, Mr Speaker, I want to appreciate that according the State of the Nation Address the number of houses of permanent material has increased. It is at 51 percent, that is, 2.7 million of the 5.2 million houses or households we have. I wish to say that the contribution of my people of Kyaka County to these permanent houses is to some extent limited. It is limited because of the fact that some of my people are settled in what is supposed to be a refugee settlement scheme. I petitioned government some time back that it would be better for them to de-gazette this area. My reason is that this is a constitutional matter because Article 32 of the Constitution provides that all those groups that are marginalized by history should be given affirmative action. My argument is that, why should one county host two very big settlement schemes when regions like central region with over 12 districts have not settlement schemes and when the whole of the eastern region has no settlement scheme? So, I request that government should go ahead because that article says that “Government shall”, and it has no option. 

I want to tackle the area of education. The President says he wants to introduce universal secondary education, which is a welcome move. And he says in order to provide it for about one million students, including provision of structures, he would have to collect taxes that are at 30 percent of our Gross Domestic Product (GDP). I feel this is practicable because we should realize that the welfare states of Scandinavia collect taxes that are up to about 56 percent of their GDP. I feel this is practicable and we should be able to support His Excellency the President in that endeavor.

The other matter that I wanted to touch on, Mr Speaker is our rate of economic growth. I am impressed that for over 14 years our economy has been growing at 6.5 percent. This is commendable. Our people who are working on the economy must be doing a very good job. In fact, the information I have is that in the United States if the economy is growing at four percent then the incumbent party or incumbent President is assured of re-election. This could be one of the reasons why some people are worried about the lifting of the presidential term limit. But since one has performed well, then I think there would be no problem.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I want to talk about some of the cardinal reasons why FRONASA and later NRM went to the bush. I will quote; “To give the people of Uganda total sovereignty over their affairs.” The other secondary issues that the President gives, which could not have led them to go to the bush necessarily are, I quote, “Fighting colonialism and black people’s enslavement where we could.” Which means that generally this revolution has been about social transformation. As we go through this transition period, I realize there are already proposals like downsizing Parliament and reducing participation. When we go in for partisan politics, members of the armed forces may not be allowed to participate.  

My proposal is that I would like to see some changes in the Judiciary. One, I am not comfortable with a bench of six or seven Judges in the Court of Appeal, the Constitutional Court and the Supreme Court. I would like to make a proposal that we should have a College of Judges to handle those three courts of between say 25 and 50 Judges. The bench in the High Court can remain the same, but I feel the Magistrates Courts should be elective like the case in some courts in the United States. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.47
MR GODFERY KIWANDA (Mityana County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Giving the people of Uganda total sovereignty over their affairs and ensuring security of persons and their property of Uganda, according to the President’s speech, those are the two cardinal principles that made us have FRONASA and the NRA. I echo the same to especially the current Parliament of Uganda that as we are moving toward this period, these two cardinal principles should be put in our minds.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate the President and to support the motion with about three or four reasons. The President mentioned the security of this country. For sure this is the foundation of every nation, that without security we cannot have the rule of law; we cannot have Parliament; we cannot go anywhere. So, with security we want to commend the President, the UDPF and the auxiliary forces.  

Mr Speaker, when we talk about the auxiliary forces we normally talk about the Arrow Group, the Amukas and so forth. I saw the contribution of these auxiliary forces. However, these forces need to be handled with a lot of care. According to the reports we are now receiving, there is a problem in the payment of these forces. These young men are given guns and promised Shs 60,000 per month and if this is not effected, he moves with a gun everyday; he can do anything with that gun.  

Mr Speaker, I would propose that the training of the auxiliary forces should be changed. Instead of training people from a particular region to protect that particular region, they should be mixed up. When you visit these different camps you will be surprised to hear the type of songs they are singing. I have a fear that at a certain time we might have a regional conflict. When you go to the east, the Atesos have been armed; when you go to Karamoja, they have been armed; when you go to Acholi, their home guards have been armed; when you go to Lango under the Amukas, they have been armed. So, if these auxiliary forces are not handled well, a problem might arise out of this. You all know these people helped us so much to curb the insecurity in those areas. I, therefore, urge government, especially the concerned ministry, to see how these people can be recruited in the UPDF.  

Mr Speaker, on the security matters, UPDF has done a great job. We would like to commend the discipline of the UPDF; we have such a disciplined army. The President in his address said that one of the peasants in Luweero mentioned that the soldiers today are like the nuns. These days you rather meet a soldier other than meeting some of the professionals, which I many not mention. If they say there is a soldier there, you can go safely.  

Mr Speaker, in the education sector, the NRM Government has performed greatly. The increment of the UPE pupils from 2.5 million to almost eight million now is a commendable job.  

When you talk about university, we had 5,000 students in 1986 but now we almost have 75,000 students in the universities. That is a job well done. But when you talk about Universal Secondary Education (USE), we should go to this level with a lot of care. We need to consolidate what we have got at UPE. Mr Speaker, I know all members support the introduction of universal secondary education but moving to that step we should first be sure that we are already stable with UPE. But even before we introduce USE, there are problems in secondary education. Yesterday a colleague here came out and said, “What about the taxes on the private schools?” The taxes are still very high, which makes some of these schools not even able to operate.  

When you talk about UNEB examination fees, in my constituency many students go without exams after completing four years because they cannot afford the Shs 70,000 examination fee. So, before we go in for Universal Secondary Education we should think about this. One day I visited a secondary school called Nakoya, one of the Government-aided schools. I found many bicycles in the headmaster’s office. I asked him, “Mr Headmaster, are you selling bicycles?” He said, “No, I have confiscated these bicycles because these people cannot afford to pay school fees. So, I have taken these bicycles, after the exams they will go, make the money and come back and pay for these bicycles.” Many of the students who had no bicycles or animals were not able to sit for exams. This is not only in O’ Level but also in A’ Level. So, as we are thinking about USE, government should think about this exorbitant examination fee.  

Mr Speaker, about science –(Interruption)

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much for giving way.  Don’t you think, given the argument you are giving that these people cannot afford fees, that should be the more reason we should advocate for Universal Secondary Education? What do you think about that?

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable member has made a very serious statement about the auxiliary forces being armed in Eastern and Northern Uganda. Does it mean that these people are going to own these guns even after the insurgency in the North and East? I thought they are already recorded and immediately after the insurgency these guns will be withdrawn. If that is not the case then there is need to be worried.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker. Still on the same issue, we understand that you are a trained Arrow boy and I remember very well that you have urged Parliament that if possible all regions should have auxiliary forces. Being a Member of Parliament representing the people of Mityana North, how has your constituency benefited from the training you got as an auxiliary man?  

MR KIWANDA: I thank you honourable members for the clarifications. First of all, I want to respond to hon. Chairperson of the Social Services Committee that I do recommend the introduction of USE, but we still have problems at lower lever. So, before we introduce universal secondary education there is this urgent need to solve the problems at universal primary level.  

About the auxiliary forces, I have made my point. When Uganda benefits I think my people equally benefit. I am not a local leader but a national leader. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker, about science subjects, we are all urging our people to do science subjects. Recently, I heard of students being chased out of a nursing school because they did not do Biology, Chemistry and Physics. Some time back when I was still in O’ Level, the Ministry of Education used to move around in a Land Rover distributing equipment in sub-county schools, which had no science equipment. I have a school but we cannot afford that equipment. So, I urge government that if possible they should distribute this equipment in the so-called third world schools, which have no access to it. 

Other secondary schools cannot afford science teachers. Many secondary schools in the rural areas can only teach Christian Religious Education, Luganda, Runyakitara, History, and Geography. They teach Chemistry and Physics from senior one to senior two and make sure the students drop it. The teacher informs the students that these subjects are very difficult, not because they are very difficult but because the school cannot afford them. So, the Government should give assistance because they cannot own all the secondary schools.

Mr Speaker, about infrastructure, the Government has done something, except that the Mityana Road as you know is still in a very bad state. We still believe that something is going to be done. When it comes to feeder roads, it is the contrary. We have attributed most of the feeder roads to the district councils but some of the districts cannot afford to upkeep these roads. When you come to my district, Mubende, we have four counties and about 20 sub-counties and there is only one grader. One grader moving from Buwekula to Mityana to Busujju and to Kasanda; it takes too long, and yet the constituents are always demanding that our roads should be done. So, the ministry should work on some of these roads especially the roads, which connect constituencies. 

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. Apart from the grader given to the district, the money that comes from the ministry takes into account the fact that you can still get contractors to do some of those roads. I do not know whether Mubende District does that, but it is not only the grader that is supposed to be used. The funding that comes can actually be utilized in hiring other people who have equipment to do the work. That is the information I had to give.

MR KIWANDA: Thank you very much. These people have limited finances to hire the grader.  

Mr Speaker, when you go to health, government has done a very commendable job. When we talk about health centers II, III and IV, government has done something but the biggest problem here is the shoddy work that is being done on our health centers. The other year I happened to be a member of the Social Services Committee. We visited about seven districts and the health centers being built there may not be able to last for at least five years. We should think about the kind of work done in the local councils.  

On the income-generating activities, members have mentioned the falling prices of vanilla. If government doesn’t address the incomes of the people, even the few things that we have done may not be appreciated. I remember during the presidential elections people would say especially here in Buganda, “Munalya tuulo?” meaning that, “Are you going to eat just peace?” They are saying that something more should be done. I am happy the President has come out with his campaign. Last time he was in Luwero and I hope in no time he will be in Mubende, especially in Mityana North.  

The issue of suspending graduated tax for ten years; I do not think it may have an impact on our people. You found people able to pay graduated tax, we have been in government for 18 years and we want graduated tax to be abolished. That means there has been deterioration in their incomes. So, Mr Speaker, the Government should come out with the policies of making sure that incomes of the people in the homesteads are increased.

Finally, Mr Speaker, the Government should think about the issue of the constituency fund. Members of Parliament, we are suffering. We have become small presidents in our constituencies. Some of us have been indebted so highly, reason being we want to deliver in our constituencies. We may say that we have been able to enact laws but they are saying, “We are not going to eat those laws!” The people want something developmental in our constituencies. Our colleagues in Kenya and Tanzania have been given this constituency development fund. I want to assure government that if this development fund is given to Members of Parliament we shall be able to utilize it well. We have been able to use the little money that we have been getting. I hope the constituency development fund, if given; we shall be able to use it properly. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

5.05
MRS RUTH TUMA (Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the voices of my colleagues who have contributed to the issue of thanking the President for his address. I also thank the President for the visionary leadership of this wonderful nation, and Africa at large.

On page 11 of the President’s address, the President thanked the Speaker for a job well done. I am also adding my voice and I commend both the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker for steering this august House with a cool head, tolerance, respect and commitment. May the Almighty continue to guide you. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, we are beginning the transition phase and I thank the Executive for the proposed, political roadmap, which was presented yesterday. On page 12 His Excellency the President was concerned about the quorum in many sittings during the past sessions. We are beginning to shape the future of this country. I am appealing to my honourable colleagues to be dedicated and committed to ensure that we accomplish our mission. I beg to remind you of the Rules of Procedure on page 23, no. 16 and Article 88, on page 56 of the 1995 Constitution, which reminds us about our obligations as Members of Parliament. For the record, page 23 of our Rules of Procedure, no. 16 read; “The quorum of Parliament shall be one-third of all Members of Parliament entitled to vote.” 

Let me look at Article 88 of the Constitution. I would like all members to observe that, “The quorum of Parliament shall be one-third of all Members of Parliament.” I beg my colleagues, please we have a mission to accomplish and the onus is on us to make sure that we always attend the meetings in this Parliament and be able to do what we are supposed to do. We have to answer to our voters. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.09
MR HARUNA ALONGA (Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to support the motion and the movers of the motion that we record our thanks to His Excellency the President on the speech he gave on 4th June. I thank the President for the brief and precise speech he gave, which covered several specific areas of concern namely, security, the economy, infrastructure and education.  

I thank the President for his assurance that he is going to support the investors in agro-processing to add value to our crops so that we fight poverty. Mr Speaker, we need really the things that can support the farmers, maybe the industrialists should undertake this. We should have something like an agricultural bank or industrial bank where investors can borrow money. This will definitely benefit our constituencies. I was so impressed when the President talked of cotton because Yumbe, for example, was leading in production of cotton way back in 1969 and of recent also in papers we were mentioned as producing very good honey in the West Nile region. Definitely, our voters will benefit from some of these programmes.  

I also wish to commend the President on his tireless efforts to look for accessibility of markets, especially the European market and the USA market. We need to support the President. However, there must be mutual support. The President should support us and we also support him so that the ideas are seen as being conceived mutually and then nurtured together and implemented together. Unlike what is happening today, some of the efforts of the President have been seen as his own efforts. When people talk of AGOA, we think it is just something in the President’s Office and maybe some few people in the Ministry of Finance. But if we are brought aboard and we are involved fully, I think we can be of support to such good, national projects.  

On AGOA, the Hon. Babu said something about it. I was really saddened when my district was not included in the training by then. But when I contacted some of those people who were in charge in the Office of the President, they said, “But you see that is a private investor, we cannot force this on him.” The President’s idea was that they get ladies from all over Uganda and train them, but this was not the case with some of our districts. I do not know whether Arua got, but these ladies from Yumbe, Arua, and Nebbi travelled here twice and bounced. I have also heard that soon they will be recruiting. So, I urge government to consider those areas, which were not considered before so that they can also benefit from this project.  

MS NAMUYANGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to inform my colleague that when they were recruiting the AGOA girls, they went through the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) and every RDC was asked to submit the names in connection with the leadership in the district. I am really surprised to hear that Yumbe is not included. These people were considered together with Arua. I will try to verify because every district at least submitted a list of girls. As I talk now we have over 2,000 girls who are working in Tri-Star.

MR ALONGA: Thank you for the information. I am confirming that Yumbe and Arua were not considered.  

MR AWONGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, this is not my maiden speech. I am preparing my speech and at an appropriate time I will ask you to give me the permission to say what I have to say to this House.  

However, I want to inform the House that when these girls were being recruited, I was working as an RDC. It so happened that the Office of the President requested for 15 girls who had dropped out of school per district. Later on, after about three weeks, there was other information saying that the number should be increased to 34. That, therefore, meant that we had 19 more of these girls; and indeed each district recruited 34 ladies and transported them to Namboole where they were assembled.  

But it is very unfortunately to hear that after these girls were received, many districts were asked to take back their girls because Tri-Star was not yet ready for all these figures that were required. The only districts that benefited from this opportunity were people who arrived earlier. Those who arrived two days later were all sent back and districts like Yumbe, Arua, Kotido and many others were all sent back. But for my case in Adjumani, because I came two days in advance, all the 34 we brought from Adjumani were registered. I think the Member of Parliament for Yumbe District is right to ask for this, because it appears recruitment is on-going and many more people are being recruited. If that is true then it would be wise for these other people who had not benefited from this very important programme, to get it now.  So, I appeal to the Office of the President to take this as a serious matter because that is one way to share the national cake. I thank you.

MR ALONGA: Thank you for the information. On education, Mr Speaker, I wish to congratulate His Excellency the President for the achievements we have made in the fields of primary education, hoping that when universal secondary education comes we shall achieve more and more.  

On security, I commend the Government’s and the President’s efforts for ending the war in the North. I was not happy when I read the Presidents speech and only military methods were mentioned, there was no mention of peaceful methods. Although I know that the President has left the doors open, we thought this should also have been emphasized so that we are not seen as only entertaining the military option. 

I was not comfortable when there was no mention of our foreign relations. We must thank the Sudan Government for co-operating with the Uganda Government and allowing us to follow Kony down there in Sudan. This has produced positive results. But more often than not we hear reports from military leaders, from government leaders saying, “You see, Sudan is still the obstacle.” I think we need to appreciate what the Sudan Government has done so far and then ask for more. Maybe we should use some diplomatic methods to air out our complaints about certain Sudanese military commanders so that we do not send a wrong diplomatic message that we are still divided or we are still not on good terms with Sudan. 

To conclude, I need to mention something on infrastructure. I am happy with what government has achieved so far but I want to ask, now that the Minister of Works, Transport and Communication is here: what about the road equipment for some of these new districts? It is becoming difficult to maintain some of the feeder roads in our roads because of lack of road maintenance equipment or units. For example, Yumbe has not received one. We have to wait for Moyo to come and grade the road or Arua to grade it up to Yumbe and then Moyo grades it from the other end up to Yumbe. It is really very disturbing. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.21
DR PETER ESELE (Bukedea County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join colleagues in thanking His Excellency the President for the State of the Nation Address, and hon. Hyuha for moving the motion. I have a few observations. 

I was pleased to hear about the improvements in the sciences sector. Government has proposed to motivate the scientists. This is very important. All countries that have developed have done so through advances in science. I would like to see Uganda moving in the same direction.  

Dr Norman Barlow, whom I had an opportunity to be taught by, won a Nobel Prize for the Green Revolution. In October this year, one African scientist, Monty Jones, will be awarded the World Food Prize for developing new rice for Africa and the prize includes a cash award of US $500,000. This is a good motivating factor. By the way the rice he developed, one of those varieties is what His Excellency the Vice-President is promoting here in Uganda. We do not have such motivational factors among our scientists. I will be very happy when this is actually implemented and we do hope that government will start with some of us. We did develop some new technologies that are being utilized today in the country. We need facilities to motivate our scientists. 

The laboratories must be well equipped, the scientists must be provided with transport and scientists must be paid high salaries. Science requires a lot of patience. You need to spend a lot of time in the laboratory, but if you are thinking about other ways of making ends meet, you will not be successful in science. So, scientists should be paid good salaries.  

We do not have yet in place rights and patents, this is costing us a lot. The sorghums and millets grown in the United States and a lot of materials in India came from Uganda, but nobody has said “thank you” to us. We have the Nile Breweries now enjoying the products of a researcher from Serere who developed eporuporu sorghum. Teso is now producing that sorghum and Nile Breweries is turning the sorghum into beer and they are reaping highly but they have not said “thank you” to the scientist –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you get informed that Dr Esele has been spearheading these achievements. Congratulations. (Applause).

DR ESELE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We need to find ways of motivating our students to study sciences. Today many students are going in for art subjects and not science subjects. This is a very serious situation. I would like to let them know that actually scientists use those who study arts. For example, I develop a scientific technology, and then I ask a lawyer to put in place a mechanism for that technology to be adopted. Some governments in other countries, in recognition of the importance of science and technology, have got specific ministries for science and technology. We may have to think along those lines by having a ministry specifically for the advancement of science and technology.  

Mr Speaker, on economic development. Uganda’s economy is basically agricultural but I would like to observe that this is dangerous. For us who know, for the economy to thrive, if it is based on agriculture, then a contribution of agriculture directly to the economy must drop so that other sectors take over. The direct contribution of agriculture must lower. The other sectors, particularly industrial, should grow - although the economy is based on agriculture. 

Countries that have developed through agriculture have gone through three main stages. They started with subsistence agriculture, moved on to commercial agriculture and then industrial development. In Uganda today we have all these three, which is not good for our economy especially when there is more subsistence agriculture. Commercial agriculture should be lifted and industries set up based on the products from agriculture. However, we need three areas of intervention. One is credit, the second one is market and the third is manufacturing. Credit is required by our farmers for small capital assets basically the tools and other equipment. Credit is also required for agricultural marketing. Our farmers also require consumption credit that they can utilize for the period between planting and harvest. Basically, we need pest control and credit is also required for agro-processing.  

The Micro-Finance Institutions (MFIs) are the best for financing production at the rural level because most of those farmers in the rural areas cannot access commercial banks. But there is a problem with MFIs. One of them is that their interest rates are too high and the farmers cannot afford that. 

Secondly, their terms are not favourable because if they lend you money today, they want you to start paying back next week. But you have borrowed for an agricultural activity, for which you will start to benefit from at least three months later. So, the terms by of some of these MFIs are not suitable. Therefore, government should directly intervene in the provision of credit to the farmers. The markets must be ready, the markets must offer high prices; and lastly we should have, if we can, price stabilization funds. We used to have a price stabilization fund in cotton so that in a bad year where we had prices fall, we would stabilize the prices to be paid to farmers. If we had that for vanilla, we would not be hearing what we heard today. We would fall back to the price stabilization fund and give a top-up to our farmers from that fund.  

Mr Speaker, on education, Universal Primary Education is a very good programme; it has achieved a lot. One of the biggest achievements of UPE is the exposure of talents that would otherwise not have been realized from lower students. Now we know that there is capacity, even among the poorest of the children. The problem now is how we advance these talents, which have been exposed, considering the poverty. When I go back to my constituency, even when I am here, the largest number of my visitors, whom I actually fear, are the students. They want one to support them in their education, but one cannot; they are too many. So, I was happy to hear about the promise for Universal Secondary Education. 

To follow that, government should implement the proposal for the quota system of education in the universities. There are many children, especially in the East and the North, who cannot afford university education and yet they are very bright. If the quota system were in place, these students would be given an opportunity. My Speaker, my son, for example –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But you are extending your time really.

DR ESELE: I was giving an example, Mr Speaker, of my son who was in senior six last year and he scored 20 points but he was not admitted to the university on government sponsorship. If there had been a quota system, I am sure he would be one of the best in Kumi.  

I also request government to speed up the establishment of a public university in the East. The East is the only region that does not have a public university. Our students travel long distances from Teso to Mbarara, Gulu or to Kampala to look for a public university. I would like to appeal that - as fast as possible - let there be a public university in the East. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, there is the hon. Member for Kanungu. Ladies first.

5.41
MS JACQUELINE KYATUHEIRE (Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like also to support the motion on the Floor and thank the President for the very good State of the Nation Address he gave on 4 June 2004.  

As the President gave us his address, I continuously got challenged as a Member of Parliament because I looked back at the people I was representing and the country and how we can work together to make sure that the ideals that were in his speech are realized. Mr Speaker, one of the issues was the innovation fund. This is the fund that is supposed to support the scientists to produce a product and thereafter commercialise it. I think this is a very good thing because a lot of potential is untapped because they have not been motivated or recognized as having endeavoured to do something. So, I hope this fund, if well utilized, will go a long way to help very many hardworking Ugandans to participate in the developing of this country and thereby improve our economy.

Mr Speaker, the other issue was the one of the Customs Union, which would lead to the political union. This is also a very good thing, especially for Africa, given the fact that we as a continent are not united. This most of the time hinders our bargaining capacity or capability. I recall vividly how often the President has gone around trying to market the product from Uganda or even from other countries. You look at the United States of America; it has been able to do much because the States there are united. You look at Europe, and of recent they have tried to increase the number of the states. So, it is also high time we in Africa forged a political union to be able to bargain fully for the development of our country and our nation. 

But the problem I have had with this, Mr Speaker, is that when you look at the countries that surround us, they are already nations. You look at a country like Tanzania and Kenya they have a very strong sense of nationalism. You look at Rwanda, even if they are not yet there, but you can see they have very strong solidarity. I was somehow scared that if we got into this, we might get lost in there because we do not have like a national language that could unite us. I appeal to all of us, the stakeholders, to make sure that this is done. That could be one of the contributory factors towards nation building so that when we get to the political union, the African Union, we are able not to continuously get lost amongst others.

Mr Speaker, the other issue was about value addition. A number of colleagues have talked about this. I would only like to say that exporting our raw materials without adding any value to them has been a very big discouragement to our farmers because at the end of the day we do not get what we should get as people who are tilling the land, or even the other materials that we get out of our country, without adding any value to them. So, the faster we do this, the better it will be for our people and also our country. 

But this has been on for some time. I have heard many times the President talk about value addition. I would have loved to hear from the ministry responsible as to how far we have gone in encouraging the people that are participating, and the companies that have gone out of their way to add value to some of the products. Otherwise, if we continue just talking about this without knowing where we have been, where we have reached and where we are going, it will continuously discourage most of the people.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, is an appeal to our colleagues. Most times we hear that some of our colleagues go outside this country to de-campaign us, and to talk ill of their own, mother country. This is a very bad thing because even if you had problems in your house, you do not have to go around talking about them because the people you are talking about them to may not come and help you to solve the problems. We must sit as a country and know where we want to go and be able to work together. I remember when the issue of UPE had just started very many people castigated it.  

We have the issue of AGOA being fought left and right by some of our colleagues outside this country. So, I am appealing to them to come back home and sit and see how we iron out our problems to be able to make a better Uganda. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member.

5.41
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have been challenged very highly by the good speech my neighbour has given. On a number of occasions I tend to be prolific but because I want to make a few concrete points, I will try to be as sober as providence will allow. 

Mr Speaker, without prejudice in regard to the road infrastructure, permit me to thank the central government for having assisted Kampala City Council (KCC) in working on my roads in Lubaga South. Although at one time I had to show some concern by saying that I would hang if the roads were not worked on, but at least some response has been forthcoming. As much as I am a critic, I would like to express gratitude for that good work.

The President made very important remarks in this State of the Nation Address, and I will dwell on specifics. On the genesis of the NRM revolution, he said one of the main reasons why the Movement went to the bush was to give the people of Uganda total sovereignty over their affairs, and two, to ensure security of Ugandans. As we speak now, can I say that the people of Lubaga South can feel sovereignty of the State of Uganda with respect to what is happening? And can I also say that the people of Northern Uganda, especially Karamoja and Acholiland and the rest of the regions in that area, have the security of tenure to be proud of? The answer is, no.

The President in his address somewhere said that if Milton Obote had observed elections, which were to follow in 1967, we would not have had the problems we are having today. That is a very correct remark and I would like to thank the President for having made that remark. But the challenge is, in the same vein if I may speak comparatively and the experts in political science are here to listen to me, if also President Museveni could have been good enough to give chance to the Constitution of 1995 to let it work without interruption with the third term perception, can we not say that things could still move well? So, I would like to advise through this address my good President, that we are all proud of the 1995 Constitution; it is a baby from the struggle of the Movement. Let it be given the chance to deliver. Let us not to hurry to restructure it, otherwise we may make the same regrets the President made over the failure of the former President Obote to respect the elections.  

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you hon. Lukyamuzi for giving way. I thought that you wanted the Constitution amended so that federalism may be accorded to this country. Why do you want it amended in one respect and not in another?

MR KAKOOZA: When you follow up constitutional analysis of some constitutions in the world, you find that a constitution is the process whereby the country, which follows it, is accorded the right to amend it. When you take an example of America, it has lasted for 200 years; they have amended it 27 times. That means every seven years they revisit it to accord the environment and the people to be moving with it. So, if it is necessary, our Constitution has stayed for ten years; if there are some gaps, it is time to revisit where we can fit best and people can move better.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much. I believe the Rt hon. Prime Minister, as well as hon. Kakooza can collectively be answered. The character sketch of the dominant problem facing the continent of Africa since independence has been lack of satisfaction about the results of elections. From state to state you have had insufficiency in how elections are carried out because of that predominant reason. Most constitutional frameworks have been obliged to ensure that they put a provision, which limits presidents to certain terms, and it has been done in good faith. So, much as I appreciate the aspect of reframing the Constitution so that the notion of federalism is accommodated, the issue in regard to the ambitions of overstaying in power has nothing to do with the perception of federalism, Mr Prime Minister.

The President somewhere in his speech commended the Customs Union of East Africa as well as the need to develop that perception into the aspect of federalism for East Africa. I would like to thank the President for having talked about federalism from an East African point view. But at the same time, in East Africa Uganda is the pioneer polity capable of engineering the machination of federalism to its successful end because we have a story to tell.  

Between 1962 and 1966 Uganda had a quasi federation arrangement and our income per capita was the highest in Sub-Saharan Africa, with the exception of the white regime of South Africa. We had very good roads, very good hospitals; all the inventions and research of prominence carried out at the Medical School in Mulago were instituted at that time. There was full alacrity, things were moving well. But when Obote came and scrapped the idea, everything went into disarray. Now we are saying to our good friend, President Museveni that noting that for the last 18 years this country has not settled, why don’t you consider the perception of federalism?  

First and foremost, Mr Speaker, federalism does not have to be initiated full blown in Uganda. After all, when we were initiating decentralisation we started with 13 districts; and when we were initiating UPE we started with a few schools. Right now we have a Minister in Charge of Northern Uganda, we have the Minister in Charge of Karamoja, what does that reveal to us? It reveals to us that there is need for us to institute some small governments at regional level to immediately handle the matters as they come. Whenever there is a problem in Karamoja, one has to run to Kampala; whenever there is a problem in Acholi, one has to run to Kampala. We are saying why don’t we develop a mechanism, which ensures that the people of Acholiland share some constitutional powers in terms of sovereignty and executive powers to enable them grapple with the problems in their respective circumstances? This is a very important point.  

Those of us that are advocating for federalism would like to also make one point of dissatisfaction. We have been miscalculated; some people think we think about ourselves only. No, the perception of federalism we are aspiring for is for all of us, but we can begin with a few as we have always begun in regard to decentralisation. 

Mr Speaker, the other unfair aspect, about federalism –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: So, hon. Lukyamuzi, you are saying the Constitution should be reviewed for purposes of accommodating you for federalism? That contradicts the other statement that we should not tamper with the Constitution. How do you reconcile the two?

THE LUKYAMUZI: Well, on the latter you must have very strong grounds for reviewing the perception of a third term. But in order for me to allay the fears of people who have not tested the good of federalism, I would like to state that it is also fair for you to know –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: However, hon. Lukyamuzi, you very well know that it is a programme of amending the Constitution. I would think that speech would definitely come when the time has come for amending the Constitution, Article 5(2), and then you talk about it.

MR LUKYAMUZI: That is right, I am just concluding on that point because the President talks about federalism, the federation of East Africa; and I am saying, why don’t you begin the federation of Uganda and then you can climb the ladder? This is said in good faith.

To conclude my remarks in regard to the perception of the science of federalism, those of us who have not been in tune with federalism have also been unfair, especially to the Kingdoms of Buganda, Bunyoro or Busoga. There are models within federalism; federalism is not of one model. For example, the American model is Presidential, the Canadian one is Parliamentary, the Indian one is based on minority rights, the one in the United Arab Emirates is monarchical, and the one in Malaysia is a hybrid. We are pursuing the hybrid model so that we can harness the resources. 

The institutions, which already exist in Uganda, namely the kingdoms, form a framework of institutional building, which must not be wasted. So, we harmoniously join forces between non-kingdom areas and kingdom areas to build up a united Uganda on the basis of unity in diversity. Federalism in Uganda would come to cause compromise because compromise in normal circumstances is not possible.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the President for one reason. Although I do not politically agree with him on a number of issues, he is a man who is sufficiently fascinated by ideas with some capacity to handle some of those ideas effectively, even when they are visionary right or wrong. He has the capacity to marshal out those issues and attempt to scientifically implement them, even with great mistakes.

Finally, when the President talks about adding value to our local produce, I am a little bit perturbed because as we speak now the two main cash crops, which have been upholding Uganda over the years namely cotton and coffee, have been left “to whom it may concern” and yet they feature prominently on our Coat of Arms. For example, Mr Speaker, what sense is there for us to adopt the AGOA framework when we cannot do any weaving at Nytil in support of the Ugandans? What about the coffee factor? By curing coffee when you dry it, you are also adding value because we have been selling the nut outside Uganda, and that is also a development.  

So, I want to argue that a developing country like Uganda cannot afford to over-liberalize everything; the majority of our people in the villages still depend on growing of these crops. The Government of Uganda must know that much as it made a mistake to get over-excited with liberalisation, it is not too late for them to invest in these crops in the same way they have invested in the AGOA factor in Bugolobi. The taxpayer of Uganda has invested US $6.2 million and these people in Bugolobi from Sri Lanka are making losses; there are no profits at all to be proud of. Nobody knows who owns that industry; some people associate it with President Museveni; and no minister here can give me an answer because I am also tempted to believe that it belongs to President Museveni. It is a serious matter; not even the Prime Minister can have the guts to answer. I am serious about my scientific challenges. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.51
MR HENRY KITYO (Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion of thanking the President and I want to inform Parliament that we have a very brilliant, hard working and visionary President. (Applause).  We are proud of him, both inside and outside – (Interruption) (Mr Lukyamuzi stood to exit from the chamber.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, people listened to you, I think you should stay around to listen to others.

MR KITYO: His Excellency, the President, makes us proud both inside and outside Uganda. Mr Speaker, I have comments on agriculture.  

First of all, Ugandans are only utilizing 30 percent of the arable land; 70 percent of our arable land is in the bush but this is an opportunity for people who can invest in agriculture. We have attracted investors in industries but we have not done enough to attract investors in agriculture. Agriculture is lacking a number of polices and I would like to call upon government to put in place the following policies.

First of all we have no policy on water and soil conservation. When you look at the rate at which soil erosion is taking our topsoil, you just get scared. When you look at the way we are handling the environment, we are just going to hand over a desert to our future generations. When you look at the lorries, which are ferrying charcoal into Kampala and other towns, and each bag of charcoal is a sign of environment destruction, you really get scared. When you look at the electricity tariffs for this country, which are so high, even higher than countries importing electricity, you get worried because the tariffs are not environmentally friendly. 

In this country, unlike the two countries in East Africa, Kenya and Tanzania, we have no marketing policy. Everybody who is trying to do marketing in this country is doing it on a trial and error –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, hon. Kityo, for giving way. I have been persuaded to give information to the honourable member because of the magnitude of the point on electricity tariffs he is emphasizing. In Tanzania, power is predominantly thermal-based; it is generated using diesel engines. Much as it is generated using diesel engines. That would mean it would be more expensive than hydropower but it is much more affordable than the case in Uganda where we are predominantly depending on hydro, one of the cheapest sources of power.

MR KITYO: Thank you very much for that information. Mr Speaker, the marketing master plan is very important for marketing produce from farmers. Marketing is the last function done by the farmer and if marketing is faulty you will definitely discourage farmers from producing more. When there is a marketing master plan, all the ministries, all the key players in marketing know their roles.  That is why now we have a problem of vanilla on our hands because there is no marketing policy, even no marketing master plan.  

The marketing master plan in Kenya dictates that traffic policemen do not arrest any vehicle taking produce to Embakasi Airport but they can arrest the vehicles when they are coming back. When you look at our traffic policemen around Kisubi, they will arrest any vehicle taking produce to Entebbe, wasting time and even losing quality of the product because the policeman wants Shs 500 or more out of the vehicle occupants. So, we need to have a marketing master plan for this country. 

We need a master plan for soil and water conservation; we need a compulsory policy for tree planting because we have depleted all the forests. Ugandans are behaving as if they are going to another planet, as if you are not going to be here for long. When you look at Mabira Forest, the trees are on the tarmac road; if you went only 200 meters inside Mabira Forest, there are no more trees. We are watching this and history will judge us on the wrong side.

I would like to thank the President for his efforts to bring in investors. However, I want to inform this House that his activity is a lonely voice. The President is very busy bringing in investors, I do not see the ministers following him; and because he is doing it alone, Uganda has a very narrow passage as a destination for investors –(Interruption)

MR KIWANDA: Thank you very much for giving way. Mr Speaker, the member holding the Floor has made a serious statement against our Cabinet, that the President is doing everything alone. Does it mean that the ministries are not in existence? Does it mean that the ministers are sabotaging the President? What really does the member mean by saying that the President is doing it alone?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The problem we have is a lot of disinformation. For example, when I was coming in hon. Lukyamuzi had the audacity to say that Tri-Star is owned by the President. That is an absurd statement, and if I was in I should I have raised a point of order. These are absurd statements, which should not be made by responsible people. 

With regard to the question of ministers, really the statement by hon. Kityo amounts to saying that we do not support the President. But we actually do; he cannot work alone. If you take the many projects, which have taken place, for example I am his technocratic premier. We also have a whole Ministry of Trade; it has to support him. He cannot function alone; it is not possible. So, we are working as a team. Perhaps what you could say is that the Cabinet should do more. I would accept that criticism but I know that you have made it in good faith. But the one by hon. Lukyamuzi was not made in good faith. (Laughter).  I thank you.

MRS HYUHA: Mr Speaker, it is on record that just the other day we were debating an issue of hon. Otafiire allocating land to some investors around Butabika Hospital. Is hon. Otafiire not a minister although the method is what we questioned? So, I feel that in one way or the other, without going into details, the ministers are also supporting the President.  

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, hon. Kityo is raising an important matter relating to investment promotion and facilitation, and he is singling out the key marketing manager for this country in the names of the President. We agree, but maybe he wishes not only to pinpoint on the President and the Executive or Cabinet but also to say that even Members of Parliament should become investment promoting officers or marketing managers for this country. Our committee on Industry, Trade and Tourism, chaired by hon. Mugambe - to which I now belong - we are working out a concept paper. We are going to discuss an arrangement where Members of Parliament can be involved in investment promotion and facilitation. Thank you.

MR KITYO: I thank the Rt hon. Prime Minister for the education and I want to affirm that my contribution is in good faith. I did not say that the Cabinet or the President is working alone in everything. I was only referring to investment.  

Mr Speaker, I also want to comment on –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Can I give information, particularly on that matter, Mr Speaker? As much as the honourable member has said that the follow-up mechanism will need to improve, there is an arising situation right now in the business community. When you look at the budget background we have, you find that the percentage of wholesale and retail is declining to the worst state. Our citizens are sent onto the street because the work, which is supposed to be done by them, is just occupied by the investors who come in pretence that they come to invest. Because of the weakness within the immigration, they do not follow up to improve on the mechanism, you find that instead of these people being put on the streets, they are redundant, they could be working. That is needed seriously. 

For instance, in Kenya from 1981 up to 1990, I was there, any investor or a managing director of an industry to renew his permit he could be given an assistant. They could not renew it, protecting the people so that they occupy those jobs. But once we do not follow up the policy we make and improve on them, then we cause a problem to the state. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR KITYO: Okay, thank you very much. Mr Speaker, may I be allowed to finish my contribution? Thank you very much. I wanted to comment on tourism. When you look at the website about tourism in Uganda, it is very small, with very little information. I am happy the Minister in charge of Tourism is here with us. I would like to call upon him to revise the website. Some of the information is very old. Let it be updated and I know that there is a group of Americans who want to conduct what they call cyber tourism. They will just come here, take all the tourist attractions and sites, form a website, which you pay for before you open it and somebody can actually visit our tourism sites on a website. 

If this happens, then it will be very dangerous for our tourism industry in Uganda. But it will be so because there is not enough information about tourism, and there are not enough attractions to Uganda. I would like to thank the Discovery Channel, which filmed the “Uganda Presidential Tour”, which is now widely viewed in America and Europe. It is also going to help us to bring tourists here. 

I want to talk about our embassies –(Interruption)

MR AKAKI AYUMU: Mr Speaker, I wish to thank my brother, hon. Kityo, for giving way. But on the issue of the website for tourism, I would like to assure him that even before the Americans come, Uganda Tourist Board, which is the body charged with the responsibility of selling Uganda, is already doing a commendable job on that. We are already updating our site, we are already putting up some new information, and those Americans he is talking about were actually invited by us. I thank you.

MR KITYO: Thank you very much, for your information. What I want to inform this Parliament about is that African–Americans, those people who are the grandsons of the slaves who were taken to America, have resolved to come back to Africa. But African countries, which will take them on are those countries, which have got good investment regimes and which will attract them back to Africa. Many of them do not know their origin; they do not know in which country of Africa they came from. So, they will be taken on by any African country, which will be prepared for them. 

I am happy to inform you that I have now convinced John Amos, the film star, to come and stay in Uganda and start a film industry for Africa by training Ugandans to be film stars. (Applause). 

On the 17th of this month, we are welcoming 24 African-Americans who are coming again back here in Uganda to carry out investment assessment. The problems we have in Africa and in Uganda in particular, we do not have pre-prepared project proposals of bankable nature where these Americans can put their money. They have the financial resources and they have the expertise. They are now working backwards to come back to Africa; they say Africa is for Africans and Europe is for Europeans. So, Uganda should be prepared to receive them so that we can get their money and their expertise.  

I want lastly to comment on education. Mr Speaker, education in Uganda is highly commercialised and we are creating a class whereby Members of Parliament will be able to pay for their children, who will also become Members of Parliament, and then leave other Ugandans to be what they are because they cannot afford school fees. I thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is almost a quarter past six. I do not know whether we should proceed or adjourn. But next time we come, we shall get your contributions. I thank you for the contributions made. The House is adjourned until Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.09 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 13 July 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)


