Wednesday, 4 July 2007

Parliament met at 2.42 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome you and at the same time introduce to you students from Gombe Secondary School from Mpigi who are in the Gallery. (Applause) You are welcome to Parliament. We also have pupils from St. Kaggwa and from Daniel Primary School accompanied by their teachers. You are welcome. (Applause)

2.45
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to seek guidance on a matter of national importance. Yesterday in one of the dailies it was reported that a company called Goodman Agencies had been compensated Shs 14 billion from the Ministry of Defence. I was in Defence some time with the secretary to that compensation committee. I remember very well when Goodman Agencies brought its claim, the claim was evaluated and it lacked supportive evidence. It was talking about lorries that the NRA had hijacked and given to Rwanda and also given to the DRC, but the authenticity of that claim was unfounded. As a result, that claim was set aside. To my disappointment, yesterday it was reported that a senior leader in this country, hon. Sam Kutesa, has successfully secured compensation from Government and together with the Attorney-General has agreed to settle the matter out of court. As we speak now, a cheque of Shs 14 billion is awaiting their collection from the Judiciary. 

Mr Speaker, with the demands we have, I would like to call upon Government to investigate this claim because it was found to be a ghost claim. The identities of the claimants were unknown, the particulars of the claimed lorries were unknown and the person from whom they were obtained was unknown. It was a flimsy and botched up claim. I raise this so that the matter can be investigated and such payments be stopped until it is clarified. How come a matter that ought to have gone to court is decided and hushed up? The next thing we hear is that payment is being issued and the cheque is ready. 

This matter started as early as 1995. It came up and dragged on to 2000 and suddenly now it has been resurrected and indeed a cheque has been issued totalling to Shs 14 billion. This is quite unacceptable. We cannot just look on. Having particularly known about it, I feel touched and ask that this matter be brought to book. Let it be investigated. 

The circumstances under which such loose claims are forwarded and immediately paid depict gross abuse to the taxpayers, to Members of Parliament who sit here and to all Ugandans. This is a matter of national importance and I request that it be investigated and action be taken as a matter of urgency. I request, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think the matter has been well stated and the Leader of Government Business has heard that we need an inquiry into this matter. I do not know which ministry is responsible; maybe Ministry of Defence or another ministry will investigate this matter.  

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, can payment be stayed because the cheque is already written and nobody has come out to disclaim that? Can that payment be stopped henceforth until the matter is verified?

THE SPEAKER: What I can say is that Government has been alerted about this and they will take appropriate action to minimise this.  

2.49
DR SAM LYOMOKI (Workers Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising here on a matter of public concern. Two days ago, in the media it was reported that one of the honourable members stated that as vice-chairperson of the Committee of Social Services, I had attended the committee meetings only four times in the whole year. I did take up this matter because I was shocked, having chaired this committee several times in the absence of my chairperson. Later on, it was discovered that this information was not based on any facts and the honourable member actually regretted it and apologised. 

Mr Speaker, how do we handle this type of misleading information? I have got a lot of calls from my constituents wondering why I had not attended the committee meetings. People who had been appearing before this committee and saw me chairing it were also shocked, having come several times and found me in the chair. Mr Speaker, how do I handle this matter to rectify this problem?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I am in Parliament now; I came under the Movement ticket but I am the Speaker, so I do not sit in caucuses. Matters that are being discussed in caucuses cannot be settled by the Speaker. These matters should be settled in your caucuses, be it FDC, NRM or UPC. 

Personally, I would advise that when you have problems in your parties, do not resort to the media. I am not saying they are bad, but I think it is better that you try to settle these differences internally. When you start going to the media, you aggravate the situation. I do not know what they said in the caucus and I cannot start asking whoever chaired the caucus what went on.  Actually, spare me this problem because I cannot interfere with what goes on in caucuses. Sorry, but I think you appreciate, hon. Lyomoki.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, we have about 70 ministers in this country but as you can see now, on the Front Bench on the other side we have only five ministers and yet very important national matters are being raised, which ministers should take note of and take action accordingly. It now looks as if the Front Bench on the other side is on strike. Can the House be informed what is going on in this country? It is not fair to have an empty bench when we have about 70 ministers. I thank you.

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Masiko Kabakumba): Rt hon. Speaker, members know that today is Wednesday and it is Cabinet day. As we speak now, Cabinet is still going on because the matters that are before Cabinet are also very important. However, we have divided ourselves and as you can see, some of us are here to respond and also to note the issues that are being raised by the members. I have already noted hon. Ssekikubo’s concern and the Speaker’s ruling, which I will pass on to the Leader of Government Business. We may be few but we are capable of handling all your concerns.

2.54
MR AKBAR GODI (FDC, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, and I am very grateful that the Minister in charge of Internal Affairs is in the House. My concern is on the issue of diplomatic passports. As I speak now, there are two Ugandans who have been detained in the UK allegedly for drug trafficking. 

Under Regulation 14 of the Passports Act 2004, the people who are specified to hold and carry diplomatic passports include, among others: the Speaker of Parliament and his deputy, Governor Bank of Uganda and his deputy, leader of public service, ministers, ambassadors and their spouses plus their children living abroad who are not more than 18 years old. The Act goes ahead to clarify that people who are authorised to carry the red diplomatic passports also include recognised cultural leaders. 

As you may have noted, in the Daily Monitor of 18 June 2007, page 3, it was reported that the minister of information in a cultural institution, the Toro Kingdom, has been arrested. Rose Birungi is alleged to be an aide to one of the top Government officials in this country. I want to know whether the framers of that Act meant to put people of her category in that law. Among the categories I read through, I never found where to fit her. 

I seek clarification on this serious matter because we are hosting CHOGM and at the moment our biggest preoccupation is maintaining the good image of Uganda internationally. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, there is procedure for making statements of this nature. You have to approach me and maybe tomorrow I may accommodate you. If I were you, I would not have made that statement. I would have raised an inquiry or a question - under what circumstances was so and so issued with a diplomatic passport? By asking that question, then we can get all the details that gave rise to the issuance of the passport. When you make that statement, nothing happens. I think the minister concerned, that is the Minister of Internal Affairs, is here. I do not know if he was rising to clarify on that or for other business.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think you have answered the question. My colleague left out one category, which is cultural leaders; they are included on that list. 

For this particular case, I have also just seen it in the press. I really want to congratulate my friend and colleague, hon. Kyanjo; there was a problem in Old Kampala and he telephoned me saying, “Can you find out what is going on?” I found out and gave him the information. I suggest that this is the best way to do things. You know you are so honourable and I do not want to give you a half-baked answer. I want to give you full facts as I know them and then you can crucify me. You can ask me so many questions when the matter has been before me and I have investigated. 

It is not possible that a minister will know the details of a certain file. So, I would request that in future, to make our job easier and enable us inform you fully so that when we are debating these matters it is from a position of fact and knowledge, I wish those queries could come before we come to the House. They could be brought in form of a written question, in which case I will do my research and get here to give a full explanation of what took place. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

MR GEOFREY EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I thought it was very relevant for the Minister to pick from your guidance to the member. I thought the Minister was going to stand up and say that within the next two weeks, he was going to table names of all Ugandans who are holding diplomatic passports so that it is very clear and next time if we meet anybody with such a passport, we help him. You may exclude those others, but if you can just bring us the list of those Ugandans - they are not many - and lay it on Table, we can help you to market and protect Uganda. I am seeking your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Godi read us the regulation. By reading the law which the honourable has stated, you will be able to know who are entitled to have these diplomatic passports - (Mr Godi rose_) - Honourable member, you stood to make a point and you have made it; that should not attract debate. It is only to alert those concerned to carry out investigations and then report. Now I see people trying to generate debate on something which is not on the Order Paper. I was going to ask the clerk to read another item so that we proceed.

MR KIGYAGI: Mr Speaker, I have another issue of national importance.

THE SPEAKER: I told my friend there that if you have a matter of importance you want to raise in the House, you approach whoever is going to chair the proceedings so that he or she will know. I should not be surprised. The person in the chair should at least have an idea as to what you are going to say. That practice has been on. Therefore, if you have one, come and see me, as I advised the honourable member, and then tomorrow I may be able to accommodate you, so that we stick to our procedure. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, first of all I want to apologise for not distributing copies of this statement in time; they should be coming in a moment. However, with your indulgence, I beg to proceed as the copies are being brought for distribution.

THE SPEAKER: It is Okay. Make the statement.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker and Members of Parliament, I am making a statement on the conflict over land between the people of Buliisa District known as Bagungu and the cattle pastoralists in the same district known as Balaalo. This House asked me last Wednesday, 27 June 2007, to look for and present answers to two questions in regard to the conflict between the Bagungu and the pastoralists in Buliisa District. The questions were: What is the area or areas of origin of these people? Two, are they armed or not?

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the answers to these questions that are based on the findings on the ground are as follows:

Areas of Origin

The first group of these Balaalo or pastoralists entered Bugana, one of the villages in Buliisa affected by this problem, in December 2004. It was led by a one Farouk Kabalega from Kijunjubwa in Masindi District. They had 200 cows with them. Farouk Kabalega and Higiro Geoffrey then became land agents in Buliisa. They later on invited other pastoralists who had been evicted from Mukwano land in Masindi Port, Kyempisi and Kiryana Government ranches, which had been divested. The pastoralists thus began acquiring land from the natives who were bibanja holders and residents in the villages of Waiga, Kataleba, Kichooke and Kaborwa. Among those with bibanja holdings were fairly senior Government district officials in Masindi. 

By January 2007, these pastoralists had reached about 250 households with about 12,000 cows, a number that was too high for the little land that was available. This resulted into violent confrontations when the cattle strayed into the crops of the natives. Traditionally, the Bagungu have zoned their area into three parts. One part is the lake and it is for fishermen and women. The second part is for cattle keeping and grazing while the third part is for crops. Unfortunately, these pastoralists did proceed to graze on the land that the Bagungu had designated for cultivation. The consequences are the questions that are being raised today. 

I have attached to this statement, which I hope each one of you at an appropriate time will receive, a copy of a document showing the heads of the households by name with specific reference to their areas of origin. I think they are about 167. As you will see from this list, a vast majority of these people are Ugandans with only a few who are of Rwandese origin, comprising mainly those who were sometime back expelled from Tanzania. Investigations to establish the exact number of non Ugandans are continuing. We shall give an appropriate report at an appropriate time, once the process is completed. 

Whether the Balaalo are Armed or Not

Investigations have established that these pastoralists are not armed whatsoever. In fact, the instructions to the Ministry of Internal Affairs and that of Lands by the head of state to intervene in this conflict were that, if any person was found illegally armed, he or she should be arrested forthwith.  

What the Police have done

The police have so far deployed 140 police personnel in the area, 50 of which are from the Kampala based Mobile Police Patrol Unit (MPPU). The others are from the general security staff of Masindi, Hoima, Kibaale and Buliisa itself.  

I want to also inform the House that a buffer zone has been established to bar a natural confrontation between the two communities. Accordingly, a permanent presence of police has also been established in the buffer zone. Community policing programmes are heavily being conducted. Several meetings were and are still being held between the police and the two communities to sensitise them about committing criminal acts. We also have radio programmes, and press briefings are going on to enhance the sensitisation process. There are both foot and motorized police patrols in the area. So far, four police patrol cars are being deployed. 

Additionally, a police complaints desk was permanently established at Bugana Police Post. The desk has a register where all types of complaints relating to this conflict are recorded.  The register is manned by the officer in charge of the Criminal Investigations Directorate (CID) whose name I do not need to mention. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I am too glad to report that nobody so far as been arrested for the offence of illegal position of arms. Thank you very much for listening to me.  

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable minister. 

3.12
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I am grateful for the statement presented by the Minister. However, I want to mention that the report has come rather late and has been overtaken by events, given the fact that this House required the Minister to prepare what was supposed to be a current statement. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I notice that this notion of the balaalo has taken a new trend. You may have heard comments from different quarters, including the senior quarter of the Buganda Government at Mengo, complaining bitterly about statements that are making rounds in town in regard to this issue. It is known that balaalo is not a tribe but it is an occupation. Therefore, it is erroneous for a minister or any officer in Government to begin to teach the people of Uganda that there is a tribe called the Balaalo. I am appealing to honourable members to reject this notion of the Balaalo. 

I thank the Minister for going further to indicate in his statement that some of these Balaalo are actually Banyarwanda; in that part, he was coming quite close to the truth, but the rest has been left open. We want this grey area to be cleaned either in black or white.

Mr Speaker, there is also some concern that these pastoralists have been vehemently rejected in different regions of Uganda. These regions include Teso, Karamoja, Acholi, Lango, West Nile, to mention but a few. The current position is that Government is making assertive proposals to bring these people to Buganda but the people of Buganda, like their colleagues in other areas, equally vehemently reject this. 

There has an explanation to the effect that these people are going to be temporarily settled in Kyankwanzi for proposes of screening. The question is - what is the rationale of doing the screening in Buganda and not in those other areas? Is it because people in those other areas were violent or is it because they defeated Government mechanisms to allow the Balaalo to be screened from there? 

There is a rumour that after the screening, some of these people might temporarily be settled in that area, since, as the Minister has asserted, they have no guns. Accordingly, there is an explanation that was given by Gen. Tinyefuza that they are going to be resettled in Kyankwanzi on Ministry of Defence land. He was also quoted as saying that this land does not belong to Buganda, it does not belong to the Kabaka of Buganda and it does not belong to Kiboga District. We consider this as an insult especially given the fact that Buganda has a stake in the government of Uganda and has a right to complain like many other tribes. Therefore, the idea of threatening us with statements that we are bringing up tribal sentiments, as if this is the first time to hear about such sentiments, to say the least is extremely insulting.

Mr Speaker, our view is that these people be screened from where they are now. If it is inevitable that they come here and be temporarily resettled in Buganda, we also have a friendly view. That friendly view relates to the fact that Gen. Tinyefuza, who was insulting the Baganda and yet he has big chunks of land in Buganda, can actually comfortably resettle a group of these Balaalo on that land; we shall have no quarrel with that. The remnants can also be comfortably resettled on the President’s land in Gomba, which is also in Buganda. To come and lecture us on how to accept others on our land when you have big chunks of land known to everybody is unacceptable and extremely selfish.

I want to inform the Minister of Internal Affairs that it is one thing to threaten people to avoid a conflict and another thing to act in a way that actually fuels the conflict. It is my strongest appeal that Government reconsiders the position of transferring these people to areas in Buganda. They should be screened from where they are because there are people in Buganda who are also landless.

Mr Speaker, allow me to inform you that though my village of Ntuuma is close to two square miles, the people that live there, including my old parents, have no land titles, so they are landless. The same thing applies to my children; they have no land because according to the Sharia law, they can only take over my land after I have died. Therefore, I feel hurt when somebody tells me that he is going to resettle other people on Buganda land before settling my father. Who are these people who think they have a right to settle before my own children and my own father. 

We are appealing to Government to resettle those people in those areas, no matter whether they have land there or not, before giving us the nice picture of the Baganda being humanitarian and asking us to accept people who are coming from outside Uganda, whose description up to day has not been clarified even by senior ministers. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.20
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I request some bit of time to give some background to this matter of the Balaalo.

THE SPEAKER: The problem we have, hon. Okello-Okello, is that originally when we passed these rules there was no debate on ministerial statements. Subsequently, we amended them to allow debates but restricted them to an hour; just an hour. You will be constrained to be very brief because I see there are many people who want to contribute.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I became the Commissioner of Lands in January 1987 and retired into the Sixth Parliament in July 1996. During that time, I realised that one of the most difficult land matters I handled was the issue of pastoralists invading other people’s land. This is not a new problem and in my understanding, it is not about to end unless the people of Uganda come together and stop it. 

Mr Speaker, immediately the NRM Government came to power in 1986, in 1997 these pastoralists invaded Lake Mburo National Park in Mbarara. I was sitting in my office when people from the game park came crying that some balaalo with guns and very many animals had invaded the park and were shooting animals in the park. The game park had their title. I told them “that is not my duty, go to court.” They went to my minister then, Ben Luwum Okello, and the matter went to Cabinet, which set up a sub-committee to handle the matter. The President requested for six months for these people to be allowed in the park while Government tried to look for some other land to settle them. 

The sub-committee eventually decided that the national park should be subdivided in two halves and one half was to be given to these pastoralists. It was done. The park was degazetted and half of it given to these people. They are now in a place called Kanyaryeru. It was supposed to be the best village in Africa according to the design, with tarmac roads, electricity, piped water –(Laughter) 

It was incumbent upon me to attend to this Cabinet sub-committee. There were very many meetings in State House, Entebbe. The President ordered that every family should be given 25 acres and own not more than 10 animals. As soon as the area given to these people was subdivided to 25 acres, some started owning over 100 or 200 animals. So, the government plan at the beginning has been completely demolished. That went. This group was from Luweero and they were always referred to as Luweero people. They left Luweero and we were not sure whether they ever intended to go back. We do not know; nobody could tell us. 

Hon. Kamya was asking last Tuesday, “Who are these people? Where are they coming from?” The same questions were asked in State House in 1988. The late Kafumbe Mukasa who was Deputy Minister of Finance –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, maybe you did not look at this statement. I heard somebody talking about screening, but this has been done. If you look at this statement, you see the names, the district of origin and places. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank you, Mr Speaker. What I am saying is that this problem has been on for a long time. Soon thereafter, the government ranches that had been privatised were invaded by another group of pastoralists. The UPC Government in the 1960s had established five ranching schemes. These were the best ranching schemes in Africa. These people invaded the ranches and did a lot of damage. Again, a Cabinet sub-committee of three people was set up. These were hon. Kintu Musoke, hon. Ben Okello Luwum and Mondo Kagonyera. They reported to the Cabinet in my presence. These people even shot water tanks to get water poured down for their animals. Right now, they have been given half of all the ranches. The ranches were subdivided, code-named and restructured by Pulkol’s committee. Therefore, half of the ranches were given to these people. We thought that was the end since they had all been settled. 

In 2003, these people were in Teso, later in Lango and a few years ago they were in West Nile. Where are these people coming from? When shall we finally settle them? According to the media report, this particular group which went to West Nile and Lango was from Tanzania. We all read this in the media. When did they go to Tanzania and why are they leaving? Are they being invited or they have been expelled? Who is giving these people guns and satellite phones? I looked after animals but I never used satellite phones and guns. Who is behind this thing? 

Mr Speaker, today’s statement is not the last. Minister of Internal Affairs, prepare yourself for more statements. To me, it seems to be the most dangerous scheme someone is trying to implement. If we are not careful as a nation, this thing will end in bloodshed in future. I think we have to find a way to pin down this matter.

Finally, why is it that when the Karimojong cross borders to Acholi, Lango, Teso, they go back home as soon as it starts raining. They do not come to look for land titles and to buy land. Why is this particular type of people buying land all over the country? What is their agenda? I think the people of Uganda should stand warned that one day we may wake up to find that the whole country is taken over. It is a very serious matter. People are saying that they have been rejected. Hon. Hussein Kyanjo, these people have not been rejected in Teso, Lango or even West Nile; they are still in Madi Okolo, Teso and Lango. I passed there recently and I found very healthy animals jumping up and down –(Laughter)- and some of the animals are labelled –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, the rule I mentioned to you was that all statements made by ministers shall be debated. However, debate on a ministerial statement shall be restricted to the issues raised in the Minister’s statement and shall not exceed one hour. This statement, a copy of which I have, is about the Balaalo or Bagungu in Buliisa District. In view of this rule, let us restrict ourselves to the debate on Balaalo or Bagungu in Buliisa District. 

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, with due respect to your guidance, when we look at the statement given by the Minister, and as the Shadow Minister of Internal Affairs has observed, certain events have overtaken the statement. For instance, if you look at page 3: police action, bullet No. 3, the minister says that so far 140 police personnel are active in the area. Fifty of these are MPPU from Kampala. In other words they are trying to cordon these people off from any movement of being attacked. But what we hear of now is that they are already in Kyankwanzi. That is why you see that it is spilling over from the actual ministerial statement to give the status quo as it is. As we are debating we have to hint on other areas, which the statement has not covered because the status quo now is not as it is. I am seeking your guidance on this.

THE SPEAKER: What you can do honourable member, if you hear reports that they are in Kyankwanzi you should have sought clarification from the minister. Tell him, “These Balaalo you are talking about in Buliisa are now in Kyankwanzi.” Seek for clarification and then we hear a statement from him.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I was concluding my statement.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but please conclude.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I was saying that it is not possible to reject these people because they have guns. You have no guns, how can you reject a gun man? (Laughter) It is not possible!

THE SPEAKER: But you see honourable member, the minister has said in his statement that there is no person with a gun. This is what he has said.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, is my colleague hon. Okello-Okello in order to stand before this honourable House and say these people are armed, when I have made investigations of the Buliisa pastoralists and I have categorically said and I am repeating, that these people are not armed? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Maybe he did not hear you say that you have investigated and that there are no guns. Let us proceed.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I thought if I had been given chance immediately after the minister I would have clarified many of these of issues. I appreciate that the minister has inherited this problem. The police officers who are responsible for this mess have not briefed him properly. There are many falsehoods in what they are telling the minister, so I thought I would be given a chance to correct a few falsehoods in the statement.

THE SPEAKER: But why did you think you would be given chance immediately after the minister when you had not indicated so? (Laughter) I choose people as they stand. So, if you stand I will decide.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I stood but I was not lucky to catch your eye.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I was still on this side. (Laughter)

3.34
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): I thank you very, Mr Speaker, for the chance at last. One hour honestly according to what I see happening in the House will not be enough. Maybe we will be forwarding this to the relevant committee. I was studying the minister’s report on page 2, where he told us that by January 2007 there were only about 250 pastoralists. I want this House to know these pastoralists move in the middle of the night. They get permits to have their cattle taken to the markets; you wake up in the morning and if you had left 250 the previous evening, you will get over 1,000 head of cattle. So unless something else is done to curb this, the issue of the movement of cattle from one place to the other, then we are not going to have any solution to this. 

I will address myself to the issue of arrogance that these pastoralists exhibit in their process of moving. Again on page 2, the minister talked of confrontations when cattle strayed into crops of the natives. What I want the honourable minister to know is that these pastoralists are very arrogant. In the year 2005 they went to the cotton farms that Bugana farmers had cleared. They just drove the cattle into the 30 acres cleared for cultivating cotton. If we are talking of taking the pastoralists to the government land in kyankwanzi, how on God’s green earth can a native and the bona fide owner of such land cooperate with a person who is more arrogant than the land owners? Unless the pastoralists’ team to try to accept to be corrected and live in harmony with the locals of the areas where they are going, you can never stop these conflicts. They will continue forever. 

You can imagine a farmer being beaten up on his farm! What is expected of you at the end of the day? Definitely we are not solving any problem. Taking them to Kyankwanzi is even opening other wounds that were earlier inflicted. 

I want to comment on the issue of the permits given to these pastoralists. Last week when this issue was raised we asked about where these pastoralists are coming from. When a native of Uganda is moving from one place to another, he is expected to get a letter from the LC indicating where one is coming from. But who are these pastoralists who do not even carry any documents to where they are going? We do not know where they are really coming from. Even in your statement you have told us some of them are Rwandese. What about the rest? What about the rest who are remaining? Unless we have a national resettlement policy to cater for some of these cases we are not going to get any place as far as this –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Most of these people are from Masindi District. This is the minister’s statement.

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. These people could be moving from Masindi District to Buliisa but that alone does not give us clear evidence to know whether these are bona fide people of Buliisa, or Masindi District in that case. At the end of the day, we do not get satisfied. The question still remains.

In my view, unless we get a clear national policy on resettlement of these people, we shall get a problem. At the moment we only have resettlement of IDPs but we do not have a resettlement programme and plan for such people to be catered for as a result of the land conflicts. As we talk now, if it were not because of the area MP raising this issue, we would not have discussed it on the Floor of the House today.

3.40
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his attempt to give a statement on an inherited problem, which has been largely complicated by the Police itself. This problem was first raised by my predecessor hon. Mutiiti Nyendwoha and the then MP hon. Jalia Bintu when they were still under Masindi District. Unfortunately, not much was done.  

I raised this problem in my maiden statement in Parliament in the last session and asked for the reason why it is taking so long for us to get an answer. The honourable minister’s statement clearly shows us that the animal stock that they are talking about is 12,000. However, we on the ground know that they had gone to about 25,000. We were also not told that the Police disarmed or took over power at Buliisa sub-county and Masindi District because these cows came without movement permits yet these people had been told clearly that they were entering people’s land. The Police invited itself from Kampala, found about 3,000 cattle and now we are hearing the number is 25,000. What I want the Police to tell us is whether they were responsible for presiding over this influx from the 3,000 animals to close to 25,000? What was the mechanism, now that they have put Masindi District and Buliisa sub-county out of the equation?  

The statement also talks of the cattle, which were taken by Faruku Kabalega. Faruku Kabalega paid rent for one year, 2004 and took his cattle to a place called Waisoke, which is not even the conflict area. The conflict area is Waiga Group Farm and Bugana communal land. This goes to show that the information they have given the minister is wrong. The cows taken by Faruku were taken to a place called Waisoke, which is a grazing area and not a cultivation area. The area of conflict is a traditionally zoned land use pattern of cultivation and not grazing. It is a group farm of nine square miles and about 230 square miles of communal land.

Furthermore, the statement talks about land belonging to the CAO, Kato Milton and the CFO, Masindi in Kabolwa. Kabolwa is a grazing area and not a conflict area. The conflict area we are talking about is Waiga Group Farm and Bugana communal land. That goes to show that somebody is deliberately misinforming the minister and that is why I would like to request the Committee on Presidential Affairs to take up this matter. This is because it is the Police that decided to keep these people on when they were less than 25 families and now we are hearing of hundreds of families. There were less than 3,000 animals and now we know there are about 25,000. Why did Police take over the powers of Masindi District and Buliisa sub-county and preside over this exercise?

The statement also says that the Police has since created a buffer zone. Actually what happened is that on the day when we expected the eviction to take place - that was on 18th - the Police deployed more forces and the Balaalo said that the Police had gone to protect them as it had always done. What is now happening is that there is actually more risk because the Balaalo are grazing their animals where people had created gardens. I think it is unfortunate that somebody is reporting to the minister that there is no buffer. The herdsmen, whom some people chose to call Balaalo, were supposed to have gone to Butyaba barracks as a transit area to make sure that we do not have a conflict but this has not been done. The lawyer of these Balaalo went ahead to incite them to get armed with pangas and fight the indigenous community. This was in the presence of the mobile patrol unit of Kampala and the RPC, Hoima but he was not arrested. This is the situation on the ground.  

The question I want to ask is, “Does it take three years for the Ministry of Internal Affairs to identify people who came from Kijunjuba in hon. Kabakumba’s constituency?” If Masindi District does not know them, and the mother district was Masindi, and we are now having a false declaration that these people are from Masindi, does it take three years to find out know who they are?  

On the issue of guns, I think the minister is right in saying that he has not got information about the guns so far. Before I declared myself a candidate, I had to move down to Buliisa and find out what was happening. There I found that cattle were being accompanied by guns and some unidentified people in uniform. I want to thank the President who conceded that there was something wrong and he sent Col. Ocanda. It is only when Col. Ocanda went there that these guns disappeared. When they disappeared the mobile patrol unit from Kampala did the work of cohesion and protecting these invaders. This is what is on the ground.

Therefore, what I think –(Interruption)

MS EKWAU: Mr Speaker, I want to seek clarification from the honourable member on the Floor. He has talked of the Balaalo having guns and then the guns disappearing. I know very well that if pastoralists have guns, there must be a scheme of disarming them. I want you to tell this House whether they were disarmed by Government or whether these guns are in their houses so that we know the stand.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: My honourable colleague from Buliisa, on that day when you were attacked, was it by armed people? I am asking this because you have disputed 90 percent of the minister’s report. Therefore, it appears that the report was doctored. If a serious investigation team went on the ground, you cannot just come with one name and make claims. What you are saying gives an impression that the report is totally kiwaani.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, we did report on the presence of guns and I have said that the President sent Col. Ocanda and that helped us. What I think the other organ should be doing is finding out who these officials were. Could they be undisciplined people? Could these be illegal arms? I think that is the work of intelligence and I do not work in intelligence.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when you read this document on the 26th of June the task you gave the minister was to answer certain questions in regard to the conflict and these questions were, “What is the area or areas of origin of these pastoralists?” I think that question has been answered. The second question was, “Is there any dispute that these people are not the ones named and the origin stated?” The other question was, “Are they armed or not?” Therefore, I think we should concentrate on whether they are armed or not because the minister has made a statement, which you all seem to accept and which gives the names of these people and their origin.  

MR MUKITALE: Just to clarify on the question raised by honourable members concerning the day of the attack, I can simply say that the Balaalo attacked us in the presence of a DPC and the mobile patrol unit. When the commander of the mobile patrol unit asked the DPC to proclaim and arrest these people, the DPC said he had no powers from above. I am the one who put in the case before the police that day; the CID in charge of the district was there, but none of them has ever been arrested. So, this is the gravity of the matter.

Finally, it is unfortunate that in Buliisa, Bugungu and Bunyoro, where we have co-existed with so many tribes, including the Bahima – who do not want to be called Balaalo – and the Banyarwanda have lived there from the days of my grandfather. Unfortunately, about only fifty indisciplined people who want to grab land in Buliisa are creating fear and a seemingly bad relationship, to spoil this otherwise very good and harmonious co-existence of these communities. Thank you very much.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Many Members of this House do not come from this area and it might be very difficult to ascertain whether this information, which the minister has given, is the true information given the statement from the area Member of Parliament. So I am asking whether it would be procedurally right for the minister to withdraw this statement and make further inquiries on his own volition, so that he can provide us with more information later. In fact even the areas of conflict that he is talking about area different from the ones mentioned by the area Member of Parliament, so wouldn’t it be procedurally right, Mr Minister, to get more credible information from your officers on the ground and we debate this thing later? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But what questions did you want him to answer? According to his report here, he says that there were two questions: what is the identity and origin of these people? He has answered this and nobody has queried him about it. The other question was whether they are armed or not. So what else do you want?

The area MP has said that there are only 50 people who are disturbing them. Maybe he can help us to identify these 50 people, and then we shall proceed.

3.53
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. One of the reasons I wanted to contribute was to correct what the honourable minister conveniently chose to do. He chose to set himself two questions and to answer two questions.

On the day we debated this issue, the problem was far broader than that. The question of Queen Elizabeth Nation Park was raised, the problem of West Nile was raised – and the minister was told to go back and come with information about who these people in West Nile, Teso, and Buliisa are. But he set himself questions, which were not set for him. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, this convenience allows us to sweep under the carpet a problem that we ought to discuss honestly and find solutions to. But if that is the choice of the minister’s government, they can go ahead.

3.55
MS BETTY KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to discuss this matter on behalf of the Buganda caucus, which I serve as the vice-chairperson, and which sat yesterday and considered this matter very carefully.

Like other Members, I am also surprised that the minister has chosen to give us only half the story when the other half is actually the more important part of the story. Even if you ask somebody to tell you the status of a patient, you cannot just say that he had a stomach ache and stop there. So, I am disappointed that he has given us only half the story. 

Having said that, there is a civil case that was filed by 54 representative members of the pastoralist in Buliisa. It was recorded as miscellaneous application No. 86 of 2007. It was filed before Justice Kagaba. These people were seeking leave to apply for judicial review of a Government decision to re-locate them. They wanted Government prohibited from continuing with this act, and Justice Kagaba gave them leave to seek judicial review. As a matter of fact, this application was filed against, among other people, Gen. David Tinyefuza, Gen. Kale Kayihura and others.

Gen. Tinyefuza, therefore, happens to be a defendant in this case. How then does he become the government spokesman, in utter contempt of a court decision to stay any action, and he says that the action must go on, yet he is the defendant in a case that has been ruled on by a chief justice? This is a matter of seriousness - Gen Tinyefuza has been in a case before, where Police and the military invaded court. It was Gen. Tinyefuza, again flouting court decisions and interfering and stopping court processes. Is it because he is wearing uniform, is it because, as we heard, the judges were sleeping or hiding under their beds when he was in the bush? Mr Speaker, we should take this as a very important matter.

The Buganda caucus, having listened to this matter very broadly, sat yesterday and came up with these resolutions – we need to know and we will continue asking - I would have stopped asking if the minister’s statement were credible, but apparently it is not: Who are these people? We hear they started in Teso, then to Acholi, and all over. You are saying that they do not have guns, but we have heard that those same people had guns in Acholi, in Teso and still have them in Buliisa. Yet, as the MP for Buliisa said, these communities have lived together for so long. 

The people of Bombo have lived there since the days of Ssekabaka Mutesa I, over one hundred years ago and nobody has ever interfered with them; they are of Nubian origin. The people of Namutamba are of Rwandese origin. If you go there, you might think you are in Kisoro, but nobody has ever interfered with them. Ssekabaka Mutesa I gave that land to them more than one hundred years ago. We also have the Banyara in Bugerere. So, it is not that people do not know how to live together; people live together and have lived together with no problem, but we want to understand why these people cannot integrate with the communities where they migrate. What is the problem? That is why the Buganda Caucus said, “No, we cannot just assume it is somebody else’s problem just because they cannot stay in Teso, Gulu or anywhere and they cannot stay in Buliisa. Now you are saying they come to Buganda, no, Sir.”  The Buganda caucus said, “No, let them stay where they are.” 

There is a court order awaiting a judicial review of their immigration, against Government. That is what should be upheld by this Parliament, by this country and by the ministers in Government if we are to respect the rule of law. Government said they want to screen these people, fine! Screen them from where they are. Do you have to screen them 200 miles away? And the minister is saying they are from Masindi but you are taking them 200 miles away to screen them and maybe decide to take them back to Masindi when they could walk the few miles to Masindi? It does not make sense; not economic, business and religious sense. It does not make any sense to me at all to take them to Kiboga to screen them and then decide on what to do with them.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, hon. Beti Kamya.  Mr Speaker, information available to us indicates that between 1987 and 1988, the government deliberately decided to arm these pastoralists. They were given guns - this matter was discussed in the High Command and no decision was taken. Gen. Tinyefuza was one of the people who gave out guns on ranches in Masaka, Rakai, Sembabule and other places. Government is aware of this and these guns have never been retrieved. Instead of Government coming up honestly to solve this problem, they are allowing the same people’s cattle to multiply and have money to acquire more guns to cause conflicts in this country. Some of us are serious that is why we are ready to speak out the truth and the truth must be known because it will burn all of us who are needy. I just wanted to give you that information.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you hon. Kamya. Mr Speaker, these people wherever they go they are not prepared to integrate with the local community, they want to live on their own in their own territory. They settled in Acholi before and in my area there was a man called Yohana and the only name we knew was Yohana, nothing else. He had very beautiful daughters of whom two were already mature –(Laughter)-  so when one of our boys tried to make a move to love one of them, the daughters disappeared and up to now we do not know where they are. (Laughter)  So, they want to live in their own world, marry their own, and have their own things. 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, hon. Beti Kamya.  The information I want to give is also in connection to this argument that these people are not armed. We may not have the evidence but as individuals in Teso, they carry arms. I know that whenever the people of Teso have complained, the UPDF has heavily been deployed to guard those people in the wetlands of Agu and Abuketi, until that discontent among the community diffuses then the UPDF withdraws.

MS KAMYA: I thank the honourable member who gave me information and I think that it cannot be over emphasised that the minister has to go back and establish who these people are. Hon. Matia Kasaija, the question is still on the Floor: who are these people; why can they not integrate with the rest of the community; why are they so special that wherever they are there is talk of guns when, as we have said we have established that communities in Uganda interact and live together for so long? Who are these people? 

Mr Speaker, I am still giving the position of the Buganda caucus. In the Buganda caucus we established that there have been immigrants for many years, decades, ten, 20, 30 years who have moved from different parts of Uganda into Buganda and when they come they have tried to look for land to settle on. It has not been easy up to now. They are asking for land to settle and they have not been settled anywhere, they live in forests and wetlands. If there is land available to resettle anybody it is these first immigrants who must take first priority. The people who came here many years ago who are being chased out of the forests and wetlands must take the first priority. 

Besides, how do you start using the taxpayers’ money to sort out the landlessness of a person who has got 100, 200 cattle and you are using the money of the taxpayer who does not even have money, who does not –(Interjections)- What are the indicators? The taxpayers of Uganda who earn below one dollar a day are being asked to contribute to sort out the landlessness of people who have hundreds of cattle! It does not make any sense at all.

Finally, we said –(Interjection)- I want to finish this, I think the Minister will make his submission when he comes on the Floor. The Buganda caucus would like to know whether Government has land only in Buganda? Because when they have a problem to sort out landless people, to solve problems the land seems to be in Buganda. Does the government not own land anywhere else in Uganda where they can solve a problem? And Government is setting a dangerous precedent, a precedent of respecting only militarism. They only respect militarism. When the people bring out pangas, they respect them. In Kibaale people said the LC V chairperson must go and Government said, “He must go; ab’e Kibaale banyize.” When people become angry those are the people that Government respects. Is that the character that Government wants all the people of Uganda to adopt, the character of militarism? I am saying this because courts are not respected.  

Mr Speaker, the Buganda caucus set up a committee to go to Kiboga and find out what it is, but the point is, let the sorting out be at the point of origin. Fortunately the minister has given us excellent information that 95 percent of these people have their origin in Masindi. They will not be chased away from Masindi and Bujenje because that is where they belong. The problem seems to be solved as far as I am concerned. They have a home and an origin and they should be actually recalled and welcomed back. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think we are going anywhere. On the 26th of June you are the ones that requested for this statement. The statement has been made and some people are satisfied while others are not. Now that we have this statement, we have to decide the way forward. That is all. Our Rules cannot allow us to go on debating ministerial statements for more than an hour. It is high time we thought of what we will do. If you have any contribution on the way forward, please bring it up tomorrow; we will consider it so that we conclude this matter. (Interruption) You see there is no winding up here. Let people think about the way forward. You have done your work and they now have your statement. They will decide as to how to settle this matter tomorrow. 

MR NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, I am one of those people who stood here last week, you can even check the Hansard, and I asked the minister whether these people are in Kiboga. Now, he has decided to answer only two questions, which he wanted. He stood here and said he would make a statement. That very evening, I was with him in the studios of Radio Simba and I mentioned the issue of Kiboga. Is the minister going to include Kiboga in his statement? He has decided not to say anything about these people being in Kiboga.

THE SPEAKER: What you are talking about was for purposes of screening these people, and he has told you that this has been done. So, why do you talk about Kiboga? 

MR NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, I am talking about Kiboga for two reasons: Our Chairperson for the Buganda Caucus has mentioned that these people were supposed to be screened in Bulisa where they are. However, today’s paper quoted the Rt hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister as saying that the majority of these people are not Ugandans. If these people are not Ugandans, can the Minister of Internal Affairs tell us how they entered Uganda? If the Third Deputy Prime Minister mentioned that these people are not Ugandans, how come they entered the country? 

Secondly, this paper also quoted a statement from Gen. Tinyefuza yet we know very well that he is not the spokesperson of the Army. In which capacity did Gen. Tinyefuza make these statements? The Third Deputy Prime Minister was saying that some of these people are not Ugandans and Gen. Tinyefuza is saying they should stay in Buganda. These are the clarifications that we need from the Minister tomorrow. 

THE SPEAKER: We have decided that tomorrow we will suggest or propose a way forward. These are ideas that whoever is interested can bring up so that tomorrow we formally deal with this matter since what we were doing was a general debate allowed in our Rules. However, having heard that general debate and having taken into account that statement, you can formally suggest a way forward tomorrow. 

4.13
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. You have given guidance on how long this debate can go on and you have put emphasis on one hour. I do not know whether I am mistaken in my understanding of things in this House, but I think even the Rule of an hour, you have the discretion-

THE SPEAKER: It has gone beyond one hour.

PROF. LATIGO: I am saying this because there are matters, which are not about the specific issues in the minister’s statement that some of us wanted to bring out to help the government; reference was made to, for example, Gen. Tinyefuza, by my brother, Hon. Nsubuga. When the issue of land conflict comes up, and at a time when Government should say something with humility, a General puts on a military uniform and makes a statement. You can insist and put these people where you want but this General will not live forever. You begin to lay seeds of discord in society and at the end of the day the country pays a heavy price for the mischief of those who think power is something that you can just use for your own interest.

I thought that you should have allowed us to talk a little more on this, because the Police are also people. If Parliament says, “Well the minister has said,” the Minister will feel good that he made a statement but this has no effect on those who have been aggrieved by the misconduct of those on the ground. I do not think it is good for us to debate the statement only without pointing out the danger it poses to this country in a substantive way. 

The Minister of Lands should have spoken without any General around him. It is so crucial for this country because there are those we have seen the past experience during Amin’s time, the Nubians took over shops and when Amin went, there was a big problem. During Obote’s time some of us felt we were in power and when Obote went, we were in big problems. (Laughter) I am telling you if these people have to be helped, it must be in the context of the country appreciating the real need to help them, and not because they think Government is behind them because when that Government goes there will be problems. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Prof. Latigo, the Leader of the Opposition, what we were doing today was under a Rule that we debate, but how does it end? By providing you another day, tomorrow, having debated this today you will be able to formally make a motion to conclude. I think that is better than giving five hours for everybody to debate and to comment without making a conclusion, because that Rule presupposes mere debating of the statement. However, tomorrow you will be able to make a proposal on how to deal with the situation. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am not totally raising a new thing, but when hon. Beti Kamya spoke, she said that these people have gone to court and they have secured a court order that they should not be evicted.  Tomorrow we will have a way forward or we will conclude on this matter. But supposing an ultimate end is that Government should resettle them in another place contrary to the court order -(Interruption)- It is not speculation- 

THE SPEAKER: This debate has now resulted in you getting that information that there is a court order. Now having been seized by that fact, tomorrow we will say that having debated this statement and having taken into account that there is a court order on this, we propose that this and that be done. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO THE REGIONAL CONFERENCE ON THE PARLIAMENTARIANS OF THE GREAT LAKES REGION

4.18
MR KAKOBA ONYANGO (NRM, Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I want to beg for your indulgence because I know you may not have carried the copies of this report, but the copies of this report was given in March. It is has been on and off on the Order Paper. So, you will have to bear with me. (Interjection) They were given out in March; you already have them. It has been on ever since that time and therefore I will beg for your indulgence. However, I will make it simple for everyone to understand.

Having said that, in accordance with our Rules of Procedure- before I read the report I want to Table a detailed report of the Parliamentary delegation to the regional conference of Parliamentarians of the Great Lakes Region.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to proceed under Rule 30 of our Rules of Procedure to present to this august House a report of the Parliamentary delegation to the regional conference for Parliamentarians of the Great Lakes Region. This conference which was co-organised by the International Conference of Great Lakes Region and the Association of Western European Parliamentarians for Africa, with the technical support of the joint AU, UN Secretariat, was held in Kinshasha on 26th to 28th of February 2007.

Uganda was represented at this conference by hon. Beatrice Lagada, hon. Wilfred Kajeke and I as the leader of delegation as well as the coordinator of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region in Uganda who is also the acting Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ambassador James Mugume. We were joined by delegates from the other ten core members of the International Conference on Great Lakes Region.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, because of time I will not read the other countries. But what we need to know is that under this arrangement we have 11 core countries in total. The UN was also represented, UN Agencies as well as groups of friends and NGOs, and it was opened by His Excellency, Joseph Kabila, the President of the DRC and closed by the Prime Minister.

Before I go into the details of this conference we need to know the background to the International Conference on Great Lakes Region. As a result of persistent instability and insecurity in the Great Lakes Region, the heads of states and Government within the region held a summit in Dar-es-Salaam in November 2004 to try and sort out these problems. The conference culminated into the adoption of the Dar-Salaam Declaration on Peace, Stability, Democracy and Development in the region on 20 November 2004. 

The umbrella body that brought the summit together was eventually named in the International Conference on Great Lakes Region and it was decided that the summit would then be held after every two years. Consequently, the second summit was held in Nairobi last year from 14th to 15th December. The Nairobi summit concretised the achievements of the Dar-es-Salaam meeting by adopting a part on security, stability and development in the Great Lakes Region, which was signed by the heads of states and governments that attended the summit.

The summit also designated Bujumbura, the Burundian capital as the host of the secretariat whereas Tanzania provided the first executive secretary. Therefore, the Kinshasha conference was generally intended to make the parliamentarians of the region own this pact by speeding up its ratification and also looking for ways of involvement in its implementation. However, the conference has specific objectives, which I will read: 

1. 	To bring parliamentarians of the region together and allow them to have a common understanding of the pact. 

2. 	To sensitise the legislators on the various components of the pact. 

3. 	To discuss the role of parliamentarians in the ratification of the pact and the mechanisms for their involvement in its implementation. 

4.	To strengthen the relationship among the parliamentarians in the framework of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.

During the conference, a number of observations were made and these included:-   
1.	None involvement of national parliaments in the process leading to signing of international conventions. This was a problem that was raised. Normally when these international conferences and discussions are taking place on treaties and conventions, the parliamentarians are normally brought in when the conventions have already been signed. 

	The feeling of the conference was that there should be involvement at the early stages because then it would save us several impediments and make the ratification of these conventions much easier. If I am to draw your attention to this, during the Nairobi summit, which I was privileged to attend, all the other stakeholders gave presentations but the Parliamentarians were lacking. So, the conference in Kinshasha was very much concerned about none involvement of parliamentarians.

2.	The conference was also concerned about inadequate financial resources to implement the pact.

3.	Third concern was there not being regular and formal parliamentarians fora for dialogue on security, stability and development challenges in the Great Lakes Region. 

4.	The conference was equally concerned about inadequate domestic legislation to protect vulnerable groups against sexual offences and succession disputes. Honourable members, as you may realize, normally during cases of conflict, there are reported cases of sexual harassment, rape and so forth. And also on the issue of succession, normally when people are displaced, they have always had problems when they go back to their places of origin. They find the land has been taken over and therefore the conference raised that concern that these issues should be looked at.
 
5.	 There was need to harmonise national policies with programmes of action and the projects of the pact. 

6.	The conference was also concerned about the slow pace of ratification of this pact by the national Parliament. 

7.	The conference raised the issue of sensitisation of the population of the member states about the pact. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to be as brief as possible, therefore, I am moving on to the recommendations.

Recommendations

1. The national Parliament should take the necessary steps to facilitate the speedy ratification of the pact. Ever since this pact was signed in December last year, it has not been ratified by any of the 11 member states up to now, and yet it is a very important pact and we need to implement it. However, before the pact can take effect, it has to be ratified. I hope the Minister of Foreign Affairs is taking note of that. 

2. The national Parliaments should use their constitutional and legislative powers to compel their governments and brief them on the pact and the progress made towards its implementation. 

3. National Parliaments should sensitise their constituents on the pact, thereby contributing to its dissemination. I must point out here that perhaps the first step should have been the sensitisation of the members of Parliament. This has not been done. What we have had with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is that they have briefed the Committee on Foreign Affairs but we feel that there is need to sensitise the rest of the members of Parliament so that we can get involved in the implementation of the pact. 

4. The conference further recommended that the pact be amended to give due recognition to the legislature as a key partner in its implementation. As I pointed out earlier, we were lacking in the presentations that were made in Nairobi, and equally when you look at the pact, provisions are made for other stakeholders but there is nowhere where national Parliaments are brought in. So, we felt there was need for legislation to include the role of Parliaments in this pact. 

5. 	In order to establish continuous dialogue, the conference resolved to set up a regional Parliamentarians Forum, which takes into account the new vision of the pact. The meeting accordingly set up a follow up mechanism committee composed of heads of delegations of the 11 member countries mandated to consider the modalities for the realisation of the forum.

6. 	In order to promote gender in the region, the conference resolved to work towards the establishment of a women’s parliamentarian network in the great lakes region. 

7. 	National Parliaments should use their budgetary provisions to lobby their governments to fulfil their financial obligations towards the international conference of the great lakes region.

8.	Member states should harmonise their national legislation to match provisions in the pact aimed at protecting vulnerable groups against sexual violence and succession disputes including legislation on the right of inheritance to returning persons. As I pointed out earlier, when there is conflict people are normally displaced but some of them have been facing problems when they go back to their countries. A case in point was in Rwanda. So, the pact felt that it should take care of such cases and therefore now we need to have legislation to make sure that this is implemented. 

9. 	As a back up to the recommendation and the resolution, the conference also issued a declaration, which was termed, the Kinshasa Declaration, whose copy is herein attached as appendix No. 1

	On the sideline of the conference, the Ugandan delegation aware of the problem of the LRA in the North, initiated and held consultations with the delegations from the DRC, the Central African Republic and Sudan, aimed at contributing towards the resolution of the LRA problem. During the consultations, witnessed by a representative of AWEPA, it was resolved that a consultative meeting of parliamentarians from the four countries on the LRA question be held. 

Mr Speaker, I must also point out that when we went for this conference, we were three members of Parliament and the PS, but we never had a clerk. I thought I should point this out that probably in future, if there are other delegations, there should be a provision at least for a clerk because when we came back I had to take on the role of writing the report.

Finally, I beg the indulgence of this august House to give due consideration to this report and the issues hereunder. Let us join hands to transform the great lakes region into a space of peace, security and development for the present and the future generations. If we do not, history will judge us harshly. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairman and members of the delegation for the representation and the report. Any comment or is that the end of it?

MR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank hon. Kakoba for presenting the report although it is a bit late. As Parliament, we should explore ways in which we can ensure that reports are presented in the timely manner because the conference was in February and now this is July. There are also many other reports in the last Parliament that have not been presented. 

The clarification I wanted to raise for the honourable member is that he raises an important issue on how we can ratify some of the international treaties and instruments. Truly usually the government is represented by the Executive in most of these meetings and Parliament is usually not part of that process. Now, the legal regime in which we are operating is such that for these international instruments to turn into law nationally, they must undergo a process of domestication and it is up to the ministries and the Executive to initiate that. 

I also see that he has made a recommendation that we look at ways in which Parliament can ensure that some of these treaties can be ratified. So, did you explore ways how Parliament can practically ensure that if there is a treaty, a pact, or an instrument, we can actually proactively engage in the process of ensuring that there is domestication of this treaty? Did you look at ways how we, as the Ugandan Parliament, can actually take practical steps?

4.36
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Onyango Kakoba for this report by their delegation. I have a concern which I think goes to the Executive. The observation says that out of the 11 countries- if I got it right Mr Speaker, I do not have my copy here anymore because this report as it was said was availed to us in March and I did not know it was on the Order Paper today-that committed themselves in signing, none of them has ratified up to today. I am forced to wonder aloud what the issue is. Did the countries or the signatories’ find it necessary in the first place to go ahead and sign something that they are not keen on seeing ratified? I would think that the Executive should come out and tell us why there is this kind of drudgery when it comes to ratification. 

I would also like to make a second observation and that is to the effect that there are so many treaties and international instruments to which we are signatories as a country. The trouble is that, first of all, the reporting mechanisms are not clear, let alone the question of ratification, if we have ratified at all. If you look at, for instance, CEDAW (The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women), you will find that the reporting mechanisms and how we are to fulfil our obligations to report on this particular convention are not very clear to the extent that if you are interested in following up our national commitment on such a convention or international treaty, you will find a problem. It is important that Government, after committing itself to an international convention, seeks recourse to Parliament so that we are able, as an institution, to follow up on matters of implementation and reporting mechanisms. 

Finally, I would like to comment on the meeting concerning issues of sexual harassment and I would like to urge Government that we have been raising concerns on matters of sexual offences, the Domestic Relations Bill and such other related sexual harassment issues. As a country, we would be happy to see these relevant legal frameworks in place so that we are able to match our international obligations. Thank you very much.

4.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE, REGIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Issac Musumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the leader of the delegation that led the Parliamentary delegation to the regional conference that was held in Kinshasa between the 26th to 28th February. I just want to update Parliament that for Uganda, the process of ratification has begun. A Cabinet paper has been prepared and Cabinet is due to consider it. Thereafter, we will be coming to this Parliament for the termination of the process of ratification. I thank you.

4.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRADE (Mr Gagawala Wambuzi): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me an opportunity to, first of all, appreciate the work which the head of the delegation and the delegation, which went to attend this great regional conference did. I urge the House to adopt the report because it is in the interest of all Parliamentarians in the Great Lakes to continuously interact so that we create the Great Lakes market. 

As Minister of Trade, it is clear that these Great Lakes countries are very anxious to work together in terms of all the business. Indeed very many students are coming from Tanzania and are studying here. Similarly, very many students are coming from Rwanda and Burundi and they are studying in some of our colleges and schools. Indeed Eastern DRC and Southern Sudan feel at home when they are here. 

Therefore, our Parliamentarians should interact with the Parliamentarians of neighbouring countries, including Kenya, all the time because these students who are here are sort of tourists and actually bring money when they come here. It is, therefore, very important for us who are at the centre of the whole game to keep moving around and know what is going on around us. In that way, our Parliamentarians who will visit there and who we thank very much for having gone- as the Minister of Trade, I find that this interaction is very healthy and it is another way of encouraging and enhancing trade and cultural activities. 

I would like to thank the delegation and say that from now onwards, even our friends who go out on official duty in conferences should ensure that at least one page or half a page is presented concerning this, even if it is just laid on the Table, so that there is some continuity in what is going on. So that when you hear that your friend was in Japan, you can there know that there will be a reference point. With those few remarks, I thank you again, Mr Speaker and I urge the House to adopt this report.

4.43
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the leader of the delegation for the report. Unfortunately the copies were given way back in March and as such Members were not closely following the reading. However, when we received it we looked at it and reflected on some ideas. I would like to find out from the Leader of the delegation, he stated that there was a proposal that the four countries where the Northern conflict is touching should have come together and probably given their input. I am sure that right now the conflict in the North has gone a long way and the report as we have seen has also taken its time; February up to July. Actually one has already been overtaken by events; that means it has already been signed as the Minister has just indicated. 

I would like to find out from the leader of the delegation. How far has that proposal been implemented in as far as the peace process has gone to a very advanced stage? If not how soon will it be done otherwise our recommendations and concerns might be time bad. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.45
MR JAMES SERUNJOGI (Independent, Kalungu County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the leader of the delegation for this report. I would like to address one issue on recommendation No.3, which states the need to sensitise constituents on the pact. This requirement might not be true on this pact alone; it is a necessity for all other international treaties, because members of Parliament in Uganda and elsewhere might not be aware of what is going on. I would like to say that this is an era of ICT and I would suggest that this pact be loaded on our website for the consumption of Members. 

Yesterday in Parliament we were discussing this when we passed the loan to China regarding the potential of e-governance, that is departments communicating through ICT. In regard to this, I would also suggest that our Minister of ICT be encouraged to use what is internationally known as e-parliament where parliamentarians from different countries collaborate using the internet and ICT facility. That is my suggestion for improving the awareness of Members on such important issues like pacts and other treaties.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that we adopt the report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORTS OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT’S ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE POOR REVENUE PERFORMANCE IN RESPECT OF THE TENDER FOR NAKASERO MARKET

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a report, which was tabled yesterday. I wonder whether you have got your copies. 

HON MEMBERS: No.

MR EKANYA: Honourable Speaker, your office has made adequate copies. The reports are there.

THE SPEAKER: So, members have not yet got them. It is a voluminous report. I have got a copy and what I suggest is that members get their copies and read through because when you are presenting this report tomorrow, you will give us a summary rather than reading page by page. Therefore, it is important that members are familiar with all the details.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I have a proposal, which is slightly different from what you have told us. I would like to propose that while we do not have the copies, the chairperson of the committee goes ahead and makes the presentation so that we save on time since we have to debate the budget. Then tomorrow –(Interruption)- Mr Speaker, the house has become so indisciplined, I wonder what is wrong with them. Maybe you could tell them, including hon. Isaac Musumba, to keep quiet. That is what I am proposing that we could start the debate tomorrow so that we can add another 30 minutes to work.

THE SPEAKER: No. You see this is a 36-page report. Do you expect him to read from page 1 to 36? What we are saying is that today we shall read the report- he can go and summarise and give us a summary tomorrow then we start the debate. I think it is better that way.  

MR EKANYA: Honourable Speaker, since that is your proposal let members receive the report. I do not need to go and make a summary, I will summarise from here because the report is familiar to me. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think let us do it tomorrow. This is the last item but I still have this to say to the Leader of Government Business that we have not got copies of the State of the Nation Address and this explains why we have not started the debate.  

MS KABAKUMBA: Rt. Hon. Speaker, I appreciate and I am aware that copies have not been submitted to Parliament. There was a problem but as of today it has been sorted out and anytime those copies will be ready and will be submitted to Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow 2 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.55 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 5 July 2007 at 2 p.m.)






 

