Monday, 7 July 2003

Parliament met at 2.28 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the public expects you to attend proceedings of the House. So, I am appealing to you to attend the proceedings of the House.  

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

i) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2003/04.

ii) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2003/04 ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.

(Debate continued.)

MR MOSES KIZIGE (Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise to support the motion. The Budget Speech by the Minister –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you Mr Speaker. I think we are supposed to debate this motion in order for the frontbench to get our views. Given the fact that the Minister of Finance is not here, we have only the Minister in charge of Transport, who will pass on our information to him? Would it not be procedurally right that we get these ministers on the Floor first?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you requested that you should not sit on Friday, but you gave in Monday to compensate for Friday. That is why we decided to sit today. We have to proceed because the frontbench is aware that we are sitting today, and it is their duty to respond to whatever comments we have made here. They have facilitates to enable them find out what you have said here. 

There is one member on the frontbench, but I think they will use our records to respond. Otherwise, if we say because they are not here we do not proceed, suppose they do not want us to debate a matter and they disappear, what shall we do? I suggest we go on. They will find a way of getting what you have said.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, even on the backbench we are only 15, so it is also alarming that the House can go on with such a number.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think our rules are clear; we can go on with this number.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, I am alarmed! This is a matter of national importance; we are debating the budget of this country, but we have got only one honourable minister here yet there are so many sectors we are going to touch on. 

Unless you assure me, particularly, that there is a way the honourable ministers are going to receive this information, I think it is really quite alarming that they are not here and there are no explanations given, yet this is a crucial matter. I know that so many backbenchers are also missing, but at least the ministers should be here because it touches everyone.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is no way I am going to force the members of the frontbench to attend. They will get to know what was discussed from the Hansard. You air out whatever you want and then it is up to them to respond. It will be on record. 

Otherwise, if you say we do not proceed because the ministers are not here, I am telling you one day they may say “we do not want them to debate this matter, so let us not go” and they will not proceed. But the Prime Minister was here and the honourable ministers are now coming in. The hon. Minister of State in the Ministry of Education is here, and the Minister of State for Transport is here. I think let us proceed. The records will be used by whoever will want to respond to what you have said.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, with due respect to the Chair, much as you are persuading us to continue deliberating in spite of the absence of the ministers, there is something alarming. As a student of Government, I know that Government hinges on budgetary estimates. If the Executive cannot respond to a matter of public concern like this, would you be alarmed if, for example, I moved a vote of no confidence in the Museveni Government?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the rules are very clear on how you move a motion. If you want to move a motion according to the rules, it will be entertained. Otherwise, your work is going to be bogged down if you say you cannot proceed because there is no one on the frontbench.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, with due respect to you, this is my final reaction to this statement. You said that according to the Rules of Procedure one could go ahead and move a motion. Suppose the Members of Parliament present give me support over a resolution seeking to remove the Government from power because they are irresponsible, would you entertain it in your capacity as Speaker of this House?

THE SPEAKER: I said that, so long as you follow the Rules of Procedure I would definitely facilitate you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: I am about to move it, Mr Speaker. (Laughter).

MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am not against your ruling that we should proceed. Indeed, we need to proceed and do business, but proceeding is one thing and the issues that will be raised is another thing.  

Mr Speaker, hardly a few minutes ago when hon. Awuzu was seated there alone, you said since he is there, he will represent his colleagues. A few minutes ago, I had talked to him about certain issues in railways –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I am sure under the rules we can proceed, there is no question of that. But you seem to be worried that if the ministers are not here, they may be prejudiced. What I can do is to suspend the proceedings for just 10 minutes, so that the honourable minister present can alert his colleagues. But it should not be a precedent that the House cannot proceed because the frontbench is not here. Members of the frontbench are supposed to be here all the time. 

The adjournment was done in the presence of the Prime Minister and ministers. So, the question of not knowing that the House is sitting today does not arise. But for the benefit of doubt, I will suspend the House for just 10 minutes to allow those who are supposed to be here to come. If they are not here after 10 minutes, we shall proceed unless there are no members who wish to contribute to this debate.

(The House was suspended at 2.40p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.00p.m, the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Prime Minister has just called me to say that he is held up somewhere, but he has assigned his duties in the House to the Minister of State for Finance (General Duties), hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana. But I have told him that I expect the ministers to attend proceedings of the House so that they can follow what members say about their portfolios. I think we can now proceed.

MR MOSES KIZIGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will proceed right away. I want to refer to page 3 of the Budget Speech, where the Minister talks about GDP growth. 

In the financial year 2002/2003, growth was projected to be at 7 percent, but the actual growth realised was only 4.9 percent. The variance is well over 25 percent. I realise that the new projection is 5.6 percent, which seems to be realistic. But definitely when you perform 25 percent below the expectation, then there is a major problem for which we would really expect a very good explanation from the Minister of Finance.

Mr Speaker, on page 5 and 6, the Minister mentions fish exports. We realize that there has been an increase in fish export. Fish is bringing us a lot of foreign exchange. But it is my humble request that under the strategic intervention, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries ensures that the landing sites on Lake Victoria and Lake Kyoga are constructed - as budgeted before - expeditiously. 

We also expect to have the power line for Kamuli District extended to Bukungu landing site, which is one of the biggest landing sites on Lake Kyoga. And also the roads should be upgraded so that people can easily access the landing site. 

Right now we have a lot of fish being collected for export. In fact, the local community can no longer afford fish because it is bought at a very expensive price, so people opt to sell off. But they get the money, and we can continue with that for the time being.

Mr Speaker, still under fish export, last financial year, there were some interventions to ensure that the quality of fish is controlled on Lake Kyoga.  But the manner in which this was done was not good. People lost property because they were not warned in good time. We hope in future such interventions will not lead to loss of property. People need to be prepared so that they know what to do. (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Speaker, I know I may have an opportunity to make some contribution, but I only wish to inform the honourable member. 

The fish folk on all lakes have various fish organizations through which information regarding fishing gear is communicated to them. In many cases, these people have the information, but like any other society, there are always those who may go against the established policies. 

Otherwise, all the people involved in fishing, even those in the fishing industry, know the right fishing gear to use. So, when we are trying to enforce, there is no time to warn. But we shall continue to sensitise them because this is a continuous process.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  The information I want to give my colleague is related to the explanation, which the Minister has just given. 

My colleague has been complaining about the methodology being used while enforcing this. When you talk about fish gear, I happen to be near a lake, but the way the exercise was being handled left no supplement or alternative for these people to survive. How do you tell them that you do not want a certain type or size of net to be used on Lake Victoria, when you know that the entire area depends on fishing alone? 

What alternative have you put in place? What sort of organization are you talking about, that needs to sensitise the farmers? I think this is what he has been talking about. A system must be put in place and it must be handled in such a manner that does not antagonize the whole idea behind generating more fish, as we wanted.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: It is dialogue. The fact is that there is a study going on. It is very interesting, if you establish the people who are really fishing at these fishing landing sites, they are not necessarily people from those areas. They come from areas that have alternatives, but they come there for business, so they should do the business according to the established procedure.  

As regards alternatives, we have a procedure of informing people about other farm enterprises – livestock, crops or fisheries - that they can undertake. But these people involved in fishing must do it according to established procedures. The enforcing is done in collaboration with many other organs. At times the way they handle it may be out of hand because of an individual, but we have to enforce the procedure.

MR KIZIGE:I Thank you, honourable minister, for that information. I would just like to request that political leaders should be involved in the sensitisation process, so that they also get sensitised. Because at the end of the day, these fishermen go to the political leaders for a solution and they do not have one.

Mr Speaker, on page 8, the Minister mentions the efficient railway links to the coast. I think this is something that is long overdue. 

In the financial year 2001/2002, the road from Malaba to Bugiri was not repaired but a new one was built. But as you drive from Malaba to Bugiri, the whole left side is now completely spoilt because of heavy loads on the road. So, if we had an efficient railways system, probably the roads would last much longer than they last now.  

Lastly, the Minister talked about strengthening the legal and regulatory framework for the financial sector. But there is also another regulation that is required right now. I recall, Mr Speaker, your remarks when the people of Busoga presented the Busoga Peoples Charter. You said that there is need for recognition of co-operating districts, but there is no law in place right now that enables the local governments to contribute to an institution like the Busoga Peoples Forum and Busoga Peoples Charter. 

There is no law that can compel the centre to contribute to cooperating districts, like is required by the Constitution. So, I urge the Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Finance to come up with such a law expeditiously, so that co-operating districts can benefit. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri County West, Sironko):  I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the Minister for having brought such a budget, which is almost one-sided.  

I will embark on my comments on the budget with the issue of fuel increment. I think our policy in Uganda is to increase taxes. That means we are looking at revenue and not looking at expenditure. 

If we increase the price on fuel, it has a multiplier effect on the entire economy and everything has to go up. You can imagine now, if you are supposed to bring in 10 bunches of matooke, you will bring in eight because the price has gone high and the number has gone down. The person who has been producing 10 will produce eight. What are we going to do?  

Tax increments should not have been a solution to this. The expenditure, in form of vehicles alone, is a very big expenditure. If we cut the expenditure on maintenance of government cars, we would not increase the price of fuel for purposes of taxing. I think Government should look further in that line, for the sake of this country.

On the employment policy, I would have been happy to hear the Minister talk about how he will employ the 10,000 Ugandans who are graduating at every level, every year; but they are not talking about it. You hear of immigration policies, but I do not know if they exist.  

In Uganda we are getting investors who bring askaris from outside Uganda as if there are no Ugandans. Where are we going? Are we marketing our country to foreigners? All the money they earn leaves our economy. I think it is time the Government came up with a policy on how to help Uganda as far as employment is concerned. The wars we are having could be because of unemployment. You cannot recruit where people are employed. They are recruiting the unemployed. 

We have manufacturers here - the so-called investors - they manufacture, they are into wholesale and also retail.  The Indians have taken all businesses, even up to the lowest level. Where are we going? What business shall we do so that we can survive? All the profits they make leave the country. 

I am not scaring the investors. Let them bring top management and we stay down. In China, the investor will only bring top management and below they have the local people. When shall we learn also to do what they are doing? (Interruption)

MR ARUMADRI: I want to inform my colleague that on Saturday I was returning from Madi-Okollo and I saw the Chinese who are constructing the Pakwach-Nebbi road. It was the Chinese who were driving the lorries and graders.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: I thank you my colleague. That is because of our weak immigration policies. If we know we have Ugandans who can drive graders, why should we bring Chinese to do it? In fact, the Immigration department should be scrapped! It is doing nothing.

On employment again, when there is a job advertised, for example for contractors for a road, they will give the job to a foreign firm and leave out Ugandans. We are talking of building Ugandan capacity. They are saying Ugandans are unmanageable, why? Give them a chance. All these foreign firms will carry out our money and leave us poor.  

We hear of expatriates, and I want to give an example. In the Ministry of Finance, you find an expatriate with one degree being paid over $10,000; no tax. He takes the all the money in form of development, and Ugandans could do this same job.  I do not know if the Government has data on the qualifications or manpower we have in Uganda. If they had it, I would imagine there would be no need for them to source for expatriates outside this country. 

About PMA and NAADS, I think this is a useless venture. The purpose of PMA was to develop the farmers. What are we providing the farmers? We should have given farmers high-yield seeds, fertilizers, equipment so that they can be able to produce. But we are giving them, Pajeros so that they can enjoy themselves! 

I do not know if the Ministry of Agriculture even has an investment plan for the agricultural sector.  I have looked at the policy, but there is no investment plan. I do not know, maybe he will tell us later.

On taxes, it is true we are collecting taxes. We collect two types of taxes, the indirect tax and the direct tax. Many companies here are not paying direct taxes. When they make a return on indirect taxes, they claim that is a tax. That is not a tax; it is a tax of the last person who has consumed. 

We need the Ministry of Finance to come up with an index showing the genuine taxpayers, those who are paying the direct taxes. It is you and the other people who are consuming the goods who are paying, and those taxes should not be put on your record. This will help us to know who is contributing to this economy. That is why I am so bothered that you exempt foreigners and leave Ugandans to pay tax.  

I have been looking at taxes for 10 years; where are we going? We have provided a good environment for development for everybody, but why are we saying it is only the foreigners to benefit and not Ugandans? 

I would request the sessional committees, before they approve these budgets of ministries, to go and see what they have done. If you go there, they will pretend that they have built a dam when they have not built it. It is time for you to first see what the previous money did before you approve their budgets; we might reduce on borrowing.

Lastly, it is good we are talking about developing the country. Ministries are talking of micro-finance, which is good, but if you know how it operates, you will know it is very dangerous.  

Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Gender and the Prime Minister’s Office have micro-finance under them. Who is who? This is borrowed money, which should help our people. If this money was administered very well, it would benefit our people. But if we put it in different ministries, we are going nowhere. At the end of the day, there will be no service.  

Right now the micro-finance scheme that was passed on to those people in the villages has made people poor. They claim that the collection is 100 per cent, but how are they collecting it? When you go and borrow money, they say, “Pay six percent per month”. You put your house there for Shs 100,000, should you fail to pay they just come for the house, and because they have sold the house, they say they have collected. You have made me poorer than you found me! I think there should also be a policy on how Government can help people. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MRS MASIKO KOMUHANGI (Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am grateful that I am able to contribute to this motion. I have a few points that I thought I should raise, as they came up in the Budget Speech. 

I do appreciate that we passed the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Act, and it was mentioned in this speech. It goes a long way to indicate that there is an effort to make people accountable. However, Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the ministry in charge to make sure that at least all the ministries get this in place. 

Though we established the authority, if it is not closely monitored and ministries compelled to make sure that we have procurement departments in all ministries in this country, it is something that could easily be neglected. We might then, not receive the dividends that we had planned to get as a nation.  

I would also like to contribute to the issue on the community development strategy. In his speech, the Minister mentioned the comprehensive community development strategy. I am sure this is the only way we can put in place programmes that could reach the population at the household level. However, I would have been happier if the monitoring component was dwelt on a little more. It is one thing to put things in place and it is another to make sure that they are seen and they do what they are supposed to do.  

Mr Speaker, in the Budget Speech, it is clear that there is an increase in money for primary healthcare, from Shs 9 billion to Shs 105 billion. I appreciate that, and I think it is useful to our country. But what is in place? What kind of mechanism is there to monitor the health programmes that have been put in place? I find that lacking, and yet it is something that needs to be dwelt upon closely so that we use the few resources that we have effectively.

When you read through the Budget Speech, you can see how the country has received money from the Global Fund. We know it is a policy now that we use the private sector and Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) in the implementation of the different programmes that benefit from the Global Fund. However, my fear is that at the moment I do not see a mechanism in place to monitor how these NGOs, CBOs and the whole private sector are using this money. I feel that if nothing is seriously put in place, we might lose it.

I am very aware that organizations are different. Many organization’s structures are different, and the visions are different. Therefore, if we do not seriously put mechanisms in place to monitor how these funds are used, I am afraid we as Government might not achieve what we think we would have achieved with this seemingly much money.

Mr Speaker, I still have to emphasize the issue of monitoring the funds that we get in our country. It is clear that many organizations are accessing this money, but how do we know? How can Parliament know how this money is being utilized, so that we are able to tell the population how these funds have been used? I think there is need to establish a body that could monitor the implementation of these programmes and the usage of the money that we get from the Global Fund.

The primary healthcare budget has increased from Shs 9 billion to Shs 105 billion, which is fine. However, it is clear in the speech that the index, the measure of the improvement in mortality rates, has not been any better. Unless we change our strategy and go down to start at the household level and use communities to get involved in their own health management, we are not going to go a long way. 

All these things have been in place; a lot of funds have been accessed in these health units, but we do not see much change. Therefore, the approach and strategy has to be changed so that we reach the household level and get the population, the communities, involved in their own health activities.

Mr Speaker, allow me to briefly talk about rural electrification. I think that we need to know more about this. As far as my district is concerned, this has turned into a song. The Ishasha electricity programme started so many years ago. I was at that time still the Vice Chairperson at the Local Council V, and we planned and put things in place. That is about ten years ago and it has not taken off since. Every time you read the budget, they say it is going to start, but nothing really goes down. 

Mr Speaker, I think there is need to move forward with some of these programmes. We would rather have a few programmes reflected in the budget, but which can be implemented, rather than having so many and nothing is done about them. 

Therefore, I wish we could have this rural electrification in practice, rather than reading about it in papers. They tell us that it is taking place and it is going to cost us a lot, and every time hopes are raised. We go back to the population and tell them that things are coming, “we are getting power soon”, only to wait for 10 years before they see anything. 

Mr Speaker, this is something I thought the ministry concerned should be serious about. They should tell us the true picture, rather than getting us to speculate and imagine while things are not coming our way.

Allow me to quickly mention the housing sector. As you read through this, you can see lots of development is talked about in the housing sector. Mr Speaker, regarding the Condominium Act, I think this has been a real disaster. It was put in place and when it was being worked on, it seemed as if work was going to move seriously. However, since we passed that Act, there is not much that has taken place. 

I would like to know –(Mr Baguma Isoke rose_)- maybe I will get information later. I know there are studies taking place, but if you read in the policy statement of the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications, they will tell you that the operationalisation of the law will end by the year 2004. Really, I think there is lack of seriousness about that issue. And they say that all this money will be used for making us know what it is all about. (Mr Baguma Isoke rose_) I think that is a waste of money. I accept to be informed.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think you have already overrun your time. Why don’t you wind up? You will get that information later.

MRS MASIKO KOMUHANGI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to know what is exactly happening. Does the Ministry intend to have the people who are occupying these houses continually stifled and not receive what they are supposed to get? In fact, I suggest that all this rent that is accrued to them since we passed the Act be embedded in the cost of those houses. That is the only way we can know that something serious is being put in place. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. To a large measure the Condominium Properties Act is implemented by my ministry, which is responsible for lands, but the lead agency is the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications. We work closely together. 

I want to report to this House, arising out of the concern raised by the hon. Member for Rukungiri, that condominium plans by structural planners and surveyors are being drawn. The registrars of titles in my ministry have already started registering condominium properties whose plans are already drawn. 

I know that the ministry responsible for housing is already enforcing the policy of allowing occupants of the National Housing flats to receive the units. They have also drawn the plans and registered them appropriately as provided for under that law. So, enforcement is in high gear. Thank you.

MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Whereas I rise to support the motion, I am a bit disappointed about the nature of this budget speech. Apart from a few sentences that I have seen, the rest is like a chorus from a Christian song. As my colleague has said, whatever was being reflected in those days when she was working at the district is what is being reflected now. 

I listened carefully to the Budget Speech ; knowing the cost of living in this country, there was nothing mentioned about the salary increment of government workers. Instead, the fuel prices have shot up and things in the market are shooting up, but the salary of a worker has remained stagnant. 

Not forgetting, Mr Speaker and honourable members, the threshold for the past six years has remained at Shs 130,000 per month. What do you expect workers of this country to do with these peanuts they are taking home yet the cost of living is increasing? 

Within the Budget Speech itself, the Minister is talking about the welfare of the workers but I fail to understand the logic behind that. As my colleague was saying, whenever you touch fuel prices it affects costs across the board. As we talk now, some of my colleagues cannot even afford to buy bunches of matooke in the market because of the fuel price increased. 

They looked at one sector and they thought that by reducing the taxes on others they had done a great job, but they have indirectly affected all sectors. Issues concerning increases in fuel prices must in future be carefully considered before the Minister comes to the Floor to read his speech, which I have already called a chorus of a Christian song. 

Mr Speaker, if you look at page 10 of the Budget Speech , they are talking about job security. I wonder what they mean by that phrase when most of the investors we are getting here are harassing citizens of this country! Whenever we rise up to complain they say, “no, whatever law we are passing must be investor-friendly”. 

Recently I went to that place called the AGOA factory and addressed all the workers. Those young girls are about 1,153 in number, and they are talking about harassment. They are being overworked. They work for more than 13 hours a day, contrary to the Employment Act. They are not even allowed to see their relatives. I was even more surprised to find out that when it comes to the time of going for short calls, one must be on the timetable. They tell them, “you should be going at around midday, or you will be going around ten o’clock”. 

These are the complaints I got on the ground, and we are talking about job security! These are the AGOA girls, just to mention a few. I have been there twice and one day the radio stations played broadcasts of their voices, of what they are complaining about. We only talk about job security here in words, but we are not enforcing it among these investors we are welcoming to this country -(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: I would like to inform my honourable colleague that even URA, a branch of the Ministry of Finance, employs workers as casual labourers. They are not given terminal benefits. They work within a range of 15 years in service, and they are not given anything at the end. They have temporary contracts, like casual labourers.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much for that information. 

Mr Speaker, I will try to concentrate on this budget speech. If you look at page 6 of the Budget Speech , they say that fishing has been promoted with 20 water sources being stocked with three million fish fries. They mention one landing site, Kasensero, which happens to be near my place. As my colleague mentioned, it is better for the Minister to come with a speech of about four pages but mean what he is going to implement. 

What is being mentioned here is a very good idea, but my first question is; the road from Kyotera to Kasensero is becoming impassable, why is there no programme for that road? You are talking about improving the landing site at Kasensero, but we need electricity in that area. There is already one good investor who is starting a nice plant there, but there is no electricity and no plan for that. 

How are we going to improve on all these sweet words and sites that have been indicated in this speech? Let us come up with a comprehensive plan where people can say, “for this particular year, we are going to handle a, b, c and we are going to finish it”, rather than having words, which we cannot implement.

Similarly, if you look at page 8, the Minister says, “Government will start constructing the Kampala Northern bypass, which starts at Bweyogerere…” Earlier on I said this is a chorus of very good music. I think this is not the first time we are hearing about this. And the Minister is very smart; he does not commit himself by telling us in which financial year he is starting this particular phase. He does not even tell us how far he has gone in compensating the people, because a lot of people are going to be affected. 

Is there any programme, which shows that they have already started compensating people and now they are in a position to start? Apart from exciting us, we clap and say –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I should give this information early enough to assist my honourable friend. Funds to construct the bypass were obtained a long time ago, but the problem has been money for compensation. I am glad to say that in this year’s budget, there is money for compensation, and this is going to start immediately. Once we finish compensation, then construction will start.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much honourable minister for that good information. My only worry is that the funds for construction were obtained a long time ago, and I know our nature of operation. Much as now we are acquiring the monies for compensation, are we sure that the money we got for construction is still safe? If that is okay then that is good.  

Mr Speaker, let me quickly talk about the fact that we liberalized the economy in this country and embarked on privatisation. But we have not been shown, at any particular day or during such a speech by the Minister, the fruits of privatisation, more so in as far as the welfare of the workers is concerned. 

We need to keep on assessing the enterprises that have been privatised and the ones that we are going to privatise. For instance, as we talk now the workers of the Railways Corporation - we were at several meetings with them - do not know their fate. What will happen to them? 

For several years, Railways and Dairy Corporations have been on the list of those companies to be privatised. Their workers have never received an increment for more than five years because the enterprises are now under privatisation. Once the enterprise is under privatisation, the worker remains stagnant. However, much as the cost of living is changing, they cannot increase their salary because the enterprise is under privatisation. 

Not only that, we are trying to assess and see how the welfare of the workers has changed. Yesterday, Mr Speaker and honourable members, we lost two dear brothers working with the electricity company. They were electrocuted while performing their duty. 

This morning when I rang the leaders of those workers, they told me they have been complaining to management about poor protective wear. They no longer have the gadgets that UEB used to provide, like radio calls. 

Before you move on to do work on a power line, you have to communicate with your colleagues in the control rooms about what you are doing. They have to have such protection. But as we talk now, some are forced to climb up the power lines without proper protective wear, and that is what has happened; we have lost our colleagues. 

This all comes about because the electricity company is being privatised. The Minister concerned does not care about whoever is going to take it over, or what programmes he has in place. So, all these things are what we expected to be reflected here, so that at the end of the day we can assess and know what is good and bad about this exercise.   

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up honourable member.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Let me wind up – (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana rose_). I will allow the information, since it is important.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I want to respond generally to the question of the plight of employees. There is a sufficient legal framework, and there are sufficient laws in place for employees. Any privatisation or transaction between the Government and a private party takes into account those laws. So, I really do not understand when the honourable member complains that employees are not protected, because the legal framework is there.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and thank you, honourable minister. I am a bit surprised. Yes, it is good that you are a learned gentleman – I am not learned – but you know very well that there are laws but some investors are good at operating beyond our laws. You know it very well! You know that they have been violating the laws, which are clear, but they are untouchables –(Interruption)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, honourable colleague for giving way. I would also like to inform the House that although the laws are there, they are very archaic. For example, if you look at the minimum wage, according to our law it is supposed to be Shs 6,000. So, would you really say that the laws are there to protect workers if such a law has never been revisited?  

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much my colleague. I think the Minister has also heard for himself, from his fellow learned colleague. 

Lastly, I would like to talk about pillar 3 of PEAP. I think it is high time we sat down and revisited what PEAP is supposed to be. I want to pose a question to honourable members; what have you really got from this Poverty Eradication Action Programme? They only have policy analysis and assessment from the Sheraton, and then they make conclusions in their budget speeches of what it has done. 

In fact, some of us have baptized it “the Sheraton policy” because those colleagues of IMF meet my colleague of the Ministry of Finance and they have their chai in Sheraton, then they tell what the poverty levels in Rakai are! But you need to go down and assess the situation on the ground before you praise yourself. I thank you very much.

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I could summarize and say that the theme of the Budget Speech , which was “Increased production for increased exports and eradication of absolute poverty”, was good, but the speech was a disaster. 

The Minister of Finance while planning is doing so for Uganda and the Ugandan economy, which is actually a consumption economy. I had expected immediate action to be taken as a result of his speech. During those days, I used to hear statements like, “Starting from midnight tonight…” If he had announced that the use of government vehicles would end with the working hours, “starting from midnight tonight”, I would know that he has done something. 

If you look at the way government vehicles are used throughout the night and the weekend when the officers are not on government duty, it is bad. They crash at night when the officers have mixed up their minds, and that in itself can never reduce the cost of public administration. 

Mr Speaker, the Minister talks of the rate of growth having been at 4.9 percent, and he attributed it to low rainfall and low market prices. The good thing is that he is seated next to the Minister of Agriculture. There is the Plan for the Modernization of Agriculture, which does not address irrigation and which does not address marketing; it is just a paper. It is just theory handled by the Minister, together with PEAP, PAP, everything, and you attribute the rate of growth in Uganda to low rainfall! 

Supposing you were representing a country that is a desert? Our children will read these speeches and they will just laugh at us. They will laugh and say that there were Ugandans in this climate who were attributing the rate of growth to rainfall in the year 2003. I just shudder.  

Mr Speaker, I have actually identified a problem that we have in this country. I have attended seminars and we have all been talking about Vision 2025. That was the vision of this government, which I even thought would be put at the airport so that as one enters, he knows what we stand for. 

The Government has been following Vision 2025, but the Minister, in his speech on page 11, is in Vision 2020 (Laughter) The President, in his State of the Nation Address, says he does not share his vision with anyone. Where are we going? (Laughter). 

The Minister read a speech on behalf of the President. The country has been following Vision 2025 and there is even a secretariat for it. The Minister is on Vision 2020. The President does not share his vision with anyone, not even with his ministers or with diplomats! Where are we going surely? 

Let us be serious if we are to work for this country. If the Minister for all these years has been in 2025, and in this Budget he has changed to 2020, I think we have a problem. We should handle this problem if we are to move. Otherwise, we do not know our vision. And a country without a vision makes its people prisoners of their own conscience. 

Mr Speaker, the Minister is talking about opening Gulu University. They are talking about higher education, but does the minister of planning have manpower requirements for this country? I have been asking about this. 

How many neurosurgeons do we need in this country? When I was growing up, I used hear about Prof. Kiryabwire, the only neurosurgeon in Mulago. How many neurosurgeons do we need so that we train those? Does the Minister know? A country without manpower requirement; you are training for what? Let us get serious.

Mr Speaker, I know my friend has talked about fuel.  The Minister sees fuel as the only source of taxation. He talks about a theme of eradicating absolute poverty, and yet the cost of the fuel goes right down to the poor man. It affects what he produces and markets. It affects the sugar prices, because now sugar has increased. Because of the increase in the cost of fuel, prices of essential commodities have also increased, and the theme is eradication of absolute poverty! 

Let us get serious in what we are doing. Let us not just perform these state functions - every year you have to read a speech. The theme is good, but without a vision, I do not think it would take you very far.

Finally, Mr Speaker, the Minister talks of industrial zones, but we want to be clear about the three industrial zones for promoting these exports and tax holidays. Ugandans have been exploited through these tax holidays because everyone does his own thing. There is no monitoring, and people exploit these zones to do their own things, both illegal and legal, and you end up not getting from what you have invested. 

So, I do not know what sort of administration the Minister is going to put in place so that these industrial zones are not abused. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe South, Kampala):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. My thanking or not thanking him will come from my submission. But I still underscore one thing; I thank him for giving us the estimates. 

I am equally touched, like my colleague who has been on the Floor, about relating the rate of growth to agriculture, especially to the climatic conditions. I am equally perturbed, because when I was reading the policy statement of the Minister of Agriculture, the budgetary outturn to agriculture was approximately 52 percent. If the Minister of Finance and Government know that agriculture plays a real impact on this economy, why do you have to give it so little? 

I do not know whether the minister in the line ministry does not know how to haggle to get more, because every time they read a budget, we end up with 2 per cent or less! I don’t know what is happening in Cabinet and on the government side over there, because it is now impacting on the economy. Like my friend rightly put it, if it does not rain for the whole year, then we are doomed. And we shall be doomed even more if we get pestilences.    

Mr Speaker, I am also perturbed about this business of ICT. I welcome the submission by the Minister, but how is he going to achieve this? I wish they could sit down with the AGOA department. Instead of labouring with textiles and crops, I think let us export our manpower to these countries. 

Mr Speaker, when I was abroad recently, I was sent by the people there to request the Minister of Finance to give the Uganda High Commission a lot of money, which would enable them support our budget here more. 

Already, if you read through this book, Ugandans in the diaspora have contributed over US$600 million. But the problem they have is, when they are hounded from there and are brought here, the Ministry of Finance does not help them. The Police besieges them further, harasses them and asks for bribes, and yet here we praise and applaud their efforts in repatriating their money here. But there is nothing we do here or at the Uganda High Commission, to help their situation. 

I learnt what the Nigerian government, does if their people are repatriated and hounded from there. I am not saying that I am abating it, but at least they receive them with open hands, give them other passports in other names and then export them. But here we just take them to Luzira – (Interruption)

MRS SARAH NYOMBI: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to inform the honourable members that even our people are harassed at Entebbe Airport.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: So, that is another example. I thank you for that one. 

Mr Speaker, on page 9, paragraph 31, they talk about an international electricity firm that took over the operations of the two hydroelectric generation facilities at Kiira and Nalubaale. I am yet to know which electricity firms these are. I do not know whether they were brought before the House so that we know. But as far as I am concerned, I think it is only UEB that is still operating, or Government – (Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: I would like to thank hon. Sebuliba for giving way. The information I would like to give hon. Sebuliba and the House at large is that the company referred to is known as ESKOM. It is a parastatal based in South Africa. Much as Uganda has a phobia for parastatals, it is promoting other countries’ parastatals. What a shame! (Laughter).  

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, I request the Minister of Finance and the department concerned with privatisation to come clear and inform us who bought what and at what price, and then at least we keep the spirits at bay rather than reading it from the budget. They kept it anonymous; everything is anonymous and under the table. 

I thank him for coming out on page 13, paragraph 45, to say that they are going to work on classified expenditure. But I do not know, because the last sentence says, “…while preserving the confidentiality requirement of such expenditure.” I do not know what he meant. I think this is a contradiction. When you say you are going to preserve confidentiality of such expenditure, you should come out very clearly on this. 

I would request the Minister to define, for my people of Kawempe and for me, who an investor is. My people and I are eager to know who an investor is in this country. Some come selling pancakes here, which Ugandans can do, and say they are investors. Even my people of Kawempe can do this! 

To make matters worse, when you turn to page 23, paragraph 88, look at all the good things that have been given to the industrial zones: a ten-year co-operation tax holiday, duty exemption, staff duty exemption, no export tax on goods, exemption of withholding tax. All these are profits! It perturbs me, Mr Speaker.  

Look at (f), exemption of withholding tax on interest on external loans; these people are working here, they export their money in dollars. How is the Ministry of Finance and Government going to monitor the money they repatriate, for instance to Kenya, and then they bring it back as a loan? How are they going to distinguish between personal money and loans? (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much for giving way.  On Saturday, we toured one of the important business sites of investors. In the presence of hon. Baguma Isoke, our team was really disappointed to find that Uganda Breweries in Port Bell is dumping its liquid waste directly into Lake Victoria. In turn, this is increasing the unit cost of water, which is supplied by National Water and Sewerage Corporation because they are incurring more costs in treating the water. 

So, these are the kind of investors we have. They come and rape Uganda; they dump waste anywhere; and they march away with dollars all the way to the bank as if we have no government. Thank you.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you very much for that information. Mr Speaker and honourable members, you have heard. It seems you have no trust in Ugandans. That is why when a speech like this is presented as the Budget Speech , and when our people hear it, they are not concerned. That is where we lack nationalism. People think it is oriented towards the people outside Uganda. I wish the people of Uganda also identified with whatever comes out of these budget speeches. Otherwise, we feel alienated.  

Look at these tax holidays and at the way we are harassed in terms of taxation. Our people are being taxed, and then you bring people here and you do not tax them! I know we are supposed to give conducive and ameliorating effects to the investors, but we should look also at the people who are supporting this country; these are Ugandans!  

My friend, the workers representative, put it nicely. Recently, I saw what happened to the branches of former UCB. The people who were brought to restructure that bank and give it a good image all came from South Africa. Even the materials came from there; they had to fly somebody from South Africa to come and put a nail in the wall, as if that one is more skilled than Ugandans. 

I appeal to the Minister or the representative of the Minister to give our submissions here the due consideration they deserve. Otherwise, I hate a situation where we end up rhyming day in day out, and our contributions are going to remain drying on paper in the Hansard. I thank you.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to, belatedly, thank His Excellency the President for his address to the nation, which I am sure, to a large extent, formed the basis for the Budget Speech .  

Related to speeches, I am reminded of a number of things. One, I am reminded of an important political treatise by Prof. Ali Mazurui, “Uhuru and Hero Worship”. In that book, Prof. Mazurui very ably portrays the tendencies of the post-independent leaders in Africa. This has been to build a sort of cult mentality among the citizens, to believe that without that hero of the independence struggle, the country would come to naught. 

This, indeed, was characterised even here in Uganda, to the extent that people took pride in wearing the portrait of the head of state. People had Obote’s head on their shirts. Today, I am beginning to see even President Museveni’s portrait on people’s lapels. But that is beside the point.  

What I am saying, after you have been around long enough, you begin to see how history repeats itself. This Budget Speech was so sugar coated that actually, we were clapping even for things that are going oppress us. For example, last week I was renewing my car license, the license for a Mercedes Benz now - at the cost of 200 shillings per cc – is 600,000 shillings. I am paying 600,000 shillings for a license a year! (Interruption)

MS KIRASO BIRUNGI: Thank you very much, hon. Wagonda Muguli. Mr Speaker, as Parliament, we have been emphasizing widening of the tax base and also progressive taxation, whereby the rich have got to be taxed a bit more so as to facilitate programmes for the poor. 

So, for somebody who owns a Benz to complain about a tax of 600,000 shillings, when we are talking about accessibility to basic health facilities for our people at the grassroot! I think this is in line with what we have been advocating for as Parliament.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI:  Mr Speaker, I know that I have filled in my declaration forms, and certainly I do not qualify to be one of the rich men in this country. But the point I am making is that, the increase in license fees, the increase in fuel, were so well put that we did not realise at the time of reading the speech how biting it would be.  

I can only remember one example of the late Wakweya, when he was talking of the budget or the economy of Uganda growing by negative, and the soldiers would clap only to realize that actually the economy was not growing but declining. 

In the same way, I think the hon. Minister of Finance has followed in those footsteps. Because to tell the country that by dropping from 7 percent to 4.9 is a small matter, we are not doing badly, I think we should be actually raising an alarm bell! We should be saying, “look, something is going wrong, our economy is dropping” and yet we say, “that is a very small matter”.  

Probably, this is from the President’s speech. The President has been very consistent on trivializing what the rest of us think are very major points. I remember at one press conference, His Excellency the President was asked about Kony and the war in the North, and he said, “Well, Kony is just a jigger, he cannot do much. He may be a nuisance, but he is just a jigger in the foot.”

We have since been told that Kony has grown into a horse. He is a dying horse; a kicking but dying horse, which is kicking many Ugandans to death. What sort of jigger transforms itself into a horse and it cannot be dealt with decisively? 

The people who fought in Luwero Triangle fought in an environment that has, among other things, forests. The people who have fought in Ituri’s tropical forests are the same soldiers who cannot fight in Gulu because the grass is tall. Is the Government being economical with the truth, or there is something we do not know yet? And who is to find it out for us? Who is to find it out for Government? 

We are even now talking of value addition as a new discovery! They even talk of commercialization of agriculture as if it that is a new discovery! When I was in the Ministry of Agriculture, I presented a paper on commercialization of agriculture. 

There was even a fund already secured to give professionals money to establish their own production units as a way of pushing this economy forward. But the people in Government said they could not do that, they wanted to transform the peasants, and the peasants would be the engine of growth. Where in the world has that happened?  Where? (Applause).

Mr Speaker, we have all along been told that the private sector will be the engine of growth. My colleagues have talked about the poor working conditions in newly acquired enterprises, enterprises that were set up mainly by the former Uganda Development Corporation. I want the Minister to demonstrate to this country that these new owners have actually offered more jobs than were previously available during the time of Uganda Development Corporation (UDC). I want to know that.  

I want also the Minister to demonstrate to this country that actually there are savings that have been realized and have been put into social services. 

May I also add that, we want to know how much revenue we are getting from those newly transferred enterprises, from the new owners, in form of taxes. That way, we shall know that there is a definite contribution to the Treasury from these new owners. Then we would be able to justify that, yes, this was the right move to take, more so when parastatals from other countries are coming to do business here.

Mr Speaker, the truth is, the economy must be examined. Both in the President’s speech and the Minister’s speech, they refer to Nyagak Power Station and Bujagali dam as the ones that are going to contribute to the increase of our power production. 

The site for the Bujagali dam is in my constituency. The grass, which has grown since the inauguration of the project, is taller than that in Gulu. The people of Kagoma and the people of Wakisi want to know whether the displacement from their land was for a good cause. We want to know when this project will start. 

How can we say we are going to finance this project ourselves when the Minister clearly states that our foreign exchange reserves have reduced from worth of imports of 6.2 months to 5.7 months? The Bujagali dam will take a lot of a month’s worth of imports. 

I do not think we are serious when we tell the people that we are able to build Bujagali dam on our own without outside assistance, when we have reserves that can only take us through six months. Let us get serious. It is good to give the people hope; that is the duty of every government. But in trying to give hope, let us not reduce on the truth. Let us not reduce on the truth and correctness of the statements that we make.  

Finally, institutionalization is the way forward. We have talked about this matter and we can never get tired of talking about it. There is the Presidency. The Presidency should assist the President in doing research, in vetting his speeches. It is very risky, Mr Speaker, for the President or a very senior citizen to start speaking off the cuff. Is it to do with the institution?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, wind up honourable member. 

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: What then is the use of a huge army of advisors to the President, when he says he only knew about refining gold when he met a businessman outside the country? Is there any justification for having such? (An hon. Member rose_) Is it about what I am talking about? It has already passed. I realise that the honourable minister will have a chance to respond to the various issues that have been raised under her portfolio.  

Mr Speaker, finally –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Finally?

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Finally, there are figures, which must be explained. One, inflation is at 4.9 percent of GDP. The population growth is at 3.4 percent. If we have not been able to transform the economy of this country at a growth rate of 7 percent, how do we hope to do it at this 4.9 percent rate? We really need answers, yet we are being told that the only way forward is to stop talking about politics and talk about development. 

Kwame Nkurumah said, “Seek ye first the political kingdom and these things will be added to you.” I am sure the Leader of Government Business knows that. Probably he could help us tell his colleagues in the Government to make sure that we create institutions that would outlast individuals. 

We have talked about building an efficient Police, but hardly any money is voted for the Police. This is to the extent that Parliament even had to contribute money to buy vehicles for the Police and yet we are saying we are building institutions for law and order. How serious is Government on this? Really, as a citizen I want to be sure that Government is going to put institutions in place that can outlast individuals.  

On institutionalisation of the Army, we used to hear that there were no bad soldiers but bad officers. Now the Commander-in-Chief has to go to Gulu in order to get things moving. What has happened?  

We talk of standardization of equipment in Government, and the next thing you hear is that Kazini has bought a vehicle, which is outrageously out of proportion with the standardization of vehicles. So, who is in charge? (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, you have overrun your time.  

LT COL KATIRIMA: Mr Speaker, I am not the Minister of Defence to speak about these matters, which I think he may have time to talk about. But I would like to give information to my neighbour on this bench and thank him for giving way. 

The information I want to give him is that the job of a soldier is a very risky one. We believe that the commanders should be given every opportunity and any possible assistance so that they can carry out their work very efficiently. Certainly, we do not think that it is out of the ordinary to provide for an armoured vehicle that can protect the commander when he is in operation. And what the honourable member should realize, and also the House –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I would think that if somebody stands up on a point of information, the information should be factual rather than an expression of a view.

LT COL KATIRIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: I wish to thank my neighbour for –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, just put a full stop because you have been saying “finally” as if it is a mirage.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Okay, finally - (Laughter)- Mr Speaker, we would like to hear from Government about the policy on mainstreaming science and technology as a way forward. 

Many of the tiger countries that we admire today have made it because they have embraced science and technology. We would like to see the measures being taken, say, to standardize operations in government departments, in the research institutions and in the private sector. We should not sit down and say our economy will be private-sector-driven, as if it will come by some miracle. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion. But before I do that, I would like to make a comment on the State of the Nation Address since I did not have an opportunity to do so.  

I would have liked to hear some information on the legislative calendar for the government, because legislation supports government activities. And in some instances when this is not clear, then it becomes very difficult to evaluate what we as Parliament have been able to do or not to do.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to give one example. We have been doing very well as a country on the issue of HIV/AIDS. But when we look at the law, there is no law in our books that touches on this very critical issue of HIV/AIDS.  The only law that we have, which is in form of a bill and has not even been looked at, is the Sexual Offences Bill that talks about HIV/AIDS.  

Therefore, my point is that we have good programmes and good policies, and we have been scoring a reduction in this area, which is acknowledged internationally. But if we do not have a law on this issue, there is no way you are going to sustain the progress that we have made on this issue.  

My second point is on the role of Parliament. In this line, I would like to thank the chairperson of the Parliamentary Budget Committee for a very good report and for making sound recommendations. The other issue, which this particular committee has done, is to introduce a new way of doing things; it is pro-active.  

I would like to agree with my colleagues who spoke before me that when you look at the Budget Speech , you find that most of it is really not substantive. When you look at how Government is doing its budgets, you find that we are adhering to what is known as the sector-wide approach. This is a very important benchmark in the allocation of the limited government resources. 

The sector-wide approach aims primarily at grouping together government institutions with closely interlinked and crosscutting activities, for purposes of planning, budgeting and optimal allocation of the available limited resources.  

When you look at what we have done as Parliament, we have made some very sound proposals. I will give you some examples. First, land tribunals should be moved from the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment to the Ministry of Justice.  

Secondly, we have also proposed that the Industrial Court should be moved to the Ministry of Justice. And this is very clear because when you look at these two, they are indeed dealing with the area of justice, law and order.  

Therefore, I hope and I pray that the Executive will take the recommendations of the House very seriously. Because if programmes to do with justice, law and order, for example, are scattered, it means that the budget allocations are not in line with the sector-wide approach I have just talked about.

My third point is on the issue of social development. I see on page 20, point 77, the Minister talks about implementation of the five- year social development sector investment plan, which will commence in the financial year 2003/2004. Amongst the key components is that, it will support people in difficult circumstances, including street children and people who were formerly abducted.  

My comment on this is that, I would have expected the Budget Speech to go ahead and talk about the implementation or creation of the Equal Opportunities Commission. But alas, there is nothing mentioned about this in the report. 

I am perturbed because of recent I got information that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is of the view that it should not establish any more commissions. This is in spite of the fact that as recently as May, the Local Government Finance Commission was created and it is already being financed.  

Therefore, you wonder, Mr Speaker, at the kind of criteria that this ministry is using to put in place certain commissions and leave out others which are very critical. The lack of the Equal Opportunities Commission is making the work of Parliament very difficult. We have a committee of Parliament, but we do not have the commission, which will be able to report to us and through which we could report. 

If you look at the strategic investment development plan, I wonder how it will be implemented when there is no commission. And under the Constitution, the commission should have been in place by now.  As we all know, we are about to review the Constitution. It will be very difficult for us to justify why this commission, amongst all the other commissions that have been established, is the only one that has not been in place.  

Mr Speaker, as Parliament we have noted, on page 22, that the setting up of the Equal Opportunities Commission is long overdue. I think this is to put it very mildly. It will be very difficult to support Government, especially on the issue of affirmative action, if lip service is only paid to such entities. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I may have a few problems when it comes to the budget of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, if Government marginalizes it like it usually does. I am sounding a warning. I would like to hear a word on the Equal Opportunities Commission. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR TOM BAGALANA (Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you very much Mr Speaker. I want to say that I am going to sound a bit archaic today. I am going to talk about a subject that I am not supposed to talk about, and I beg to be off record. This is about emoluments of Members of Parliament. Many times we have heard on radio– (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs will deal with emoluments of Members of Parliament. I imagine they will make a report on that, and I think that will be the appropriate time to deal with that particular subject.  

As you heard from the chairperson of the Budget Committee, she indicated as to what this kind of debate should be. Therefore, I will give you opportunity when the report is tabled. Definitely, you will make your contribution when that time comes. For the time being, I think let us move to another person. But definitely, it is on record that I will give you an opportunity to do so.

MR BAGALANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, but this is reflected in the Budget Speech. It is not administrative per se–(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, you have already ruled on the matter that was being pursued by hon. Bagalana. Is it in order for him to continue pursuing a matter over which you have pronounced yourself?

THE SPEAKER: It is not in order. But as I have said, I will definitely give him opportunity to contribute on that matter. Please, bear with me.

MR BAGALANA: Thank you Mr Speaker. I will oblige.  I wish to thank Government for the way it has gone ahead to upgrade our primary schools, especially through the UPE programme. But I would urge Government to move progressively and cautiously as far as this policy of Universal Primary Education is concerned, because we are moving so fast.  

Wherever you go in the country, you see classrooms and see a hope for education. But it is like somebody marrying and then buying a six-inch mattress and forgetting to buy the blanket. I do not think you can sustain such a marriage.  

Mr Speaker, I allude to this because when you look at many of our primary schools, except those that are urban, you do not see scholastic materials, there are no books or maps. You just see buildings that were built for them. That is why I urge Government to move progressively and cautiously, otherwise, we shall achieve nothing out of the policy of Universal Primary Education.  

Mr Speaker, I have eaten too much into my time, but the next thing I would like to say is that even secondary education should get a bigger share of the Ministry of Education and Sports’ budget. 

Mr Speaker, this is now my 7th year in Parliament and I have been advocating, fundraising, taking Members of Parliament and ministers to my constituency, but I have not got a government-aided secondary school in my constituency. 

This Government is urging us to upgrade the peasant. I think we shall upgrade the peasant from Kampala by having some people drive Benzes of 400 million shillings, when we do not have a school in Bunya South. I think that is how we shall upgrade the peasant. 

Mr Speaker, another urgent matter that needs to be tackled in this House is the research on malaria. Many Members of Parliament do not talk about it, but it has superseded Aids in killing many of our people in Uganda. I think the sectoral committee charged with this matter should look seriously into it and see that Government carries out proper sensitisation about the problem of malaria and equips our hospitals.  

When you go to the village, people are still using chroloquine to treat malaria, which does not work for the people in Kampala. So, I think we need to do so much about malaria, because in my village almost every month we have somebody dying from malaria. The Minister of Health –(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, the honourable colleague is raising very important points, and actually some of them are recommendations. But with due respect, hon. Bagalana, I think that this will come when we come to sectoral reports. The recommendations, which we pick up and condense for follow-up actions, are normally picked out at the time of discussing or concluding sectoral committee reports.  

Well, they are good comments, but at this time they may not be taken on as recommendations because the sessional committees have already made their reports.  

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Speaker, is hon. Kiraso in order to pass judgment over what hon. Bagalana has said? Would it not be proper for her to advise the honourable member, rather than to abandon his line of argument and take it upon herself to pass judgment on his contribution?

THE SPEAKER: If you were here when we started this debate, she is the chairperson of the Budget Committee and she told us what they had agreed on the kind of debate we should have. I think she was just informing the honourable member, who might not have been present.

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I think the honourable member from Bunya is justified, in that the emphasis of the budget speech was misplaced.  Health is a very vital part of any nation, but it is not emphasized in the budget speech; so is education, as he has said. So, I think the honourable member was justified in bringing up the question of financing the health sector in this country. Thank you very much.

MR BAGALANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When you are looking for a marriage partner, it depends on what points you emphasise. It depends on whether you begin with the real points or the pseudo points – (Laughter)- Mr Speaker, that could be the tactic of hon. Kiraso.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to touch on the issue of privatisation. As we are progressing in the liberalization of our economy, there is a very sharp diminishing role of the state in public affairs. As Members of Parliament, I pity us because Parliament is a very bad place to work in.  You will realize the points in July 2006, and you will not be able to undo what you did or do what you did not do.  

The diminishing role of the state in public affairs is so worrying, especially to some of us who are economists. It is so worrying because it will cause a number of negative effects on the economy. One of them is inflation. So, I think Government needs to rethink and take it at a slow pace. 

They may be imitating other countries like the Asian tigers, which took the same path of development. But you find that these countries did not mingle up this with things like micro-finance as this Government is doing, giving somebody Shs 50,000 to develop you to copy the Asian tigers. Those people took up sectoral budgets to aid agriculture, and not just this micro-finance of Shs 50,000 in the rural countryside.

Mr Speaker, at this point let me remember to ask whether we still have the sector of Entandikwa in our country. It is so silent, and we, Members of Parliament, would also need to access it. I do not know how this could be done. It is so worrying because many of us - as I was going to mention in my other point but you halted me - are still dressing in the suits we had in the 6th Parliament and we are comfortable.  

To be elected, Mr Speaker, we came up with a manifesto. I think Government should be warned and informed that Members of Parliament were elected on grounds of a manifesto, which we have to fulfil.  We are earning 4 million shillings and the poor wanainchi in the village also want part of this money. How many Members of Parliament have left their seats and are rich? Can you count any? This thing we get is for them, but they do not know. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am so annoyed I cannot – (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, now I think there will be no reason for me to give you another opportunity.  

MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for his budget speech.  Like most speeches he has presented to this Parliament, I think he deserves thanks. I think, really, we should thank him for this budget speech. 

However, I would like us to look at the summary of this budget proposal, which is on table 6. I understand this budget does hinge on poverty, and if you can fight poverty then everything will be okay.  

When you look at table 6, the summary of 2003/2004 recurrent and development budget by ministry and department, look at programme 001, which is the Office of the President, it is Shs39.7 billion. Look at programme 002, State House, Shs43.7 billion. Come down to Ministry of Defence, Shs311.4 billion. Move down to Land, Water and Environment - a very, very important sector - only Shs 132 billion. Move down to Education, Shs150 billion.  Come to Health, Shs190 billion. 

Now look at the column for Government contributions - this is a combination of both the donor and the Government contribution. If you look at Ministry of Education, Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Agriculture, it is amazing. Can we call this a budget that will eradicate poverty in this country!

Mr Speaker, as a Member of Parliament for Rukiga County, I am not sure whether the Government will adhere to the priorities set out in this budget.  The priorities are clear, but given what has taken place in the past, where you find a lot of shifting of money from one ministry to another, the work of Parliament will be extremely difficult. Our work will be difficult unless Government adheres to its priorities, unless the Prime Minister in particular, tries to guide the operationalisation of this budget.

Mr Speaker, there are huge reallocations that were done in the last financial year, huge supplementaries – which in my opinion reflect the insensitivity of the Executive. It is very insensitive to proper planning. 

There were huge cuts, which I may call illegal, which were in some cases exhibited. I request that if this budget is to succeed, we should create barriers. I hope the Budget Committee finds a way of creating barriers for this continuous reallocation or adjustment in the budget. Otherwise, it makes the budget actually useless - in my opinion. 

It is a waste of time for all Members of Parliament to sit in this great House to discuss the reallocations of resources, and by a mere word from either the President or someone else, the entire budget is aborted and we start running a country as if we have no people to plan for it.

Thirdly, my concern is that we have continued to have presidents of wars. If you look at Mr Obote, Mr Amin, Mr Lutwa and President Museveni, it appears that war is a major priority to these presidents. We have not had presidents of peace, reconciliation and development, and that is why we continue to spend a lot of money on areas like defence. 

I would personally be concerned with the internal security, the Police for example. But look at how much money has been given to the Police! It is mockery. We have failed to pursue dialogue, we have failed to pursue reconciliation; we have insisted that we have to defeat them, and we shall continue. 

So, I request Government to move out of their “war thinking” and know that this country can be governed well. It can be developed, and we can see genuine development if we avoid wars in this country. 

The other day I made it clear that if this government is to make Ugandans feel what the Government promised, they should seek dialogue. They must look for those people, for those areas that are dissatisfied and make sure that they have a bit of discussion about how this country should be governed.

Fourthly, I would like to touch on the policy of rural electrification. The Minister has come here many times to talk about rural electrification. She came here with a new policy, which favours the rich, which favours those areas where businessmen are and can take up the new policy and implement it. 

A person like me, from Rukiga, who knows the people, knows that the President went there and promised us power. He said, “You the people of Rukiga, you gave me votes.” Actually, we gave the President 99.7 percent of our votes. 

When I came here and asked the Minister to explain to me when this power will be taken to my constituency, she started telling me that there is a new policy to form a company. She said people can form a company, then they will be responsible for the redistribution and we shall give them money. 

Surely, Mr Speaker, this is a policy that will benefit those areas that already have rich people, and which already have big trading centres. But we are looking for rural electrification to help our schools, help our hospitals and even start new trading centres. In this case, Government must take charge and try and take these lines across the country, just like the roads and the railway lines. 

You do not expect a businessman to come and start putting up a power line for an area. You must give incentives to these people. So, I request the hon. Minister of Energy to reconsider and review this policy so that the rural areas, which have no power, do access power.

Lastly, I would like to talk about the cost of administration. A number of Members of Parliament have talked about this very issue. I think in Africa, Uganda leads in having high administrative costs. If you look at our budget, about 20 percent of it is for administrative costs. 

In my opinion, if we managed our administration properly in terms of transport and in terms of recruitment, we would lower it. Actually, this money could be channelled to areas such as increasing the salaries of doctors and teachers. Those are the areas, which touch the common man - a teacher and a doctor. 

So, I request the Government to reconsider this policy on public administration. The Minister touched on it a little in his speech, but the way I look at it, he was just lamenting. There is a Constitutional Review Commission, as he said, and we have to talk with the Public Service Commission. 

I thought that by the time you come up with a budget speech, a policy is already conceived and arrived at, and therefore it should be implemented. Twenty percent is too much. I, therefore, request the Government to make sure - and I hope the Budget Committee does the same - that they seriously look into this if any reallocations should be done in this budget. 

We should not accept the Executive to think that what they think is the best. Policy formulation is the mandate of both the Executive and Parliament, and therefore, we must agree on what we want so that the country can move ahead. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion but I have reservations about the body content of the speech. 

Those who have read philosophers like Edinburgh will agree with me that the government is as a result of the need for taxes to be collected and be put into good use. Mr Speaker, the economic growth perceived in this budget, in war-ravaged Uganda, is in my view an illusion. It is not justified, and there are no indicators to back it on the ground. I can challenge anybody on that. 

The people we represent are as poor as mice that reside in churches. If you go to villages and you see what is referred to as development in terms of modernity, you will see a man struggling to put up a house with wet bricks and mud. That is all we see in the villages. So, if you are anticipating economic growth, which is not justified, you should check your stand. And I am speaking here for the poor people in the villages and even in the urban areas, because those in Lubaga South are part of those people.

Mr Speaker, Uganda is a landlocked country and our economy basically survives on communication and accessibility. I was disturbed when I heard the Minister say that he is increasing taxes on airtime for mobile phones, oil products and road licenses. This is one of the biggest blows to our economy today, because if the budget does not address communication and accessibility in a landlocked scenario like Uganda, then it is no budget at all.  

If our economy is to survive, the Government should not distance itself from this economy. This is why I do not agree that an economy like Uganda, which is still part of the developing countries, should have a government that distances itself from responsibility on certain issues, especially those impacting on survival. 

I am very reluctant to assume that in a developing country like Uganda, government should distance itself from the responsibilities of administering fuel prices, for example. If the political parties come to power, we are going to retain that industry as a parastatal so that we administer justified prices for fuel. We are going to get into power - it has to come - and we are going to cause Parliament to change.

Mr Speaker, no budget is going to make an impact if that budget does not address the war in Uganda. Uganda has been at war for the last 17 years. This budget should have addressed the issue of dialogue, for example. I would have expected some money to be earmarked for facilitating the talks President Museveni has spoken about. Where is that budget? That he did not mention anything about the budget to sustain the talks means he was deceiving the public, and he must be cursed. This is a serious matter.

His Excellency the President has shown no –(Interruption)

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, is the honourable member in order to say that the President should be cursed? Is he in order? Can he be in order?

THE SPEAKER: Well, there is a procedure for cursing the President, and if he has not followed that one, he is out of order. You see, there is a formal way of doing that.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I do withdraw that statement if it does not please the Rt hon. Prime Minister. 

His Excellency the President, whom I greatly respect -(Laughter)- has for example not shown any willingness to effectively talk to the rebels. I come from Lubaga South. There are people from Luwero who have been demonstrating, urging the Government to pay them. They have been here in Kampala for three months. The President has not found time to talk to them, and yet without them he would not have successfully fought the protracted war. 

So, if the President could not find time to talk to these Luwero people, can he find time to talk to Kony? (Interruption)

PROF. MWAKA: Thank you very much, hon. Lukyamuzi, for having given way. I want to remind the speaker on the Floor that all those people are not from Luwero District, but they are from the Luwero Triangle, which is about 22 districts. We talked to the two people who were from Luwero District and they withdrew. So, better use “Luwero Triangle” but not “Luwero District”. 

Secondly, Ugandans thank you very much for having been so hospitable to take on a national issue in Lubaga, Wankulukuku. However, I wish you could go there and see the pathetic conditions under which they are staying. They have no toilet, there is no water, nothing. It would have been better if you talked to them to be patient and go back home. You should also have done research to find out whether those people were not paid, rather than jumping onto the bandwagon yet you have little information. I thank you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: You could refer to them as evildoers, but they are Ugandans. If the Ugandan Government cannot find time to talk to them and explain the dynamics of payment, what does that mean? They have got data in terms of demand notes, and I have seen that data. But the Government fears to go to them because it is not willing and it has no money to pay them. This is a serious matter, but I am not going to labour too much on that.  

The issue of  -(Interruptions)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LUWERO (Prof. Semakula Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the hon. Member for Lubaga South that the Verification Committee for Luwero Triangle has actually identified nearly all those people who are lodged at Wankulukuku as having been paid. 

Their leader, called Yasin Kaziro, who appeared in the New Vision last week, collected Shs 3 million in November. We have his signature, his thumbprint and the cheque number. We have a lady there called Lydia Naku; she too was paid. There is another lady called Scovia Kyebukombi, she was also paid Shs 5 million. 

I think with this, the hon. Member for Lubaga South, whom I believe is hosting these people without the facts, should be better informed. Now that he knows that the people have been paid, I think he should withdraw his support and encourage them to go back to Luwero to join the productive Ugandans. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR LUKYAMUZI: If the Government has got the figures and the facts related to payments, I urge them to go on site at Wankulukuku, explain and put those people to shame. But the latest information I have, and it is backed by evidence submitted by the hon. Minister in charge of Defence, who was the former Minister in charge of Luwero, hon. Nankabirwa, is that those people have never been compensated. And it is on record in the Hansard. 

So, I do not know where the whole Minister in charge of Luwero - who is too new to know the facts here, because he has been in the United States for too long to know what he is following up - gets those facts from.

The other issue I would like to articulate is related to the need for Uganda to talk to the rebels. All the people giving us aid from outside, that aid they are giving us will never cause any impact, from budget to budget, if we do not stop that war. 

At a later stage, I shall move a motion urging the Uganda Government and His Excellency the President to produce a comprehensive report of peace talks with Kony, articulating issues like terms of reference, the mediation point and the observers. The aim is to put that war to a complete end. 

Now that President Bush is coming here, he could even fund those talks so that Uganda regains that glory of peace and security. Otherwise, we will never go anywhere at all. And I urge the Ministers in particular to assist my President. They are not assisting him enough. Assist him so that he also propagates the need to talk peace.

Finally, I would like to draw your attention to the last pages of this budget speech, which articulate the budgetary estimates and capital development funds. Mr Speaker, on the page where they talk about mass mobilization, Vote 135, I am disappointed to note that the mass mobilization fund was planted there without telling us what it is going to do. 

There are so many changes, which have taken place politically and scientifically, which demand a revival and renewal of that vote. After the Constitutional Court ruling on the POA and the coming into force of the POA, which recognizes the existence of some political parties, it is now fashionable for us to review how the mass mobilization exercise is going to be implemented. 

Modern governments and modern economies of scale demand that you cannot implement any economic order without taking into consideration the issue of good governance and democracy. For example, unless you now have a preconceived idea, suppose the political parties gain power in 2006? We have not mobilized them with order and construction in institutional building, and so we might mess up all of a sudden and you take us over again. The world would then assume that you pre-arranged it so that you take over government in a coup-de-tat. (Interruption) 

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to be clarified by hon. Ken Lukyamuzi as to whether he is saying it is not yet time for multi-parties?  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, noting that the budget talks only about mass mobilization with which all past budgets have been characterized. I would have loved to see a fund, which addresses the operations of parties like CP, DP, UPC, Reform Agenda, and JEMA. Then I would understand what you are talking about. 

So, later when we get to the committee stage, Mr Speaker, you will let me move an amendment so that political parties, which exist constitutionally in accordance to Article 270, be funded. We need to streamline and improve the infrastructure of development, management and organization. 

Organization, in terms of quality, should not be mapped out to cater for the Movement alone. Suppose we come to power? We would also need some engineering of capacity building so that we internationally qualify to lead a modern government. Thank you very much.

MR ALEX ONZIMA (Maracha County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the first place I would like to get assurance from the frontbench as to whether they are not going to treat Parliament the way they did last financial year. We sat here, passed a budget and after that budget was passed they went behind us and chopped 23 percent from ministries to go to the Ministry of Defence. So, we must get assurance that this time they will not turn around and repeat what they did last year. (Interruption)

MS KIRASO: There is good news because we passed the Public Finance and Accountability Act, which came into effect on the 1st of July. In that Act, the Government cannot repeat such a thing, except with the approval of Parliament. I thought I should give you that good news.

MR ONZIMA: Thank you very much. To me, as the representative of Maracha, Pillar No. 1 should be defence, security and political stability. It should be pillar No. 1 because without these concepts, you cannot carry out any useful or meaningful development in a country. 

On the issue of Government ever demanding more and more money under the pretext to fight Kony, I need assistance from the Executive arm of Government. They should tell us exactly how much money Kony himself uses to fight Government. 

The other time President Museveni was giving Parliament statistics of HIV infection on the side of Kony’s territory. Why can’t they tell us how much money Kony uses to fight Government? I think it is just a pretext to consume money and to misappropriate this money, which we earn in a very hard manner.

For 17 years you have an army that is composed of highly trained people, graduates, people who have masters, who have gone to military academies all over the world, an army that is equipped with helicopters. At least I do not know if Kony has got any one MIG or any helicopter, as they use pangas and a few AK-47 assault weapons; and you are saying you want billions of shillings to fight him. I think at one time you are even going to ask for a trillion shillings to fight Kony. What a justification! This is wrong.

We hear the President was in Gulu to command, and the recently he was giving excuses that the Kyankwanzi politics took him away from there. Now there is no more Kyakwanzi politics, why can’t he go back? He has instead sent Tinyefuza. 

The other time when a new Army Commander was brought in, people were sending congratulatory messages to him, that he is a competent person and that this time there is hope that Kony would be defeated. Now Tinyefuza has gone there, and he is a man who is of a higher rank than the Army Commander himself, will that war end? To whom will the credit go? 

For 17 years we have had no peace. Then here comes the hon. Lt Gen. Salim Saleh. That one is asking for only Shs 4 billion to finish the war. What a contradiction! (Interruption)

CAPT. GUMISIRIZA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, the deployment of Gen. Tinyefuza in Northern Uganda is not a show of “no confidence” in the military understanding of the present Army Commander, Gen. Aronda. It is just to support and bring all military brains to that volatile situation, so that they can work as a combined team.

MR ONZIMA: Saleh says you can forget about Shs 300 billion, just give him Shs 4 billion and he will wipe out the rebels. The former Army Commander, Jeje, says this war can now only be managed by the Iteso. He says all able-bodied Iteso should assemble at their respective sub-county headquarters and they will be given 100 AK-47 rifles that will be a solution to Kony. Where are we really heading? Which line should we pursue? 

In my view, we have failed. But what will actually happen? Suppose a country like Rwanda actually declared war on us? Suppose a country like Sudan declared war on us?  

If the President can go and command a war against Kony and his men, who were at one time estimated to be less than 500, who will actually be our Commander-in-Chief if a country like Rwanda declared war on us? I think we would just all run away and leave this country empty, because we do not have the capacity, and we do not have confidence in the Army. 

I think this even explains why a man of President Museveni’s status can stoop so low to go as far as Britain to meet Kagame before a junior minister, to negotiate peace between Uganda and Rwanda. Why should a person who belongs to the new breed of African leaders, a General for that matter, a fountain of honour, go to England to meet a fellow African leader before a junior minister! 

I think this grossly undermines the integrity of the presidency of a country like Uganda, which has been independent for 40 years. That is totally unacceptable to the people of Maracha, and we do not support any further meetings of that nature in the six months to come. 

We need peace, we do not want war with Rwanda, but if President Museveni is to go and negotiate peace in Britain, a person of President Museveni’s status must convene that meeting. The Prime Minister, I will accept; but he should not bring down the name of the Republic of Uganda by meeting a junior minister in Britain – (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, HOUSING (Capt. Francis Babu): Mr Speaker, I would not have interfered with hon. Onzima because he is making some good fundamental points. But when we are talking about other countries, especially a country like Britain, which is our partner in development, and we refer to their Overseas Development Minister as a junior minister, it is not very palatable. I suggest that we refer to her title. Although she has now resigned, she was a full Minister of Overseas Development who sat on the Cabinet. Thank you.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): I want to give my experience to hon. Onzima. When I had just become a prime minister, I had some differences with a junior minister, but it was a minister below me who drew to my attention a number of factors, which were causing the differences between us. The three of us sat down and we cured that problem.  

What I am saying here is that, if you are trying to grapple to get peace, you should be willing to deal with any mediator as long as that mediator is sensible and is committed to your cause. 

We are now at a loss. On one hand you say that the President is not putting adequate attention in seeking for peace, but when he goes to Britain, you say that the meeting is being chaired by junior ministers. I do not accept your premises. When you are seeking for peace, even a peasant should be listened to. I thank you.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much hon. Member from Maracha for giving way. Mr Speaker, I get extremely happy when I see the Prime Minster stand up and talk about the situation in the North.  I think I have an inclination, a premonition – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Dr Mallinga, is that clarification or information?

DR MALLINGA: It is information. I am just on the preamble. The premonition I have is that perhaps the Cabinet is not sufficiently influencing the President in the direction to follow, in order to advocate for peace in the North. 

For example, I think it was a major tactical error for the Commander-in-Chief, His Excellency the President, to go to the North and say he has taken over command of the war against Kony and then leave. The impression it created was that the President had been defeated by Kony and that is why he left Gulu to come back this way. 

This created a very serious morale problem on the soldiers who were actually fighting in Gulu. The Commander-in-Chief was defeated and he had to run away from Gulu; that is the impression it created, so he should not have gone there. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up, Mr Onzima – (Mr Okumu Reagan rose_)- He is a negotiator, okay.

MR OKUMU REAGAN: Mr Speaker, I would also like to inform hon. Onzima and the House that the problems between Uganda and Rwanda are not personal; they are between two countries. 

If the President of Uganda and that of Rwanda go to Britain, it is a matter of the two nations. Therefore, that would render the Prime Minister’s analysis invalid because it is not personal. These are national issues, and therefore, we should also be able to protect our national dignity and integrity. Thank you.

MR ONZIMA: In fact, Mr Speaker, the scenario given by the Prime Minister was totally irrelevant. It was irrelevant in the sense that what transpired between him and his junior minister was more or less like a family problem, a problem between a wife and a husband or a child. You can sit in your family and solve it. 

But I do not think the Prime Minster would have accepted a situation whereby a minister somewhere, maybe the State Minister of Water, would come in to mediate and bring him together with the minister whom he had a disagreement with. So, in my own understanding, the scenario he gave was totally irrelevant. 

Mr Speaker, that is my position. It is my perception and I am entitled to it, and it consists of the view of the people I represent. We do not want to be embarrassed; we want our name to fly high –(Interruption)- I do not know why you are ringing the bell. You know how many people gave information.

Mr Speaker, now –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable member, when they give you information, you forfeit your time to them. It is your right to accept or reject, and you did that. Actually, you are giving away your time, not their time. 

MR ONZIMA: But I thought the scenario you gave, as far as Lukyamuzi is concerned, is not applying.  You remember what he hinted on when – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Which one?

MR ONZIMA: Mr Speaker, the other time when the Movement had their conference in the International Conference Centre, eventually I went there to attend. As I was getting there, I met one of the ministers, hon. Musumba. He told me, “Onzima, we have opened up, now what is your view? What do you think?” 

I told the Minister, “first of all, you are a lawyer. You know that I do not know law, but I can gamble somehow. Who has given the Movement the authority to open political space? Where does it exist? Is it in the Constitution? Is it in any of our law books? Where do you derive that authority that ‘we in the Movement, we have now opened up political space’?” 

I told him that you can only make recommendations as Movement, or NEC or whatever and those recommendations can go somewhere, probably to the Constitutional Review Commission, which will eventually come up with the recommendation that will come to the Floor of this Parliament, and it will be this Parliament to open the way. 

Maybe the recommendations will come from outside, but it cannot be NEC, it cannot be Museveni, it cannot be any other person.  

So, Mr Speaker, eventually as the Movement graduates to officially become a political party, the question is; will they continue to be funded in budget like they have the established structures like the Movement Secretariat? 

In my view, as soon as we finish that process and they finally become a political party, these other structures should be scrapped or they also allow other political parties to have similar structures, which should be funded by government. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to start by thanking the chairperson and members of the Budget Committee for a very good report and very patriotic recommendations. 

I would wish, and I think all of us who have participated in the making of that report would wish, that the Executive implements a good deal of it, if anything. They should do this in the spirit and in fulfilment of the principle of co-operative governance, whereby the Executive and legislators can formulate sound and viable economic policies in the entire interest of the country.  

Mr Speaker, I want to speak about the pillars, and I commend hon. Onzima because our minds sort of met. We are a country that has been experiencing insecurity for almost 20 years now – let us say from 1979 when we fought Amin’s government. We know that security and insecurity is a sine qua non for development, and yet you put your pillar No. 1 as creating rapid economic growth. You go ahead and outline the factors for creating rapid economic growth, which do not include peace and security. 

That kind of policy could only have been drawn by people who are not Ugandans. I would like to believe that it was drawn by the IMF and it has been shoved down our throats. We are never going to use the present pillar No. 1 to create rapid economic growth without peace and security, because that is fundamental. It is a sine qua non. 

The other thing, obviously, is political freedom.  As Nkrumah said, “seek ye political freedom and everything else shall come unto you”. You cannot liberalise the economy and then monopolise politics and presume that all will be okay. Museveni has realised, quite late though, that this is essential. After wasting our time on experimentation for 17 years, we now have to start on the real thing, trying to invent a way. Thank God some sense has come in and I think we can take off from there.  

Mr Speaker, there is something called urban-rural complementality. That is to say, there is mutual development and economic interest between the rural and urban areas. In a country where urbanisation is merely 12 percent and the rural population is 88 percent, it will be a miracle if we can achieve sensible and commensurate economic growth. It will be a miracle. 

88 percent of the people in the rural area are self-sufficient. They are producing the same thing for each household. So, they have no market between them. The only market they have in the urban areas is 11 percent of the population. That is the thinnest market you can ever expect 88 percent of the population to produce for, and to produce for economically. 11 percent of the urban population is then expected to produce for 88 percent of the population. The whole thing is skewed negatively.

When we look at our budget, there is absolutely nothing. We should start treating the urban sector as a sector. If you talk of programmes for modernisation of agriculture without a complementary industrialisation and urban development programme, it is a waste of time. It is just a waste of time. 

You go running to Washington trying to use AGOA – obviously, that is not your market. That is a market, which is highly competitive for Uganda. We must first produce textiles, which can dress our people. We must first produce textiles, which are affordable by all ranges of our society. We can produce cotton instead of these so-called second-hand clothes, and you tax it also in order to raise revenue. You might as well start taxing dead people in order to raise revenue.

Mr Speaker, when this budget speech was read, road tolls for collecting revenue were supposed to disappear instantly. We still see them. Who is supposed to enforce the removal of these road tolls? Can the Minister of Finance tell us who is supposed to enforce the implementation of this policy, which was supposed to take place instantly? I thank you.

MR PATAKI AMASI (Obongi County, Moyo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the committee. 

Mr Speaker, I am going to raise a few issues. Government created new districts but most of them do not have borders. A case in point is Yumbe District. Right now, Moyo District and Yumbe District are at loggerheads. Yumbe District local authorities meander around to quench their thirst of raising revenue, and in so doing they are engulfing other areas. 

In my constituency, in Itula sub-county, the villages of Kali and Waka have been invaded by the local administration of Yumbe District. Last year they carried out the census in my constituency and there were a lot of problems The local administration from Moyo took guns and Yumbe did the same. They were going to exchange fire. 

I wrote letters to the Minister of Local Government, which I copied to the Ministry of Lands and to the Prime Minister’s office. In response, I was told there is money for border demarcations in the Prime Minister’s office. We made efforts, but all was fruitless. I do not know whether in this budget money for demarcating borders of new these districts is catered for. I want to get clarification from the Prime Minister; it is good that he is around in this House.

Mr Speaker, many members talked about the insecurity in this country. The people of Moyo and Adjumani districts are facing a lot of problems, especially when travelling from Kampala to Adjumani and Moyo. Many of them have died on the way and lost property. 

Right now, the prices of commodities are very high. A kilo of sugar is about Shs 2000 and a litre of petrol is Shs 2500. The local people cannot even afford a bar of soap or a kilo of sugar because the rate of transporting these commodities is really high. Some traders even go via Arua. 

We are talking of peace talks. We really look forward to a day when Kony will agree to proceed and sit down for dialogue. We cannot end this war, as many have said, without dialogue, but Kony does not like to sit down. Kony is adamant; he is even threatening to kill the Bishops who are engaged in bringing peace. 

Now, with whom is he or Government going to sit on a roundtable and talk peace? Are we going to bring people from heaven? It has to be the government side and the rebel side. Bamuze gave a good example in west Nile; he did not involve even religious leaders. He talked peace, he came out and at the moment West Nile is peaceful. Kony does not like to sit and talk peace and he is finishing us.  

We, the people in Adjumani and Moyo districts, are very, very few, population wise. Every other day we are being killed in ambushes, and we talk of peace talks. Peace talks are avenues, to me, which have failed. But some other people who are involved are not serious. I mostly blame areas where these rebel activities are taking place. The rebel commanders who are involved are not serious; they are not talking peace. 

Somebody said one time that to bring a lasting solution to this war in the North, people must win the hearts of the local population in the area. I support that member, because in Uganda these wars are fought because there are some tribes who think they were born to be leaders and they must rule, and therefore, they must take guns and fight. They think they do not need to talk peace. This is the fact. This is why the war cannot and will not end if we do not win those hearts. 

We shall continue fighting because we want Kampala City. Why talk peace if I want Kampala city? Why waste my time to talk peace? I want to sit there on that chair, so peace talks are useless because people want that chair. To talk peace or dialogue means you are going to lose that chair, you are not going to sit on it. That is all. That is what is happening.  

Mr Speaker, I thought in this budget the Minister was going to mention our security road, which is Gulu-Atiak-Adjumani-Moyo road. It was started in 1996 by a Chinese company called SIETCO, but up to now nothing has been done. The Minister has not talked about it and yet it is a security road. 

People who travel on this road are being escorted in a military convoy. You move very slowly like snails that even a child rebel can jump on the road and disorganise and kill people. But if we were given a first class murrum road, I think some of those incidences would be avoided. So, I am urging Government at least to look into Atiak-Adjumani-Moyo road, which has been undone for a long time.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (Ibanda County North, Mbarara): Thank you Mr Speaker. I will discuss economics and not politics today, because I think we are discussing the economy although the two disciplines –(Interruption)

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to raise a matter of concern. We are discussing a very important subject this afternoon, but the frontbench is almost empty. Who is going to reply to our reservations and queries when the time comes for the ministers to say something? Where are they? Mr Speaker, if –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, the motion we are dealing with is a motion belonging to the Minister of Finance, who is here. The Leader of Government Business is also here; I think he has just gone out, but is around. 

However, we had already ruled on this matter. We said that we do not have to be bogged down by the absence of the frontbench. Because if we set a precedent, the frontbench one day may decide that we do not proceed and we shall not proceed with the business. If they are not here, there is the official record. I think we should proceed.

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, I was saying that I would discuss economics and not politics although the two disciplines are linked. 

Hon. Yiga has hinted on a point I wanted to make.  I agree with you, Mr Speaker, the Executive is fully represented. But I can assure you that there is need for those technical people from the planning sector from Ministry of Finance to be here, so that they can know the minds of some other Ugandans who represent people here.  

My colleague, hon. Rukutana, is a renowned lawyer. I agree with the way the President appoints his people. But I can assure you there are occasions when certain things become too technical and they do not need the mind of a Prime Minister and a minister. So, I would have expected the Director of Economic Affairs, Keith Muhakanizi, to be here so that the debate can go on.  Nevertheless, it has to go on. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think that is a valid point, and that is why we provide room for them.

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, let us go on, because maybe Parliament is not looked at as offering a useful input in as far as the sharpening of the economic policy and matters of the economy are concerned. 

A peasant economy –(Prof. Nsibambi rose)- My time, Mr Speaker. I do not need any assistance, at any rate, but I respect him as my elder.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): I think your point is well taken. But what we are doing currently is that your points are being written down and they will be ably answered. And of course, I try also to urge my colleagues to be here and to ensure that at least every ministry is represented. 

However, sometimes we have factors beyond our control. For example, some have gone to attend to the visit of the American President, and some may have gone abroad. I was saying that some ministers are involved in planning the visit of President Bush, and it is not a small matter. Others may be involved in critical meetings to ensure that we get money for the parity of Uganda. 

So, what we do is that, at least when we are dealing with the Budget Speech, the Minister of Finance must be represented here, and he has some technical people over there and minutes are being assiduously taken. 

I was this afternoon delayed in another very critical meeting, but I was kept abreast of the major issues. And when I stand to respond, I hope I will be given the time I deserve. We are grasping the basic issues because your input is greatly treasured.  I thank you. 

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, I hope I am beginning now, in terms of time. 

In a peasant economy like Uganda, it is sheer suicide for Government to presume that a private sector led growth, as hawked by the Britain institutions, is a sustainable issue in controlling inflation, interest rates, and everything will go in line.  

At the Conference Centre, Mr Speaker, you will remember how His Excellency the President blasted the IMF/World Bank. He has all of a sudden realized, with frustration, that the prescriptions by World Bank, which were parroted by us, are not yielding the necessary results. So, it is such a serious matter.

In one of his addresses last session, the President told us that Government is going to intervene in what he called appropriate relevant economic sectors. But when you read the available literature about the economy from the planning sector of this country, you become more confused. You really realize, and wake up to a very unfortunate conclusion, that there is no co-ordination in matters of our economic sector in terms of planning.  

Let me give you a quotation from the Uganda poverty status report of this year. It is from hon. Rukutana’s ministry, I do not know whether it is in the Executive summary of hon. Ssendaula. Point number 16 says, “Increasing the ability of the poor to raise their incomes”. It goes on to say, “With the limited availability of household data for the review period, it is difficult to ascertain the extent to which economic growth was resulting into improvements in the income levels of Ugandans.” 

If hon. Ssendaula and his entire team are telling us that it is difficult to ascertain the extent to which economic growth was resulting into improvements, how do you come to the poverty reduction indicators?  

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the biggest private sector in this country is the subsistence sector. That is the biggest sector, but look at the –(Interjection)- I need protection from this wonderful colleague of Adjumani, so that I make my point.

I was saying that the biggest private sector in this country, as far as I know from my little knowledge, is the peasants. The rest of this area, where everybody is paying a lot of attention, is secondary. Now, the peasants look at the resource allocation, financial year in and financial year out. Look at the resource allocation for a number of successive financial years backwards, there is the much sang about PMA.  

Again in this document, I will quote some figures. In 2000/2001, the percentage total resource outlay on agriculture was 1.6 percent. In 2001/2002, there was an insignificant increase; it was 2.6 percent.  In the financial year, which ended the other month, it was 2.3 percent. It has declined from 2.6 percent. That is specifically agriculture –(Mr Bikwasizehi rose_)- I have limited time, Ndugu Bikwasizehi. I wish you could leave me alone so that I grapple with some –(Interruption)

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I thank my honourable colleague for giving way. The small percentage given to the Ministry of Agriculture is due to the fact that the Ministry of Agriculture has no investment plan. I happen to be on the Committee for Agriculture and we have always demanded for it. So, this is the cause. Money should be put in for what? There is no plan for it. I thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Mrs Mary Mugyenyi): Mr Speaker, with respect to the vice chairman of the Agriculture Committee, may I take this opportunity to inform the House that the Ministry of Agriculture has a development strategy. And also, PMA - if I can concurrently answer what hon. Guma has said - is supposed to serve the rural communities. 

So, whatever investment is going into PMA is not meant for the urban 11 percent that he is talking about, but actually for the rural population. So, there is investment in the rural peasant population compared to what we are being told here. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, no more information. Please, do not interrupt me. I will not call the Speaker’s guidance an interruption.  

On page 25 of this poverty status report, there is a table showing distribution of loan advances in the private sector. In the words of hon. Ssendaula, or whoever wrote the report, the biggest benefiting sector was imports. It talks about the distribution of loan advances to various private sectors, and the report confesses that the sector that received the biggest proportion was the import sector.  

Then you hear people saying that this financial year URA met its quota. Yes, it met its quota for major reasons. One, it was because of the devaluation of the shilling. If you do not know economics, shut up and we educate some of you; do not just shout that URA met its quota. It met its quota because of the shilling increasing vis-à-vis other strong currencies. That is how this lady, Annebritt, met her quota.  

Two, the increasing lending to the import sector should not be something that we must be proud of.  That is an indication of the externalisation of the dollars and bringing in consumption goods, particularly vehicles.  

Then this report confesses that agricultural lending was relatively small; that is one.  Two, Mr Speaker, you realize that there is instability in the financial sector. Again, hon. Ssendaula confesses this in his various pieces of documents about the economy of Uganda. 

About two months ago, there was a workshop in Entebbe and the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Finance, Mr Kasami Chris, and Keith Muhakanizi accepted that there is instability brought by indiscipline in the fiscal management. There is a lot of borrowing from the domestic financial sector by Government, in spite of the reduction of the other 23 percent from every sector in order to beef up the security vote.  

There is insecurity because of the privatisation of the capital account. So, all these multi-national companies, particularly MTN, are externalising our dollars. I thought even the most uninformed economist ought to know that no amount of Bank of Uganda interventions will stabilize the financial sector. As long we have Shell and we have MTN, we have this huge import deal, which is about twice our export earnings. So, there is a big problem.  

I wish there was sufficient time, which can never be there, anyway. Time is a resource, and therefore, it is scarce. There is not enough time to really delve into these issues in a more professional sense, rather than glossing over them and then we call it a day.  Nobody is writing. The Prime Minister is assuring me, but how can hon. Rukutana write because these things are really –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, but honourable member, we have already identified a date for discussing a report on the economy. I think you will also have the opportunity to deal with it.

CAPT. GUMA: Thank you, Sir. Let me summarize.  

The policy of encouraging exports, instead of what someone called import substitution, is ruining the economy. It is causing further risk, because Ugandan products cannot compete favourably with most of the products produced in other more disciplined and more professional economic systems Therefore, we need a policy that encourages domestic investors to start in whatever small way, so that we reduce on our import bill. 

Mr Speaker, the moment we increase our import bill, that means externalising the hard currency. We are not using Ugandan shillings to import whatever we import in this country; we are using dollars or pounds. So, industries that would be encouraged here in this country to reproduce most of the things that most Ugandans import would save this country from a lot of foreign exchange instability.  

It would help to keep the forex within the domestic economy, for unavoidable and important imports, which we need. There are some, of course, which are unavoidable, which we have to import, like guns and vehicles. But there are certain imports, which we can really stem off. But, there is no serious analysis or even inventory on what constitute our import bill.  

On the analysis of the poverty trend in this country since the 1990’s, I want to know which one is right - poverty Eradication Action Plan or Poverty Reduction Action Plan. Because a careful look at these words also shows what one wants to achieve. Sometimes they use eradication and sometimes they use reduction. So, which one is which? I just get confused, is it eradication? 

Anyway, PEAP stands for the Poverty Eradication Action Plan. There is PAF, the Entandikwa Scheme, YES, and donor efforts via HPPIC. They set objectives to be attained. Have they been achieved?  Has the economic growth and quality of life of rural folk substantially been affected, in terms of being improved?

Mr Speaker, we were told, when Uganda Commercial Bank was being sold, that the sale of the bank would have a tremendous effect on the interest rates of this country. What are we seeing now? Mr Speaker, thank you.

MR PATRICK MUSISI (Busiro South, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will definitely dwell on one thing that is apparent; I think we need to have a serious policy review across the board. I will highlight my presentation by looking at a number of anomalies that you will see in the Ministry of Health.  

It is just a question of reviewing certain policies. For instance, today the first radiotherapy hospital in Uganda was, and still is, Lacor Hosiptial. But the machine that was used by all Ugandans has now collapsed and nothing has been done. Government would have come up as a matter of urgency to alleviate the situation. 

We have only of late acquired a similar machine in Mulago, but you will realize that now somebody has got to travel all the way from Nimule to come to Mulago. 

Maybe of late you know that the Heart Institute in Mulago is in a terrible situation. We have got an echo machine that is a 1978 model, and this thing overheats. When you go there, sometimes the doctors look at you and say, “no, our machine is puffing and it cannot work anymore”. Nothing has been done to solve this problem.  

You very well know that of late Mulago Hospital acquired a loan of $38 million. But I realize that as of today, all that money might have gone to waste. Look at the new Mulago Complex; it is partially rehabilitated. I understand the job is over, but I do not see anything tangible.  

The Prime Minister here will agree with me that we need a cardiac lab, which is about 900,000 Euros. A number of Ugandans today have got to travel to South Africa for the same, but we have just spent $38 million on some buildings, which are not even done, and this machine is non-existent. 

Another thing is the medics. You will realize that some time ago we had people like Prof. Kyalwazi, Prof. Bulwa, but all those died. There is the retired Dr Odonga. I understand these people were earning 1,500 shillings in 1955, but by then this money was enough. Today, the doctors are somehow frustrated. I think there is need to review the policy. 

I would like to show you something else. We now have a hospital being constructed in Kamuli, but next to that hospital there is another old hospital. It is on the same venue. We are constructing a government hospital, but there is a church hospital next door. This hospital would have been put in some other place. 

The same thing applies to Mutolere; right across it there is St Francis Hospital. Some of the things I am saying are not just for the sake of saying. Can’t we have this same service a bit far away from the present structure?  

I wish to tell you one thing, today in Namirembe we have got an eye clinic and we have also got a good dental clinic, but the same place needs some bit of a push from Government so that we can have better services.  I wish the $38 million had been given to Namirembe Hospital. A portion of it would have helped improve those services. But, they have got all these buildings in Mulago half done and nothing is there. 

Rubaga has got a children’s ward. Nsambya has got a good Gynaecology clinic. But we are not doing anything to help these people. We have sunk the money in some dead horse. So, I believe there is a need to have a change in policy and review certain things.

Another thing is to have an audit for work done. As we speak now, I am very sure there is nothing that has come out of what was done in Mulago. At least on Mulago I am an authority because I am a builder. I know what was done in Mulago. I know how much you can do with 38 million dollars if it is for construction.  

Honourable members, you know very well that 38 million dollars is not peanuts, but you can see the value that has been put on Mulago. I can just see a few old buildings in Mulago, but nothing new and nothing substantial. 

Mulago does not have equipment, and the Minister of Health was here the other day but he could not definitely tell us why we do not have some of this essential equipment in place. So, I think it is high time that some of these things are analysed critically. As people who love this country, it is not right to say, maliciously, that everything is going on well. 

I end here by quoting Ghandi, who said, “Politics without principle is a sin”.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So far 16 Members of Parliament have made their contributions. I had already recognized Capt. Matovu. I have also recognized the member for Kania, hon. Mugambe and Dr Mallinga. It is okay, honourable members, I assure you I will definitely cover you. But you see, when we started power went off, I think there must be a problem. 

I appeal to you to be here in time tomorrow. I will be able to start at 2.00 p.m., so that at least these people I have identified can start making their contributions. Later, I think we shall ask the ministers to make their contributions or to answer queries. So, I think it is an appropriate time to adjourn, honourable members. We will resume tomorrow, but I request you to be on time so that we can start at 2.00 p.m. or at least 2.15 p.m. That way we should be able to cover as many members as possible. The House is adjourned until tomorrow.

(The House rose at 5.58 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 8 July 2003 at 2.00 p.m.)
 

