Thursday, 2 July 2009

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to welcome you to today’s meeting and to inform you that we need to move really fast because we agreed in the Business Committee to start the debate on the State of the Nation Address today. There are items that have been pending on the Order Paper and I would want us to finish all of them within one hour before we start debate on the State of the Nation Address. So, we need to really be quick. Thank you very much.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 61/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Rwakimari, are you standing in for Dr Baryomunsi?

2.42
MRS RWAKIMARI BEATRICE (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): “a) Can the Minister of Works and Transport inform the House why the construction of Ntungamo-Rukungiri-Kanungu-Ishasha road stopped in Rukungiri before reaching Kanungu?

b) When does the Ministry intend to resume the construction of the road from Rukungiri to Kanungu?

c) Is the Minister aware that the road in question has been a government pledge since 1986?

d) When does the Ministry of Works and Transport intend to construct the Biraara Bridge that connects Rujumbura County (Rukungiri) and Kanungu District?”  

2.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Byabagambi): Madam Speaker, hon. Chris Baryomunsi put a question to the Minister of Works and Transport asking why the construction of Ntungamo-Rukungiri-Kanungu-Ishasha Road had stopped in Rukungiri. 

In a short and precise answer, I would like to say that the government did not have funds to construct the other section of the road from Rukungiri to Kanungu. To elaborate more on this, I would like to inform the House that Government wanted the road to be constructed from Ntungamo to Ishasha. That construction was to be funded by the European Development Fund (EDF). However, when the detailed study was done, it was discovered that the internal rate of return of Rukungiri-Kanungu Road was below their funding levels. So, they accepted to only fund the road construction from Ntungamo to Rukungiri. However, the funds delayed because of the bureaucracies in securing them and this forced Government to take it up. 

Using its own funds, Government did start construction in respect of phase I from Ntungamo to Kagamba. By the time that construction was complete, the funds had been availed. So, construction of that road continued up to Rukungiri. I would like to say that the other section is now under the northern transport corridor. I would like to inform the House that we have just contracted a consultant to review the detailed engineering study. We expect construction to commence by November 2010.

The third part of the question was whether the Minister was aware that the road in question had been a Government pledge since 1986. I would like to say that it is the wish of the NRM Government to have major links in this country tarmacked. This is why Government has been struggling to secure money to enable it fulfil that pledge, which was made in 1986. 

What I can tell you is that Government is aware. Government has so far fulfilled about 60 percent of the pledges. Road construction is now in Rukungiri. We are only left with the shorter section that is going to Ishasha. (Mr Arumadri rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no; he is still answering the question.

MR BYABAGAMBI: The fourth question was: When does the Ministry of Works and Transport intend to construct the Biraara Bridge that connects Rujumbura County to Kanungu District? The design of this bridge was completed and as I talk, we are at the contracts award stage and construction will commence at the end of August. So, I can report that works will soon start. That is the much I can do, Madam Speaker.

2.48
MRS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Minister for his eloquent answer. However, I would like him to clarify on the period, November 2010. He said that construction of the road will start in November 2010. I am asking this because it is not clear whether the construction will be for the road from Rukungiri to Kanungu or the one from Ishasha to Kanungu.

2.49
MS SARAH NYOMBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County, North, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the Minister a supplementary question regarding when Ministry of Works intends to start the rehabilitation of Munkono-Kayunga Road; it is in a bad shape. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, when we opened the session, we said we should handle matters which are related. 

2.50
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. If I heard the Minister well, he said that the funds were not there. Which funds does he mean? In the budget of 2008/09, I remember we passed Shs 1,001,750,000,000 (one trillion, one billion, seven hundred and fifty million shillings). Where did this money go? Wasn’t it partly supposed to be used to put that road in place?

Secondly, he has talked about phases. I would wish that the Minister gives Parliament the number of kilometres he has worked on and at what cost, and even the duration. People can then have hope that within this period, we would have covered so much and we would have finished here or there. Otherwise, since 1986, we have had to wait. We, the Opposition, might even come to power before you have fulfilled your pledges and then they will become liabilities on our side. 

MR JOHN ARUMADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to give very important information. The stretch of the road from Ntungamo to Rukungiri was the effort of Dr Kizza Besigye. If you went to Rukungiri District, you would find that the road is called Besigye Road. So, it might take more effort from Dr Besigye to work on the stretch to Kanungu. I thought I should inform the House about that. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please ask supplementary questions arising from this answer. 

2.51
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County Pader): Is the Minister aware that I almost died on my way to Kanungu in a road accident because of the bad nature of the road? Are you aware that I almost died in an accident with hon. Michael Ocula on the road to Kanungu?

2.52
MR YOKASI BIHANDE (FDC, Bukonjo County East, Kasese): The Minister told us that ADB could not fund the road because of the low Internal Rate of Return (IRR). Wouldn’t it be better if we included it on that road - the stretch from Katunguru–Ishasha and Ishasha–Ntungamo? That stretch would increase on the IRR because of the activities along that route. 

2.52
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This road was pledged 23 years ago. Does the Minister accept that it is the normal thing to keep people waiting for a pledge to be fulfilled for 23 years?

2.53
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to thank the Minister. Recently, my constituency was cut off for almost three months but with his intervention - Madam Speaker, you were with us yesterday in Karamoja - we were able to pass through that road. 

I do not know the date when Government promised this road to Kanungu in 1986, because the four bridges from Napiananya to Nabilatuk and the bridge of Lolelia and Lolachat were promised at the same time, and I remember at that time I was in P.7. (Laughter) I would like to know from the hon. Minister the criteria that the ministry follows in implementing these pledges. 

2.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS (Mr John Byabagambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. To answer hon. Rwakimari’s supplementary question, the road is Rukungiri–Ishasha-Kanungu, and that is why there is some delay. For Rukungiri–Ishasha, the detailed engineering design was done together with Ntungamo–Rukungiri. However, because of some changes and additional span from Ishasha to Kanungu, we have gone ahead to procure a new contractor to redo the detailed engineering design.

Hon. Mutumba, it was only last financial year that we got Shs 1.1 trillion. What hon. Members should understand is that this Shs 1.1 trillion is the total amount of money received by the sector of roads and transport, including District Urban Community Access Roads (DUCAR), current expenditure – salaries and everything - and upgrading and maintenance of national trunk roads. If I break down the Shs 1.1 trillion, you find that quite substantial amounts of money went to the district roads, community access roads, etc. This money was only received in 2007. In 2007 to 2008, I do not think that under our normal procurement procedure, the contractor would be already working. Yes, we have the money under the same arrangement and that is why I called it the Northern Corridor Transport Project. That is where the money is.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, the Minister must be treading on dangerous ground. Is he telling us that the Shs 1.1 trillion was less? By how much was it less? According to what I have noticed, there are so many roads that are not worked on and yet when they read the Shs 1.1 trillion, we all clapped our hands. So, what was the deficit?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, there is nothing which is as expensive as road infrastructure. If I am to construct roads in Uganda, for example a highway of two lanes or three lanes, it would not even be enough for 200 kilometres. That money is not enough for a highway of double lanes. Therefore, the answer is in affirmative. This amount of money will not solve all the problems we have with roads. It is just a drop in the ocean. 

We have to appreciate that the extra money was to be provided during the budget time. Really, within one year, to have some of the projects committed and moving on, I can say that we have worked at an abnormal speed compared to most of the departments.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually Minister, I was hoping that you would not agree to go with the Shs 1 trillion because this was an old road. You should have just said that the Shs 1 trillion was not part of this because that was an old road with old funding and negotiations. Now you are mixing it with the Shs 1 trillion and getting into problems. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: No, I am not sorry. It is not mixed up. I am getting the money from there.

The road was promised in 1986 and by that time, I think Kizza Besigye was a corporal; he was nowhere. He must have been somewhere in NRM as a soldier. So, to tell me that now after the road was pledged by NRM government and turned into Kizza Besigye, I do not buy that. (Interruption)

MR NYEKO OCULA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Is it in order for the hon. Minister to stand on the Floor of the House and try to misguide this House and let it go on the Hansard that in 1986, Col (Rtd) Dr Kizza Besigye was just a corporal? We know for sure that Col (Rtd) Dr Kizza Besigye was on the highest command at that time, and he was a minister and a doctor. Is he really in order to belittle the President of Forum for Democratic Change who has contributed immensely to the struggles in this country, and say that he was just a mere corporal or not existing? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I hope you are not suggesting that people who enter as corporals never rise. All the grades are useful and this includes privates, corporals, sergeants, generals. Everybody is useful.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you for that wise ruling, Madam Speaker. What I know is that he was serving in the army. I am not interested in the ranks.

Hon. Otto asked whether I am aware that he was about to die on that road. What I am aware of is that hon. Otto is still alive and seated there in front of me. He is in Parliament and whatever happened down there, I cannot know. I cannot know the cause of his close shave with death and resurrection. I do not know whether it was bad driving or over speeding. I think if he had reported it to the Police, I would have had a better answer.

Hon. Bihande, we are aware of this road, but the internal rate of return I am referring to was done in 1998. As I speak, it is no longer the same issue. It has surpassed the minimum, which is about 12 percent, and that is why the government has come back to finish that phase. We are considering the Katunguru to Ishasha road to be part of the tourism network.

Hon. Okello-Okello asked whether it is normal to wait for 23 years for a pledge to be fulfilled. You have waited for 2000 and something years for Jesus to come back and He is going to come back according to you. I know that even if the government does not have enough resources, the programme is there. That is why it is called a pledge. It has no limited time. I can pledge and fulfil it in ten or 20 years, provided I fulfil it.

Hon. Remigio, I do not know which road you are referring to which has all those bridges. Maybe it would have been better to contact me in private or come to my office and we discuss that issue. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 63/1/08

3.04
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): “Could the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries inform the House whether the Pulkol Report on the 1992 ranches restructuring exercise was adopted?

b) If so, to what extent were the recommendations of the Report implemented?”

3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) Mr Bright Rwamirama): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, you will recall that hon. Ekwau, Member of Parliament for Kaberamaido, raised a question about implementation of the report of the 1992 Ranches Restructuring Committee to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, which was tabled on 14 April 2008. 

Consultations have been made with the relevant ministries, that is, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, and the Ministry of Water and Environment, on the subject. I have found out that the report was implemented as highlighted below.

In 1992, the exercise of restructuring started. In 1997, the Ranches Restructuring Board submitted a final report to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. In 1999, Cabinet approved the minute on restructuring. During the Cabinet meeting, which was held on 12 May 1999, Cabinet approved the report under Minute 152 and a Cabinet extract on Ranches Restructuring Board communicating the Cabinet decision in the report was sent to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

In 2003/2004, Uganda Land Commission and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development started the process of resettling squatters and processing land titles. Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development embarked on compensating ranchers whose ranches were sub-divided. A total of Shs 3,657,075,368 has been paid out in compensation by the Ministry of Lands and Urban Development to 46 ranchers, for facilities that they had developed, but had not forfeited after restructuring of the ranches. See the attached appendix and you will see a table of the details of compensation. 

The registration and initial processing of land documents for the squatters, now bona fide land owners, is being handled by the respective district land boards. The government, through various programmes under MAAIF and/or Ministry of Water and Environment, is in the process of providing water and disease control infrastructure to respective ranches. 

I gave hon. Ekwau a copy of this before I came here, and I think the report was adopted and implemented. 

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much. According to the answer to the question that I got just at around 2.00p.m., which group of squatters are these who are moving all over Uganda? Are they related to the above in your answer in question No.5? How many districts have been covered as indicated in answer No.7? Why has this report never been made public? Are you aware that even the Ministry of Agriculture in Entebbe does not have this report? Can your Ministry, under your charge, lay a copy of this report on the Table of this House? The intention of the institution of this committee was to improve the livelihoods of these squatters, what has the government done so far to improve the lives of these squatters? Thank you very much. 

3.09
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In his response on page 2, No.5, the Minister observes that a total of over Shs 3 billion was spent on compensating ranchers. I would like to know from the Minister which year this payment was made, and from which budget it was drawn. Could it also be that this Shs 3 billion relates to the money that we passed last financial year for landless people? If that is the case, would I be wrong to suggest that landless people actually exist in the entire country, and that the table in appendix (a) shows that there is selective compensation being made in as far as the budgeted amount of Shs 3 billion is concerned? 

I would have been happy to see that some of this money is spent to buy land for landless people in Teso and other parts of the country, and not only in Ankole, Bunyoro and Nakasongola. Thank you.

3.11
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you. I would first like to thank the Minister for his concise answer. My major clarification is on the table on appendix (a)Members, you note that there is an outstanding amount for compensation totalling to Shs 16.8 billion. I would like to know from the Minister the payment schedule for those ranch owners who have not yet been compensated. When is the Shs16.8 billion going to be compensated?

Secondly, for the ranches in Buruli, for example, which total to 26, only nine were compensated. We would have loved to know which particular ranch and in which region got compensation, and which ones government still owes monies. Thank you.

3.12
MS BINTU JALIA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, I want to raise two concerns in form of questions to the Minister. One, do we still have some ranches which are vacant, especially in Bunyoro region? – (Interjections) - Yes, I have a reason as to why I am asking this question. Two, if these ranches are still there, what plans do you have in place? 

I am raising this concern because I am reliably informed that in Bunyoro, in Kitwara and Kibanda counties, there are some ranches which had been allocated to some communities that were displaced by the NFA, and up to now we are still waiting for that community to be resettled there, and we are told those ranches are still vacant. Thank you.

3.13
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I want to know from the hon. Minister whether he is aware that with regard to Masaka Ranching Scheme, quite a number of people who surrendered their certificates of title for ranches to be removed, have never got their certificates back in spite of numerous demands. I would also want to know who the 46 remaining people to be compensated are. What are the amounts due to them, and when are they supposed to be paid?

MR RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the concerns of Members. Most of the information is available, but if I had to produce it, I would have produced a very big document and, therefore, not responded to the concerns of hon. Ekwau. We have the details. They are available. For anybody who is interested, they are public documents.

One, who are these squatters roaming around the country? Squatters do not roam. Squatters are defined as occupying land, have stayed there for a number of years, and are recognised as bona fide occupants. So, we should not confuse nomads with squatters. (Laughter) These are different things. Let us be very clear on that. 

I want to inform this House that these squatters were compensated. By 1986, we had so many people co-existing with ranchers and Government decided that they compensate ranchers and also give these squatters land which they had occupied. In some areas, these ranches were not restructured when people were not on the ground. People were displaced and somehow they came back. So, the squatters are not nomads. I am sure that this Parliament commissioned a report on nomads and those people who are roaming, and it will soon come. 

Why have these people not been settled - the people in Buliisa and all over the place, in Ankole, Teso and Karamoja? Cattle-keeping is a very complex economic activity. I think we need to separate squatters and nomadism.

Hon. Amuriat asked why compensation was done selectively. Compensation was done on ranches. There is no ranch that had squatters that was left out. I have attached a table which shows across the board where the ranches scheme was. The people who were affected were compensated. 

Hon. Epetait, you would have wished to know the details of those who were compensated. I think this is a new question; but should you wish to have this information, it is available. You can go to the Ministry of Lands and get it. I have a copy here but it is a very big booklet. 

Why were some people paid and others not? You know how we have been fighting with our budgets here. The cost of land is very high, and I think it is because we have not received a serious budget to address the problem.

Hon. Bintu asked if there are ranches which are not allocated. Yes, some of these ranches you are referring to are government ranches and this is government land. We have not yet decided to give away government land. I know we have two ranches in Bunyoro which belong to Government, and the government position is that you should not give out land anymore.

Hon. Kawanga wanted to know the amount of money for the people who have not yet been paid. I have ably put it there. On Masaka Ranching Scheme, I have indicated how much has been paid and how much is remaining. 

As for those who surrendered titles and they have not received the titles back, the process of getting titles has not been very easy. I think the arrangement is that when we finish compensating the person and creating titles out of that, they return the titles. I think the Minister of Lands can help me to explain that. As a member of the restructuring committee, I know that that is the arrangement. We have people who know that their land is not taken but are waiting for Government to pay them and then they get their titles.

Finally, I think I have answered the specific question that was asked. For these subsidiary questions that are coming, anybody is free to come to my office or to go to the Ministry of Lands and get this information. I thank you very much. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW AN ADDITIONAL FINANCING OF SDR 3,100,000 EQUIVALENT TO US$ 5,000,000 FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA)OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING COST OVERRUNS IN THE SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT OF MINERAL RESOURCES PROJECT(SMMRP)

(Debate continued.)

3.21
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Rt hon. Speaker, colleagues  on behalf of the Committee on National Economy, I would like to present the addendum report on the motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow an additional financing of SDR 3,100,000, equivalent to US$ 5,000,000, from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group, for financing cost overruns in the Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources Project (SMMRP). 

The Committee on National Economy presented to this House a report on the above loan request on Tuesday, 16 June 2009. During the debate that ensued, a number of issues were raised by Members resulting into a decision that the debate on the matter be deferred to allow the committee more time to provide answers to the concerns expressed by Members, and also harmonise positions with the Committee of Natural Resources and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. 

The committee subsequently attempted to respond to the concerns at a sitting held on Thursday, 25 June 2009. Once again, the debate on the subject matter was not concluded due to a procedural matter which was raised by Members. The Speaker rightly directed that because of the procedural inconsistencies, the matter be recommitted to the committee and an addendum report be produced.

Madam Speaker, it is in the above regard that this addendum is presented to this august House to provide answers to Members’ concerns as requested and directed by this House.

Methodology

The committee held meetings with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and also consulted the Committee on Natural Resources. 

On the loan performance concern, the committee together with the other stakeholders mentioned above, reviewed the loan performance for the total project cost of US$ 42.7 million, including the US$ 25 million, whose details we shall give later for this purpose, and noted that as provided for in the main report, the achievements attained included the following:

Members, there is Annex 1 of the report, which we had earlier on laid on the Table, but you did not have enough copies. You now have enough copies clearly showing the details of the project progress report from 20 September 2004 to March 2009. Among others, artisan and small scale miners and communities have since been trained in safe mining, better productivity methods, and assisted environment and health issues. 


Also, the non-tax revenue royalties and mining fees have since been doubled. The project has carried out an airborne geological survey for demarcating mineral targets, which has covered 523,099 kilometres of magnetic, radiometric and electromagnetic surveys accounting for 83 percent of the plant airborne surveys.

The capacity building of geoscientists, engineers and technicians of government has been undertaken through on-job training and academic training at bachelors and Masters of Science levels in specialised fields of geochemistry, mining engineering, geophysics, mineral processing, digital cartography, applied geology, mineral economics and contract negotiation. 

A joint mid-term review of the project by all financiers and stakeholders was carried out in January 2008, and it was recognised that not all the planned activities had been carried out as stipulated in the project implementation plan. 

Pending project activities

These include geological mapping of 75 percent of the country’s landmass as earlier mentioned; geochemical surveys and reconstruction, and construction of offices and laboratories at Entebbe. There is also construction of seven regional offices at Arua, Fort Portal, Gulu, Kabale, Mbarara, Moroto and Tororo, which require the extension of the project by two years. As you are aware, the geological offices at Entebbe are one of the most ancient activities that we still have in this country. 

Observations

The committee observed that there was a mix-up during the presentation of the 83 percent area of airborne surveys vis-à-vis the 92 percent of the Uganda landmass, of which only three quarters – 75 percent of geological mapping survey is pending. We would like to confirm that these figures are correct because the airborne survey is intended to target and reduce the areas of concentration by those going for the landmass surveys. 

The committee noted that the financing of the pending work is not just the US$5 million cost overrun from IDA because the total project cost of US$42.7 million has a multiple financing, which we did not get in the earlier report, and is also indicated in the annex. The other financiers include Government of Uganda, which provides counterpart funding equivalent to US$3 million; the World Bank’s original loan which we are now topping up was US$25 million; there is the Nordic Development Fund equivalent to US$7 million; and there is the ADB grant of US$7.7 million. So, the total cost of the project then was US$42.7 million of which only US$32 million is loanable fund and, therefore, loan payable. So, when you add the US$5 million currently sought for cost overrun by the ministry, the total project cost will become US$47.7 million dollars and this is clearly given in the details.

Madam Speaker, there were also issues raised to do with debt sustainability and debt strategy and I have already stated here that after the committee met with the Minister of Finance, and according to the Budget Act and the Debt Strategy 2007, we requested the ministry, and they have now given us a copy of the report on loans, guarantees and grants for financial year 2008/09, which the committee is currently analysing. We have requested a slot where we will present our analysis of this report so that the ministry can defend it and Members can contribute to that. 

But we also urge that when looking at loans, we should be mindful of a percentage of about 33 percent. We have to support Government in financing our budget using borrowed funds, but it is also important to appreciate that when looking at loan performance, different sectors are performing differently and this is given in this report. The committee would also like to request the sessional committees to put more emphasis on monitoring loan performance after we have approved these loans, so that we get value for money. 

Recommendation

Madam Speaker, in due consideration of the significances highlighted in the main report earlier on presented in this House, the committee recommends that this august House authorises Government to borrow an additional Special Drawing Right of EUR 3.1 million equivalent to US$5 million from the IDA of the World Bank, for financing the cost overruns in the sustainable management project to accomplish the pending works. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as you recall, we had had a debate and there were some gaps to fill. We had asked the chairperson and the minister to respond to them. I do not know whether they have been adequate in their submission. Minister, do you want to say something? There were some questions that were asked; let us hear from the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development.

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MINERALS (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, there were some questions that were asked during our debate and to some of which clarification has already been given by our chairperson. One of the questions was to show how much money is really involved, and we decided to show in tabular form the financial structure and the loan portfolio as you had requested. The actual loan which was negotiated is summarised and attached to the report of the committee. So, the financial information is there. 

The loan that we got from IDA is US$25 million; from the Nordic Development Fund, which was indicated as EUR 6 million, is equivalent to US$7 million. The loan portfolio payable is US$32 million and in the financial structure, we have a grant from ADB which is US$7.7 million. The Government of Uganda counterpart funding is US$3 million and that is US$10.7 million non-payable grant. The Government of Uganda’s total contribution to the project cost that was negotiated at that time is US$42.7 million. That is the financial structure that we agreed upon at that time. The components run as indicated below, and what we carried out, not to waste Members’ time, is there. 

As we move to page 2, there is component 4, and I would like to request the Members that since the chairman touched on most of it, I deal with just a bit of it. There was a lot of controversy, if you allow me to read it all - that is geo-information and development.

Under this component, airborne geophysical surveys have been conducted covering 83 percent of the country - that is, the flying of the plane, and the first batch of acquired magnetic and radio metric data, has been released. The final release of all the geophysical data including electromagnetic data will take place in September 2009. 

Geological mapping, the surveying by the plane and the walking by geologists - that is the mapping so that we zone the country into plots like we sell the plots in town. We shall say, if you want to go and survey that area, there is something we think is there; go and carry out your own surveys. That is geological mapping.

Geochemical surveys and mineral resource assessment funded by IDA commenced in 2008, and activities are scheduled to take 30 months. The mapping funded by Nordic Development Fund commenced in April 2009, and is planned to last 34 months. The geological mapping will cover 92 percent of the country, that is to say, we are not going to walk on water. We are going to walk on swamps to get minerals, and the area that the geologists will walk is 92 percent, leaving deep water bodies which are eight percent. We do not walk there. 

Under the same component, a geological and mineral information system will be developed, and currently, the data capture and cataloguing is in progress. However, the funds for the survey of Karamoja region, which could not be surveyed at the material time due to insecurity, were instead used to carry out an aerial survey in Acholi region, not considered during the negotiations due to insecurity at that time. When negotiations were taking place, Kony was active and Finance said they were not giving us money for that place until it was safe. By the time the activities were taking place, Karamoja again became a problem because of disarmament and so on. Acholi region suddenly became peaceful, and the work was carried out in Acholi region. People were concerned about Karamoja, but the funds for the survey of Karamoja region will be sought at an appropriate time. I thought, that is what I needed to explain about those percentages.

If you look at our tabulation after component five, the table shows the funding for the various components – it comes from annex two. What this one says is, we got that money we requested for from various sources and appropriated it according to items. We allocated the money until it was all exhausted. On page 3, you see the total of $42.7 million. Then the other table shows you what we have done with that money. There is actual expenditure on column two and on column three there is what we call total committed funds. People have been hired; they are doing their work; we shall tell you who they are and what we have done with that money. This is all committed and when you go to the last page, the committed fund is $19.5 million, the expended fund $23.25 million and when you total up, you get the money that we have requested for. That is all gone. 

Then on the additional loan, number 12 shows how we want the additional loan to be financed. When you go to page 4, there is what we call total original budget, additional funds required, total revised funds. The revised one is how the expenditure will be at the end of the project. We are saying that the additions for every component are on column 2. You see, $1.4 million is supposed to be added to the original $9.2 million to give you $10.6 million. The other addition will be $0.5 million and it will go to $5.8 million. 

So, what you see on your left, by the end of the project, we shall have all the money spent; $47.7 million. That is what it is. I thank you so that I wait for further questions.

3.43
MR THEODORE SEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the chairman and the minister for coming up to fill in the gaps that we had raised when we last tackled this loan request. 

I look forward to seeing this Parliament debating Uganda’s loan portfolio, so that we can have a clear picture of where we stand as a country in terms of borrowing, because it appears we should reserve borrowing to only critical areas where we have as a must to borrow. But I was re-examining myself as I was listening over the zeal and the effort made to make this Parliament accept this chunk of a loan, and I was wondering about this creature called sustainable management of mineral resources that has so far consumed $42.7 million, and for which another $5 million is being requested. And, yet, when you look at the main objective of this sustainable management of mineral resource project, “To strengthen government capacity to develop a sound mineral sector based on private investment and improvement in artisan and small areas”, it may sound good, but go to the ground; what does the country benefit out of this? Is it under a public-private partnership? When do we gain out of this amount having sunk in all this? 

On page 2, number (ii), they tell us what has so far been achieved and one of them is that non-tax revenues, realities and mining fees have doubled - from what to what? Short of that, this House will be taken as a House of rumour mongers. We ought to be given figures so that we appreciate them as Parliament. Tell us that our returns and revenues have risen from this amount as a result of this to that amount. Once you fail to give us that, it will be mere rhetoric, and I do not think it is in the best of interest, that this Parliament engages in rumour mongering – (Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: I would like to request my colleague, hon. Sekikubo, to read the annex properly. The addendum gives the summary, but the details are attached. The whole project performance is attached. Kindly study before you debate.

MR SEKIKUBO: I was not talking about the performance of the loan, and I would like to draw the chairman’s attention to this. I am asking, using his own report, by what percentage or from what amount have we realised the non-tax revenues? 

Another question I was going to raise is - and essentially this appears to be in areas under private holders and private mines - why Government should incur this amount of money and then we are not told how Government has benefited and by what amount. This is the question I was raising. Not about the loan performance, but the actual returns to the country. This is money to be repaid. But what are we gaining out of it? Are we contributing money to the private miners and who are they? Who are the owners of these mines whose capacity we are helping to build, and at the end of the day we walk home empty handed? This is the issue I was raising. I hope the chairman can get me right on this and in good faith, not as an attempt to peddle the report. When we reconsider, what are we getting out of this colossal amount being spent in a bottomless pit? We should have light at the end of the tunnel that we are standing to really benefit from this.

The aerial surveying was not completed and part of the reason for that is that the aeroplane that was doing the survey was involved in some accident. I would like to know, is this failure to cover the entire country a result of the shortage of funds, or did the plane develop problems indeed? Once it developed problems, who is to shoulder the burden? Is it being passed over to the taxpayers again; to shoulder another loan to cater for that? There is something we are not being told because, it was indeed reported in the papers, how the plane carrying out aerial surveys had crushed, and now we are being told that this is the reason why the surveys were never completed. But this vital information is being withheld from Parliament. If the chairman of the committee cannot tell us, who is going to tell us about this reality and fact? It really leaves a lot of bad taste and I hope it can be rectified. 

Lastly, I do not know whether it is too late for the committee to reconsider this loan request. When you consider the amount we have to shoulder as taxpayers - and indeed they are not showing the returns as a country - shouldn’t we have a cut-off point where we say enough is enough? We have incurred that cost; let the private miners continue shoulder the rest of the burden. Because, apparently, there is no direct benefit for the national coffers out of this we are doing. I think we better borrow for education and health, where we have direct returns and can realise this, rather than trying to co-sponsor a project that we shall not benefit from as Ugandans. We do not see the list of those mineral deposits that we have got and the owners of those deposits. Probably they should be made to pay rather than Ugandans paying for this. Because, there is no direct correlation between the loan request and what benefits Ugandans are bound to get out of this. I thank you.

3.51
MR REMEGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support this loan request, but there is one thing which has continued to persist and disturbs me throughout this report and many other reports that come to this Parliament. Since 2006, and on the onset of disarmament, we Members of Parliament from Karamoja, many neighbours and stakeholders, have realised tremendous improvement of peace in the region, internally, although there is a slight escalation rate with members from Kenya. The issue of what is written in the report –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you a Member of the committee? 

MR ACHIA: Yes. But I did not attend this one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You should have given your views in the committee. You cannot debate your report; it is for us the other Members to make our comments.  

3.53
MS GRACE OBURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the committee chairperson about capacity building. This is page 2 of the report. We are taking a lot of pain to have specialised training for these officers who are going to take up the jobs on this geochemistry and so on. But then, what measures do we have in place to ensure that after their training and getting the degrees, they are bonded and they will not leave the work? What other sustainable training is there in place, to have the others trained, just like those other people who are on specialised training? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.54
MS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister and the chairperson for bringing this report. However, my concern is that some of us are wondering why the government does not bring other important loans, for example, for reproductive health, in particular maternal health. (Applause) 

Last year, we raised the issue of maternal health; we requested government to look for a loan to support reproductive health, particularly maternity centres for our women; obtaining obstetric care to help the mothers who are dying in this country.

At the moment, 16 women continue to die every day because of preventable causes. I would like to know from the hon. Minister of Finance, who promised us a year ago that a grant would be sought to fund issues of reproductive health. And on top of that, there is already a road map to the reduction of maternal mortality and child health in this country. It is already costed; we know how much money is required. The President has already endorsed it and it is one of the main MDGs. (Applause)

So, where is this money and when is government bringing a particular loan to fund this very important sector in this country? People are thinking about minerals but human beings are more important than minerals. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, three months ago, I raised two questions for oral answers. One was directed to the Minister of Finance and another to the Minister of Health, inquiring about the state of reproductive health, and in particular, maternal health in this country. Up to now, I have not got any answers from them. This shows lack of initiative, lack of support for these very important sectors in this country. We demand as women of this country and the men in this Parliament, that these issues should be considered and brought on the Floor of the House. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the last Business Committee I reminded the government that it was a condition for us to pass the budget of the Ministry of Finance; it was a condition that the loan on maternal health would come. That was the condition last year, and you promised here. Now, there is no sign and you are dealing with minerals. (Laughter)

3.57
MS JANET OKORI-MOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report. I thank the minister for what he presented. I have ever told this House that whenever we are passing loans in this House, I feel so envious; envious because I feel that some of these loans could benefit places like Karamoja.

I feel very sad when the minister reads on page 2 that funds for the survey of Karamoja region were diverted to the Acholi sub-region because Karamoja was insecure, and the funds for the survey of Karamoja will be sought at an appropriate time. Which is this appropriate time, if it is not now? The minister is our brother, a son of the soil. (Laughter) We are tired of always being in the last phase of programmes or in no phase at all. I need some clarification on this one. Thank you very much.

3.59
MR FRED BUKENI GYABI (NRM, BUBULO COUNTY WEST, MANAFWA): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I requested, my concern is why we are borrowing the US$ 5 million. When you look at page 3, table 11, they indicate the total budget of the money needed and the total expenditure. When you look on number 6 of 11, that is contingency. No money was used on these items. It remained US$ 2.1 million.

In other words, during the entire life of the project, which we are boosting now, this US$ 2.1 million was not needed. It was not used and it is not being indicated as being needed. The problem is, apart from maintaining it as contingency, which was irrelevant during the first phase of the project, we are giving it more US$ 0.5 million, making it US$2.6 million.

This is money we are borrowing, which has been lying there and it has not been used. In the entire document, they are not mentioning that contingency is, therefore, going to be needed more than before, and we are increasing the money. This is the money which is more than even 50 per cent of what we are borrowing. 

Why are we borrowing money that we do not need? Why are we borrowing money that has not been needed in the first phase and now we are increasing it and it is more than half of what we want to borrow?

4.01
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC ARUU COUNTY, PADER): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee for taking heed and making the necessary corrections. I thank the minister for making the necessary intervention.

Madam Speaker, on page 28 of the committee report, there is a summary of key achievements as of March 2009. If you look at the list of what they call key achievements, there is: Uganda mineral sector opportunities were promoted to private investors through publishing brochures and fliers and conferences; institutional capacity building by procuring and installing computerised accounting and financial management systems - I do not know, procuring it for who? 24 hour Internet services were delivered. 

If you look at the last pages, there is a pictorial of what they have been doing and I can see people taking photos during a workshop at Lira Hotel. There was another workshop at Rock Classic Hotel in Tororo, and another sensitisation workshop at Moon Hotel in Fort Portal. These are the key achievements -(Laughter) 

Now, I have looked at the previous project documents. Out of the original money this Parliament authorised - I am a lay man and I do not know anything about minerals - only $11.4 million was used for geo-information and development. The rest was used for strengthening transparency on governance and mining; community development and mining resource management; establishment of environmental and social management capacity - as if we do not have NEMA - project management and coordination, and a contingency of $1million.

Honestly speaking, if out of the original $42 million we borrowed we only used $11.4 for getting the geo-information - my understanding is that the $11.4 was used to map the whole country to establish where the minerals are - that means the $29 million was used for capacity building. And we are very happy; we have seen the pictures and the venues where the seminars took place. We may even have to pick interest and go and pick copies of the receipts to show how much it cost this government to hold those capacity building workshops. 

I think it is not proper for this Parliament to approve the additional $5 million towards the development of the mineral sector in Uganda because out of the original $42 million we approved, only $ 11.4 million was used for that purpose. 

Now, my understanding is that all sectors of government, save for a few, have been privatised. What business then do we have in building the capacity of local people in mining other than just having the geographical and aero impressions of where minerals lie? We shall then call upon the specific investors to bring their money on table and they go and tap those minerals for this country. I thought we had liberalised and privatised several aspects of the economy.

Recently, I was in Zambia, and the Government of Zambia has signed a million dollar contract with a foreign investment South African company to come and start exploring a copper mine that has just been discovered in Zambia. The investor is coming with huge amounts of money as long as government has already identified where the deposits lie. Now, what is this trend in Uganda where other than identifying where the minerals are we go ahead to train people from Pader who even do not know how gold looks like? What is the use of that capacity building? 

I want to caution us that as we deliberate on this loan, there are those who are already salivating. They are just waiting for the time that the loan will be approved, and they will smile all the way to the bank. (Laughter) As hon. Sekikubo said, can we be told, before we say yes or no, how much money the Government of the Republic of Uganda gets from mineral deposits? 

In fact, I now know why in the last constitutional amendments, in the Government White Paper, there was a single clause which said that oil shall not be deemed to be a mineral. They brought the Government White Paper to this Parliament, and in it they did not want oil to be a mineral, moreover people had already known where the thing was. (Laughter) I now know because, honestly speaking, if oil is not a mineral then what is it? Is it like omusenyu where you just collect sand from your garden and sell it to people and the money is yours and government does not have anything to do with it? 

I would honestly submit that this Parliament only approve additional funds which are necessary for the surveys and for producing national maps of minerals to be produced in this Parliament. As for capacity building, I think we already have enough capacity as far as minerals are concerned.

Also, I think the accounts of this particular loan should be audited. I have a problem with the way money is negotiated with the World Bank, the IDA and IMF. 

On the last bullet on page 28, from the money we have borrowed from these people who love us so much, some of the key achievements of the month of March are that we signed contracts for consultancies for airborne geophysical surveys with ADB, and airborne geophysical surveys with IDA. Now, if you look at the cost of consultancies, is this really borrowing money or are African governments just being used as a channel for money just to bounce here, and then it is pocketed by those who claim to be giving us money?

And this trend is not only in Uganda.  There are people who have positioned themselves at the IMF and the World Bank, and are now working as commission agents in areas they are interested in, because African governments do not have the capacity to know the dangers of the money they are borrowing. For example, we would be expecting so much if we expected the minister in charge of minerals to know any detail on airborne geophysical surveys. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, try to wind up.

MR ODONGA OTTO: So, I stand on the Floor of this Parliament to say that, let us approve only the component that will enable the ministry to produce a map of the mineral deposits in this country. Otherwise, this loan is intended to be abused. As we have seen on page 9, a DEO together with ten people were trained on minerals in less than five days. There is also a gold miner who participated in the training of trainers, and in less than four days he had brought 20 others to be trained. Honestly speaking, this cannot be the purpose for which we should take up loans. 

The way the thing has been packaged is like an ordinary peasant farmer who will get a loan from the bank and the first thing he will do is to go to a salon and buy a gomesi for his wife. (Laughter) I think this is not how we should approve loans. I am talking as a young person who will be here for a while to bear the burden of paying these loans we are collecting in a hurry like we are burying a wizard. Thank you so much.

4.10
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Madam Speaker, I think clear concern has been expressed by this Parliament, especially on the type of manpower that is recruited by government.

If you look at page 3 of the report of the committee, paragraph 5 says: “… the joint mid-term review of the project by all financiers and stakeholders was carried out in January 2008, and it was recognised that not all planned activities had been carried out as stipulated.” And when you get back you will discover that even senior engineers – because this a specialised ministry and so one would expect that experts are serving at very high-level capacity. But you can imagine fellows who are illiterate being recruited to occupy senior positions in the ministry and getting trained on job; some of them have not got a degree, but are being called geo-scientists or engineers.

We have been told that they are going to be trained, but most of them do not know the country. If they knew it, they would not plan to use the first phase of the loan in Karamoja and only discover that there is hostility in that area at the implementation stage. That is how the planes were diverted to the North, an area whose people had not been sensitised that there would be low-flying aircrafts surveying their land. 

When we were debating the first part of this report we heard Ugandans in the North had expressed concerns about these low-flying aircrafts. That according to them, the aircrafts were coming to grab their land. Suppose these illiterate engineers discover that the entire Northern part where the low flying flew has minerals underground and they tell citizens in those areas to vacate, what would government tell us?

On the basis of that, I would like to request for a clear explanation from the Ministry of Public Service on how it sources the manpower to those ministries. Otherwise, this is too much wastage - a big chunk of the loan is going to train people who one would expect to already be senior civil servants. How can we let this happen yet we have, in this country, over 900 young graduates who are lying out there jobless? What is happening to this Ministry of Public Service? How does it source manpower for the respective ministries? Why are they training people who are shortly expiring?  Well, I thank you, but these are very serious matters. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, can I ask the chairperson to respond to those issues so that we can decide on what to do?

3.21
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Steven Mukitale): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank Members for all the questions raised.

There was a question on where the extra US $5 million, but I would like to say that in the original report on page 3, for those who carried their copies, we gave details of cost overruns in the establishment of geo-data, internet and intranet; the cost overrun for the documentation centre, the geo-mapping and geo-chemical, the design and institutional model. I thought it is important that we relate it to this original report, which clearly talks about these areas.

On the areas covered, I would like to draw the attention of the Members to Annex II, which is a 37-page document. As a committee, we thought it was important that Members appreciate where the US $25 million was expended. I did not expect details to attract more debate. Anyway, on page 15, there is a clear indication of how much geological survey was done. I can inform you that the data processing is still continuing. So if the data processing of whatever has been surveyed cannot be availed because of only the remaining US $5 million, I thought it would be wise for us to complete this project.

On the question, if we have liberalised, how come we are still having seminars and interface with the private sector? I would like to say that this is intended to promote private sector-led mining. The seminars are intended to disseminate information about the findings to the private sector in the different parts of this country. That is why that was done.

About the specialised staff, I would like to say that we have since got an answer – the bonding is not only in the petroleum sector. As we speak other specialised scientists are being bonded to three years before they can move on to other projects.

There is a Member who said that we have already borrowed US $42.7 million. I would like to say that we did indicate in the earlier report and in this addendum that the loanable fund is only US $32 million and not US $42.7 million.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development answers the other question. I also request the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to answer some of the questions. Otherwise, as a committee, we did appreciate the challenges that sector is facing. We also did appreciate the mineral boom not only in Uganda, but worldwide. We think it would be unfortunate for Parliament and government to spend US $42.7 million and abandon the project because of the only remaining US $5 million cost overrun. That is why, as a committee, we stood firm and said the project should be disposed of. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Mukitale, you know I have been reading this, which is supposed to be a Uganda project. Some two years ago I spent some time in Moyo District but the ordinary people who are very uneducated kept on showing me places that they thought had minerals. They also told me that before the colonialists left, all those areas had been mapped out for mineral; that they were known. Now, if the ordinary people can know this, what is it that we are still studying? (Applause)

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, it was the same stance of the committee at the very beginning and if you see our original report, among the answers we got from the ministry, the question we put was, “When will Uganda know its mineral status?” It is true that even in my own home, I grew up knowing that we had oil. But until further studies with modern technology were done, it was not possible to ascertain whether it was a viable economic venture. 

For that reason, we need not process this data because spending US $42.7 million and we abandon the project half way is not patriotic and I do not think it is wise. So it is important that we help this project to be disposed of and we move on. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR BALIDDAWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have noted on page 3 of the report; point 3.4(ii) the committee says that there was an establishment of a geo-data, GIS, Internet and Intranet for geo-logical mineral information system, which had been budgeted at US $510,000 million. But upon bid opening, the evaluation shot up the cost to US $1,187,000. I am enraged; this is not possible. Internet and intranet access can never cost US $1,187,000 (Applause) unless they are talking of something else that I do not know. Internet and Intranet access can never cost that amount of money in this country.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter. The main emphasis of the Chair of the committee is that we need to process data. Data once captured does not rot. There are questions the honourable colleague has just raised that need more complete answers. 

I rise to propose that we suspend the passing of this loan and follow up on some of these specific matters. It is quite obvious – considering the contribution of hon. Odonga Otto which makes it very difficult for us to rationally pass the law in its present form. So, I propose that we defer this matter. If need be, we put a select committee to look at this project before we allow Government to come back and ask for this loan.

4.23
MS HUDA OLERU (Independent, Woman Representative Yumbe): Madam Speaker, on the issue raised by the Leader of the Opposition, I want to bring in an amendment that the issues of women, especially health are always under looked especially when it comes to national programme implementation. I am aware that the budget committee assigned the Ministry of Health to table the request for maternal and mortality rate. Now that the minister has failed to meet this obligation, I beg to move that this loan request be suspended until the loan which was promised by the former Minister of Finance, Dr Suruma – he was going to bring a US $100 million loan for reproductive health; let that money be brought and we pass it, then we shall pass this one. (Applause)

MR OCHIENG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Members, I rise to give some information. I am the Vice-Chairperson of the Committee on National Resources of Parliament of Uganda. I have heard a number of Members contributing. But with you indulgence, I want to put something right. We want loans, we want this –(Interjections)– this is a request for a loan to enable this country get more money to help in other sectors that we are talking about. Let us understand what a loan is –(Interjections)– I am speaking because I know what I am talking bout –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you are insulting this House to say that they do not understand what a loan is. Obviously Members know what a loan is; this House has been passing loans and rejecting some. 

MR KASOZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There has been a motion Tabled by Hon. Oleru. I want to seek clarification on that motion; the motion is to the effect that we suspend the loan request and pass it later on conditions that the government brings a loan request for reproductive health. 

But I want to seek clarification here. We are suspending the loan request because there are areas that we think are wanting. So, does the motion that has been tabled mean that regardless of whether those areas have been met, as long as they bring the other loan request, we just pass the loan request?

4.28
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mr Hillary Onek): Thank you Madam Speaker and thank you my colleagues, Members of Parliament. I simply want to give some information. This is an on-going project. It has a small gap remaining to get it completed. Already, US$42 million has been committed. We are only asking for that small gap remaining. 

I am not trying to prevail over Parliament; I am just seeking understanding from my colleagues the Members of Parliament that there is only a small potion remaining. If we do not get this loan passed, the bank which is giving us that money – actually we have stopped them from cancelling the loan and that is why we are trying to get it to the House so that it is passed. 

I would wish to recommend that if colleagues are not happy, we can still pass it, but leave it open for your scrutiny through the committees as to how the administration of that loan is going to be handled. That is if there is some element of question or grey area. Otherwise, the project will not be completed and this is the fact on the ground. The result is that we shall be the losers as a country.

Secondly, I want to bring to your attention that training and capacity building is very important because the oil that we have discovered in Lake Victoria was not discovered by the consultants or the foreigners who came to explore oil. They tried it in Lake Albert and they did not see anything. They were leaving and it is the 10 geologists who were trained in oil exploration who insisted to drill off shore and that is when the oil was discovered. I can even mention the names of the geologists. 

So I am saying that capacity building is investing for the future. It is not a retail business where you invest money now and get the profit immediately. It is for the future. It is my plea to my colleagues that we pass this loan. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a procedural matter. I know that the Leader of the Opposition has proposed a motion, which is still on the floor and that motion has been amended. I am wondering what has happened and the status of that motion because I see Members of the Front bench standing up and contributing as if the motion is not on the floor. So I want to be advised on the status of the motion, which is before us. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the minister was opposing the motion and saying that instead of suspending it, let us proceed and pass it. That was his contribution to the motion.

4.32
MS REBECCA OTENGO (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Madam Speaker, I just want the Front Bench to know that the concern of this House is value for money. The Chairperson of the committee with your team did a very good job. I want you to look at your report on page 3. Look at 3.4, then look at items one to seven. Look at the variances where somebody budgets for US $510,000 and then it turns out to be US $748,000. The second one moves from US $510,000 to US $1.187 million. The next one moves from US $170,000 to US $1.2 million. The next one moves from US $4,800 to US $5.8 million and so forth. 
The question we must put across is who are these technical officers who worked on the bid documents? Do you still trust that the work they did was right? Look at your observations, Mr Chairman. Your first observation was that the variance was too much. As a technical person in that area, that is the advice you are giving us. Unfortunately when you went to recommendations, I thought you should have recommended that this is an area that should have been looked at but you kept quiet. 

If we look at these gaps, as Parliament we must decide whether to go ahead or take it back to the committee or to another committee to look at these variances because they do not give us value for money. We think that if this money was well used, we would not have asked for another batch, but it is such variances that made this difference. I thank you.

4.34
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the whole thing lacks merit and we should not even go further to debate it because when you look at observation No.1 as my colleague has said, the committee observed that there was a big difference between the estimated cost of items and the actual costs of overruns putting into doubt the reliability of the appraisal document and the project implementation plan for the project. This further exhibits poor planning on the part of the people who designed the project.

Why should we go further to debate this matter when the authors themselves tell us that there was poor planning? We cannot base ourselves on poor planning. I beg that we suspend this matter to avoid embarrassment. Thank you.

4.35
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Central): Madam Speaker, I think the mood in the House is clear. I seek your guidance on two issues. Now that we are suspending this request, to which committee is it going? Are we sending it back to the same committee, or are you going to use your powers and appoint a select committee, or are you going to send it to another committee?

Secondly, the minister is expressing concern and is worried. Maybe there is an element of urgency. Is it possible for you to give the time frame within which this committee should report back? Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, it is really unfortunate but this loan does not smell too good. Can you advise on what to do?

4.36
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I totally concur with the view of the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament. Let us have a small committee. We are going to handle this matter and we shall resolve the issues. I so suggest.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, do you have any proposals, or do we need time to consult over the completion? Number and time?

4.37
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga-Latigo): I think the government concession has been welcome by Parliament. We want to do this right. There would be no time to think over it now. Please allow the consultations to go on, and then on Tuesday you will announce how to proceed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I will ask the government side and the Leader of the Opposition to meet and consult and then they will give me the names. I will announce them on Tuesday.

4.38
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Madam Speaker, there was an amendment to that effect and we are seeking guidance on how to proceed especially on that motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kasozi asked a very pertinent question. He asked that are we suspending merely so that we can allow the other loan to come and then we shall also approve this one. The issue of the Health money still stands but we should not tie it to this one. This one is suspended. The other one should come by itself and I warned you, hon. Minister, the other day when we were at KCC; if you do not produce that loan for reproductive health, no money this year. (Applause)

Hon. Members, in the gallery, we have students from Pepperdine University and the University of Kent in the UK. They are on a project in the Ministry of Justice and they have come to observe our proceedings. You are welcome. Let us ask the Minister of Trade to lay a paper. 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON ECONOMIC PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENTS (EPAs)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Trade is supposed to lay a document today in relation to this, is it not? Where is hon. Wambuzi? Ah, the Minister is here, hon. Otafiire. 

4.39
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Maj. Gen. Kahinda-Otafiire): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, like we promised yesterday, I hope you have received our written replies. I beg that you study the answers we are tendering and if there are any further questions and observations, they are very welcome. 

I would like to thank the hon. Members of the Sessional Committee on Tourism and Trade for the effort put into the development of this report on the signing of the Economic Partnership Agreement.

Allow me to make a few comments on the report that was presented to you. 

In the report, it is stated that Parliament was never briefed prior to the initialling of the EPA (see page 14, paragraph 1). I would like to share information with this House that the Ministry met the committee to discuss the EPA on 8 May 2007 and exchanged ideas with the committee on EPAs. This was long before the initialling of the EPA which took place on 27 November 2007, and we found their input very useful. Since then, we have had a number of briefings both at committee level and Parliament level where we delivered a statement on 13 December 2007. On a number of occasions, honourable members have also raised questions on the Floor of the House, to which we have been glad to provide responses. 

There might have been instances where we could have fallen short, but it is our desire and commitment to work together and bridge such gaps. Indeed we have intensified our engagement with the Committee since 2008 and we will continue doing so.

Secondly, the committee points out under its observations that many of our infant industries are at risk of collapsing due to the EPA (page 15, paragraph 2). This concern has been taken care of under the agreement. Under the agreement, 17.4 percent of our imports from the EU have been excluded from liberalisation. This is intended to cover sensitive/infant local industries. 

Fears have also been expressed that the EPA may discourage Uganda from exporting finished/proceeds products that confine us to exporting raw materials. However, it is important to note that under the EPA, Uganda can export all her products irrespective of the level of processing to all the 27 EU member states without paying taxes or being subjected to quantitative restrictions. 

This is an important milestone in securing markets for our products and encouraging value addition since even processed and manufactured products can be exported free of duties or quotas under the EPA. This was particularly in response to fears expressed by our private sector that failure to initial the EPA would subject their exports to duties which would render their products uncompetitive in the European market.

Madam Speaker, the committee also makes an observation that we have not made sufficient consultation with all stakeholders. I want to assure Members of Parliament that we have carried out extensive consultations with Members of Parliament, the private sector, civil society, Government bodies and the media, and we shall continue to do so. Important to note, however, is that we consult through groups and our assumption was that, for example, the National Farmers Federation also represents the peasant cluster of agriculture. 

On the recommendation that EU should assist the EAC countries in building their capacity in trade in services, this has been provided for in the agreement. 

The committee also calls for an increase in aid for capacity building and value addition processes. This has also been catered for under the agreement but it is also recommended that government should increase its support to building capacities and value addition to products so as to reduce dependency on donor aid. I believe that the Executive and Legislature can jointly work to make this happen for the good of our country. 

On the recommendation of periodic review, this has been provided for under the Agreement and is normally catered for under Institutional Arrangements, which was not part of the text initialled. 

The committee notes that the time for negotiating the EPA is too short. I would like to inform you that a ministerial meeting has been scheduled to take place on 8 July 2009, that is next week, and one of the things we shall discuss is the extension of the negotiations deadline. Our philosophy is that we are both negotiating and the failure to meet agreed deadlines is a responsibility on our part jointly.  And this will help us move at a correct speed.

On the issue of developing a comprehensive response to the EPAs, our ministry has already prepared a comprehensive response strategy to the EPAs, and I am grateful for the contribution of the committee to the strategy during our previous consultations sessions. We are set to launch it in the near future.

Lastly, in line with these clarifications above, we take note of the recommendations made by the committee and second the adoption of the report. We would like to thank you, Madam Speaker and the hon. Members for their wise counsel. I beg to move.  (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members the Minister’s answer touches on what was raised by the committee, but it also touches on agreements which we don’t have immediately at our disposal. So, what we would suggest is that the Members study this answer. Look for the agreements and read through them and I will appoint time for a full debate because this has been very contentious and all of us need to be happy, both the Government and the Members of Parliament about the economic partnership agreements. So debate on this is deferred.  Thank you. 

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS OF THE STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS BY HIS EXCELLENCE THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON THURSDAY THE 4TH JUNE 2009

4.49
MS ROSE MUYINDA (NRM, Woman Representative Gomba, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. I would like to take this opportunity to move this motion that thanks of Parliament be recorded for clear and precise exposition of government policy contained in the address of the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President to this Parliament on Thursday, 4 June 2009. And I am moving this motion in accordance with our Rules of Procedure.

It is with honour that I move this year’s motion thanking the President for addressing Parliament and the general public on the State of the Nation Address. His Excellency the President was fulfilling his constitutional obligation as per Article 101(1) of the Constitution of Uganda. 

His Excellency the President, Madam Speaker, in his address to the nation acknowledged with great concern the many lives that have been lost due to road accidents and collapsing buildings under construction, which he attributed to lack of monitoring and supervision of construction works. 

He also expressed his concern on the increasing number of rituals related to murders, especially of children which have been widely reported in the media. He noted that there was a break through in Kiboga area where the perpetrators have been arrested and they are awaiting trial. As a remedy to this very unfortunate situation, he proposed an amendment of the Constitution to deny bail to suspects in such cases in addition to those other cases on rape, defilement and embezzlement except if the mandatory days are exceeded.  

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the proposed amendment if passed considering that we already have specialized courts handling corruption cases, should provide a remedy to corruption, which is one of our biggest challenges in the country. 

Through these amendments together with other initiatives, His Excellency the President and the NRM Government has been able to demonstrate their commitment to the fight against corruption. Therefore, these initiatives need the support of all stakeholders including us Members of Parliament. Indeed the President rightly acknowledged that our success in the fight against corruption will require the collective efforts of everybody.

On the economy, His Excellency the President of Uganda in his submission indicated that there is a very big hope for Uganda’s development due to the increased economic growth from Shs 24.7 trillion in June 2008 to Shs 29.8 trillion by the end of June 2009. 

He further explained that much as there was a slight decline in the growth that was projected during the fiscal year 2008/2009 per annum, Uganda’s economic performance was relatively more stable than that of other countries in the region, hence explaining why we have not approached the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to seek for support like many of our neighbours and other countries have done. This performance on the part of the economy has only been possible because of the right economic policies put in place by the NRM Government.

The biggest challenge now is to ensure that these figures translate into improvements in our peoples day to day lives. This is where government requires the support of everybody, that is to say, leaders both the elected and unelected, technical staff in government ministries and departments and the general population.

Madam Speaker, the President rightly reported the falling share of agriculture in the total GDP. He noted that this had continued to decline from 15.7 percent in the fiscal year 2007/2008 to 15.1 percent this financial year. He explained the significance of this as being a result of continued structural transformation in our economy. Hence, the other sectors of the economy have grown faster than agriculture. 

Whereas it is true that the other sectors, that is to say, the service sector where we have communication, tourism and others are experiencing appreciable levels of growth, the NRM Government has not lost sight that the bulk of our population still depend on agriculture for their livelihood. It is for this reason that a well-thought out strategies to boost the performance of the agricultural sector is critical. This will give great meaning to the ordinary Ugandan. 

With this in mind, the NRM Government has had to revisit the National Advisory Services (NAADS) Programme. The revised NAADS Programme, if well implemented, provides a wind of hope to our people.

On investment, His Excellency the President of Uganda highlighted the continued improvements in Uganda’s investment climate. This has led to the attraction of many diverse investments. To the investors, Uganda offers an opportunity for earning good returns for every dollar invested. To the NRM Government, these achievements are helping us create jobs and hence solving unemployment and providing incomes; they help us to increase tax earnings to the URA; tackling poverty issues and helping in the transformation of the lives of our people. Therefore, given the public outcry on unemployment, especially amongst the youth, it is only prudent that as Members of Parliament, we play a much more active role in attracting investors to our areas and the country. 

On infrastructural development, in order to address the most critical growth constraints in the economy, the President reiterated the need to increase resource allocation, particularly in the area of infrastructural developments. A number of roads to be constructed in this financial year and in the next one, covering every region in the country, were highlighted. I remember Members were very excited to hear their roads being mentioned.

More importantly was the reassurance given regarding the resumption of the railway transport services for our landlocked country. We optimistically look forward to this translated into a reality this financial year. These efforts, amongst others, will not only facilitate the transportation of goods, services and people, but will also enhance regional peace, cooperation and ultimately integration. 

On energy infrastructure, the President as usual took time off to underscore the need to increase electricity supply in the country. He reassured the country that the construction works of the 250 megawatt Bujagali Dam was progressing according to schedule, and the project is to generate electricity by the end of 2010. Obviously, by that time, the gap between supply and demand will have grown even higher. This explains the anxiety regarding the need to start the 750 megawatt Karuma Hydro Power Project, and commissioning the mini hydro projects which were mentioned in the President’s address. 

Given this background, it is highly reassuring to learn that Government has pursued a number of renewable energy projects that have been concluded, that is, Kakira, Kinyara and Lugazi, and is supporting Kisizi micro rural grid. We are informed that these sugar factories are ready to generate more electricity, although there are some bureaucrats who have denied them a realistic tariff. We, therefore, pray that mechanisms for clearing such frustrations will be put in place, so that increased investment in the sector can be realised to enable the country get more electricity, especially in our rural areas. 

On the health sector, the President informed us of Government’s effort in the construction of Health Centre III’s in every sub-county, and requested Members of Parliament to visit them and report any anomalies. It is through this monitoring that we shall ensure that our people get quality services at these health centres. The monitoring will help us to report on thefts of drugs and other equipment, as well as checking on the general state of these facilities.  

Critical areas such as maternal and child health in the country like ours, where the majority of the population is young, will also need to be given greater attention. His Excellency the President also reminded this House that it is the mission of the NRM Government to ensure the positive transformation of the lives of all Ugandans. 

Under the Prosperity for All Programme, agriculture and rural development have been identified as core strategies in achieving our mission. Government has, through the restructured National Agriculture Advisory Services (NAADS), completed the roll-out exercise on ensuring that 30,000 demonstration farmers organised into farmer groups or cooperatives, will be provided with the necessary planting or breeding inputs, skills and knowledge, to transform their production systems into commercially viable ventures every year. 

He further pointed out that other critical elements in improving household incomes under the NAADS Programme include the provision of high-yielding, pest-free and disease-resistant varieties of planting seed and breeding stock, developed through the national agriculture system. 

The support for value addition processors of agricultural produce, improved market access, and provision for microfinance through SACCOs, will provide a clear avenue of improving the lives of our people as captured in the NRM Manifesto and His Excellency the President’s vision. Like any other programme in its infancy, the Prosperity for All Programme is faced with a number of challenges that need the support of all stakeholders, in order to see it grow and bear fruits. 

On peace and security, the President assured the country that the situation in Northern Uganda is now excellent, which has always been our prayer. Post war programmes to rehabilitate the area and improve the wellbeing of the people of Northern Uganda have started. We expect the PRDP to produce the desired impact for the people of Northern Uganda. I, therefore, condemn the reported rebel recruitment in this region, which is an attempt to reverse the positive developments in the region and the entire country.

In conclusion, I wish to once again thank His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, for his clear exposition as contained in his State of the Nation Address, and call upon all hon. Members of Parliament to join me in supporting this motion.  I beg to move. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

5.02
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, Persons with Disabilities): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I humbly beg to second this motion. Hon. Rose Muyinda Najjemba has so ably and eloquently moved this motion and I thank her most sincerely. I also thank the people of Gomba who elected her. 

A motion of this nature gives us an opportunity to examine what the Government and the President perceives as major challenges of the times, the progress you are making as well as the way forward. The President in his speech so ably and so convincingly articulated the achievements of the Government and the challenges being faced by this country, and he presented the way forward. I am, therefore, proud to stand here and second this motion.

It is important to show the culture of giving credit where it is due. Even if I hate you, even if I do not like you, I should see the facts about what you have done and what you have not done. His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, this great son of Africa, has done many great things for this country for which he deserves to be praised and thanked. (Applause)  

Yes, our President has done a lot of good things but you must agree that a lot still remains to be done. Therefore, as leaders, we have an obligation to work with our President, to help our President in building a better country for ourselves, for our children and for our grandchildren. 

I beg to point out a few issues from the President’s speech, and to emphasise, and where possible, appeal to colleagues and other seconders, to help the President realise the dreams and vision he has for this country. 

On page 3 of the State of the Nation Address, the President so ably told us that we are losing many lives because of road accidents. He gave us very good advice in relation to speed limits. As you recall, the Minister of Works and Transport, and the Police, tried to put in place strict regulations regarding speed limits. These were particularly enforced in regard to buses trekking long distances. However, as I speak, we have some buses that are defying this regulation. Therefore, I appeal to the Minister of Works and Transport to help the President by ensuring that speed limits are vigorously reinforced by the government and also the police. I believe that in one way, this can save lives. 

The President so ably articulated the problems relating to the economy and the challenges. As you are aware, we continue to hear people saying that the gains from economic development are not being equitably distributed. Some of these friends continue to say that the poor are getting poorer while the rich are getting richer. I, therefore, appeal to Government to undertake an objective study of this situation and tell people the truth, and also come up with remedies to address this sad scenario. 

The President did clearly articulate the importance of SACCOs in ensuring that Bonna Bagagawale or Prosperity for All actually succeeds. I beg to remind the minister in charge of microfinance that as of now, we do not have people to regulate activities of SACCOs. This has resulted into scenarios where some of our people are cheated by unscrupulous people pretending to help. I request the minister in charge of microfinance to help the President by ensuring that he tables before this Parliament, the law regarding supervision of SACCOs. 

After attending the State of the Nation Address, my niece who is in P.5 came to me and asked me questions. This is one of the questions she asked:  “I saw MPs booing and heckling, but at school, our teachers tell us not to practice booing and heckling; would it be that MPs did not go to school?” (Laughter) I want to confess that I failed to get an answer to this question. I beg to leave it to the Minister for Ethics and Integrity, and probably the Minister for Information and National Guidance to give an answer to this niece of mine. 

Lastly, the President assured this country that we are safe when it comes to the security situation. However, as we all know, recently, we have been reading and hearing disheartening and disturbing reports that there is resurgence of rebel activities in some parts of this country. I appeal to all political leaders, civic leaders or people of goodwill, to work with the government and security agencies, to ensure that we consolidate the security in this country. 

With these few remarks, I once again beg to second this motion, and appeal to all members of this august House to support it. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, in the gallery we have a group of young people from Bugoto-Bukhabooli, Bunya East, Mayuge District. They are represented by hon. Kubeketerya. You are welcome. (Applause) Let me invite the Leader of the Opposition to make his response. 

5.11
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business and hon. Members, I am once again honoured and privileged to make this statement in reply on behalf of the Opposition, it being the formal response of the Opposition to the State of the Nation Address delivered by His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of Uganda, at the commencement of the Fourth Session of this Eighth Parliament on 4 June 2009. 

Before I focus on the President’s address, allow me express our sincere congratulations to the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker and to you, honourable colleagues, and the entire staff of Parliament, for the great progress we have made in entrenching the multiparty dispensation in our Parliament. (Applause) We particularly applaud all those members from both sides of the House who have taken personal risks and have stood firm and principled in holding Government to account to the people of Uganda. That is our noble duty, hon. Members. 

In a fragile multiparty democracy such as ours, the Opposition performs difficult, life-risky and sometimes thankless tasks. We are the ones who must dare tell the king that he is naked. We are the ones who must tell the people that things could be done differently and better even when the country seems to be doing well. We are the ones who must bring out the dirt and rot in Government without killing the hope of the people. We are the ones who seek to replace those in power at the next general elections, and are consequently viewed as enemies by the ruling elite. Any group that does any less, certainly has no business being in the Opposition.

Hon. Members, at the beginning of this Parliament in mid 2006, the Opposition gave an assurance to Ugandans that in Parliament we shall play our roles, carry out our duties, exercise our responsibilities and make our contributions without fear or favour. To date, we have lived by that commitment. 

As we move towards the next general elections due in 2011, however, we are all bound to be acutely challenged. The relentless effort by the NRM and their lies to hold on to state power, and our equal pursuit of the same severally and collectively, will raise the levels of exposure, arguments and competition and even tempt some to act above board, recklessly, brutally and extra-judicially. 

In the face of this looming challenge, our assurance to this nation, to our people, to all friends and to you, hon. Members, is that in the exercise of our legitimate political rights and responsibilities, and in pursuit of associated interests, we, the Opposition, will never do anything to undermine the wellbeing of our nation. We shall, however, also not shy away from doing all in our power to uphold and protect the interest and future of our people and country. Yes, regardless of what others may say, we, the Opposition, love our country and people passionately. In whatsoever we do, we will always seek to advance the good cause of this nation. 

Turning to the President’s State of the Nation Address, allow me to formally congratulate His Excellency the President for the delivery of the address. As always, the active engagement between the President and some of our members, although at times provocative on both sides, livened up the rather long address. It also remains a unique feature of our national engagement. 

We join the President in his kind words of condolences and deep sympathy conveyed to Parliament over the death in the last session of our two dear colleagues, the late Dr Israel Kibirige Ssebunya of Kyadondo North Constituency, who was also Minister of State for Agriculture, and the late hon. Kyaka Kyakuhairwe, who was the Woman Member of Parliament for Isingiro District. The loss of these two colleagues over a very short period in October and November in 2008 was indeed very painful and distressing.

We also share in the recognition by the President, of the potentially avoidable death of many Ugandans over the last year that occurred through road accidents, collapse of buildings and the satanic ritual murders of innocent children that have become a real nightmare to Ugandan parents. We deeply regret these wasteful deaths and convey to all who lost their loved ones, our sorrow and sincere condolences. We urge the Government to take all measures possible under the law to end this nightmare. 

We closely monitored the President’s body language and utterances during his address and have carefully examined the address, particularly bearing in mind the duality in the ways of the President and the dichotomy in our politics, where what is said is not always what is meant; what is professed is not always what is done; and what you see is not always what is. Before addressing specific issues, permit me to make a few broad comments on the address.

Firstly, we were very satisfied and happy that the President has at last ended the diversionary practice of blaming the Opposition and everyone else, but himself, for the political and administrative failures of his government whether on land giveaways, Bujagali, the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture, decentralisation, rural poverty, corruption, etc. We all hope that by the next elections in 2011, the President will be contrite and humble enough to own up and apologise to Ugandans for the vast opportunities lost on account of these failures.

Secondly, we were somewhat surprised by the content of the President’s address that was to us more of a budget speech than a review of the state of our nation, with rosy and excessive statistics although he was absolutely cunning in hiding the challenges that we must surely deal with in light of the global economic meltdown.

Thirdly, we were intrigued by the fact that so many ongoing and planned activities that are physically extensive and highly visible, whether road construction, power generation or oil supply, have start-up dates and end dates of late 2010. Regardless of whether this was deliberately planned with the coming elections in mind, or it is purely coincidental, this activity convergence is a serious commentary on the NRM Government’s planning capability. Given its limited supervisory capacity and high level of corruption, in the typical kavuyo saying of the Baganda, the confusion is also a potential basis for shoddy work, fraud, corruption and eating. 

Lastly, we keenly note the lack of attention the President gave to those non-material and non-tangible things that must underpin our existence and progress as a country, and that show that we care about the heart and soul of our nation. 

We also noted the absence of the faces of ordinary Ugandans in the President’s address and concerns.

For the second year running, the President has not mentioned anything on the state of our politics and the plans government has to improve things as we approach the coming elections, although his body language and off-the-cuff comments were surely those of a man satisfied with what he knows that he believes his opponents do not know.

Sadly, we also note that apart from a brief reference to the perennial hunger in Karamoja in paragraph 74, the President said absolutely nothing about the drought and hunger that is gripping much of this country, and whose urgent handling is an imperative demonstration of a leader’s organic and parental care that he surely must have for his people.

Consequently, our broad assessment of the President’s address is that it was long on the hardware - the material things - but absolutely short on the software - the state and feelings of the people, moral concerns and the principles, values, spirit and an applying philosophy that must guide the life of our nation. 

In the specific responses that follow, we will first dispose of those matters over which we largely agree on and then deal with politics and good governance, the economy and the various non-material issues that are of concern to our people. We will also critically reflect on the software aspect of our nation.

Development and Maintenance of Infrastructure

We, the Opposition, have always advocated for effective development of the country’s physical infrastructure as a basis for underpinning our social and economic activities, creating a comparative advantage for regional trade and minimising our disadvantages in being a land-locked country. To this end, we have consistently supported government efforts to develop our infrastructure, while at the same time pointing out areas of key concerns and caution.

Road, Rail and Water Transport

On roads, last year we fully agreed with the President on the urgent need to develop our key artery trade roads and support increments in the road sector budget. We however cautioned that the road development process must not be rushed for political expedience, but be preceded by detailed planning, the revamping and building of local management capabilities, and a comprehensive review of the extent to which the Ministry of Works has to date handled or mishandled the transport sector, coupled with full political accountability.

In spite of the caution, however, the President in his address has brought forth a massive road works programme, the scale of which has never been witnessed in the history of our country nor even in any less corrupt, better managed and more rapidly developing country. 

We are naturally deeply concerned that yet more money has been allocated to the Ministry of Works when a comprehensive report on the more than Shs 1 trillion allocated to road works last year has not been given to Parliament. We are equally concerned about the capacity and competences of the Ministry of Works and the National Roads Authority to effectively use such large sums of money and to soundly supervise the extensive road works that are being contracted out.

More importantly, we recognise that such a cramped roads works programme distorts the needed sector balance in national investments and expenditure and will pause great maintenance challenges in future, since very many roads will deteriorate and come into disrepair at the same time.

To us hon. Members, these massive roads works programme is not driven by prudent planning and rational investment for well spelt-out goals. If it were so, the ten-year road sector development plan would not have for long gathered dust in government shelves.

Why spend so much time and resources developing a ten-year programme that you do not follow? How much of this beehive activity is driven by rural authorities? 

On rail and water transport, we reaffirm our support of government efforts to develop these transport systems as they provide cost effective bulk transport means that enhance our competitiveness and spare our roads, and help to prolong their life spans. We, however, caution that most of these transport systems are best developed by the state rather than being left in the hands of speculators as was the case with the rift valley railways concession against which we had warned the government.

We also appeal that given the urgency of the ferry networks enumerated by the President, some of the unspent road funds provided in last year’s budget be made available for the immediate purchase of all the needed ferries.

On energy infrastructure, we in the Opposition and our colleagues in Government are at last finding convergence on the issue of provision of power and energy for our country. Right from 2006, we asked Government that rather than attempt the impossible task of building two moderate sized dams within 44 months, the more rational thing would be for Government to invest in building one large dam that would buy us time to better prepare to build smaller dams in a more cost effective manner.

Hon. Members, we are happy that Government has taken our advice seriously and has committed the country to building a redesigned Karuma Hydro Power Dam with the capacity of 700 mega watts. As before, we pledge our support to the project and for any other sound energy undertaking.

On petroleum development, we are also relieved that government is now moving more cautiously although the energy production scheme has offered assurance of reliable access to cheap kerosene and diesel for our rural people and economy.

In 2007, we expressed alarm at the euphoria and excessive optimism generated by the rosy picture being painted by the President on the prospects that there had been discovery of oil wells in our country.

In this period of sobriety, hon. Members, let us make a fresh commitment. Rather than rushing to exploit the oil for short expedients, we shall engage in open dialogue on the national petroleum development and use plan, that will guarantee fair sharing of benefits, broad balancing and use of resources generated in the short and long term, and protection of the environment, game parks and reserves in which the oil wells are located.

On information technology infrastructure, we acknowledge the success the country has so far made in telecommunication and information technology, and the fact that over the last 12 years, the number of telephone subscribers has climbed from less than 100,000 to more than 9 million.

What must not be lost on us though is the universality of this progress that arose from the development of the mobile telephones. We also appreciate the effort of Government to develop the national data transmission backbone infrastructure. This being a regional project, however, we are concerned that Uganda is lagging behind Rwanda and even Kenya with its much longer distances in connecting to district headquarters to the national headquarters.

Rwanda is even progressing much further in attracting to the country’s key industry players such as Microsoft and successfully instituting computer access and learning programmes right from primary school.

We urge our government to commit itself to similar goals. Since more than 80 percent of the 9 million telephone users are low income earners, a reduction in tax on airtime in these difficult economic times will also be most beneficial to our people, the sector and the economy. (Applause)

On human development, the importance of human development through education, training and health services provision is fully recognised by the Opposition, and we have over the years acknowledged programmes made by government in this area.

We have also frankly pointed out weaknesses and needed interventions to improve the situation. In the education sector, we pointed out in 2006 that we would over the life of this Parliament push for effective reforms in UPE whereby –

i)	first grades are not confined to high cost private schools and public schools in towns and in Kampala, but are equally obtained in rural areas;
 
ii)	 there is development of model secondary schools in all parts of the country that provide affordable opportunities to all Ugandans, regardless of location and socio-economic base;

iii)	 there is intensive investment in technical training to truly prepare the country for industrial development; and

iv)	 comprehensive rehabilitation and redevelopment of other tertiary institutions and universities as a basis for building our global competitiveness.

In this regard, we welcome the President’s commitment to address the various constraints related to implementation of UPE. We are particularly pleased that the President has now accepted our rejection of the rosy statistics of UPE that he presented in 2007, and welcome his proposal for a judicial inquiry on UPE implementation that we believe should extend to USE.

We also welcome and fully support current efforts by Government to rehabilitate the various secondary schools in the country, as this will vastly improve the performance of upcountry schools.

In spite of the above, however, we are deeply disappointed by the continued neglect by Government of technical education in this country, and the inadequate attention given to the rehabilitation and revamping of our universities and tertiary institutions.

The neglect of technical education and of the universities and training colleges is the greatest disregard of our human resource development. We urge Government to quickly address this critical shortfall.

On health, we continue to render our support to uplifting of health infrastructure services. We particularly appreciate efforts to rehabilitate the regional referral hospitals and the quick responses by the Ministry of Health to recent outbreaks of Polio, Hepatitis and other contagious diseases. 

We are nevertheless concerned at the poor quality of services offered by our health units and the continued exodus of medical doctors from our hospitals because government has failed to provide needed facilities and to pay the doctors.

Peace and security

Peace and security in Northern Uganda and Karamoja has continued to preoccupy the minds of the Opposition and Ugandans generally. We are satisfied that the peace evidence continues to fuel our economy through vastly expanded cross border trade, savings in military expenditure, return of the internally displaced persons to productive lives in the villages and through increasing investor confidence in the country’s stability in future.

We are, however, deeply concerned about the recent government allegations on the existence of groups seeking to reignite insurgence in the greater north, the various arrests that have taken place since, and even the cynical attempt to implicate the Catholic Church and parliamentarians in these activities. 

We, the Opposition, know how much some military and political leaders benefited financially from the LRA-Kony war. The recent huge expenditure of nearly Shs 40 billion over just two months in the Operation Lightening Thunder that was launched against Kony in Garamba, and the associated accountability disputes, is testimony enough of how these vampires have lived off the blood of our people in the many years of conflict. (Laughter)

We also know the politics behind this allegation of renewed rebellion and the targeting of the Church and the Opposition politicians.

Madam Speaker, you will recall the beating of Acholi parliamentarians in 2004, in the name of security, and the arrest of others later on, an allegation of murder when the real issue was politics. In the same vein, allegations linking Opposition politicians to renewed rebellion in Teso, Acholi and West Nile have also surfaced recently.

As for the satanic claims against the Church, one need not be surprised. Hon. Members, the targeting of the Church and its flock started right after the 2006 elections. NGOs from Northern Uganda were taken to meet the President at his home on the claim that they supported the Opposition during the campaigns. The real target though was CARITAS, an international Catholic relief agency that was falsely accused of distributing blue key brand bar soap to IDPs on behalf of the FDC party, whose symbol is the key. (Laughter)

In the recent Garamba operations, the military again claimed that CARITAS had been caught supplying food to the LRA, an allegation that they were later forced to retract but whose intended effect had sunk.

We should also not forget the vilification and torment of Radio Veritas of the Diocese of Soroti by Government functionalists during the last elections, and the threat that still hangs on the Church in Teso.

The simple desire of all the people of the greater north, including their Church and political leaders, is sustainable peace -(Applause)- for it is peace which has enabled them to shake the shackles and shame of the IDP encampment and not any alleged resettlement package from a government that put them there in the first place.

And, let no one be mistaken that the people would respond resolutely to an attempt to undermine the leaders and the peace that they so dearly sacrificed for.

Our appeal to Ugandans of goodwill now, is to ensure that evil does not reign again in our region, for as Martin Luther King Jr once said, “In the end we shall not remember the words of our enemies but the silence of our friends.”

On the drought and hunger in Karamoja, we deplore the gross insensitivity and neglect shown the people in their most difficult times. In our response on the matter on 26th June last year, we stated that, “Given the severe drought that is now raging in the region, we urge Government to urgently mobilise relief and make substantive appropriation to ensure and sustain support for the people of Karamoja.”

Hon. Members, we only passed that appropriation one year later, the other week, and even then, just Shs 10 billion, and as a second schedule supplementary to be incurred over and above the three percent supplementary permitted under the Budget Act!

We also note with sadness, the position of the President in his address on the matter when he said, “…in response to the perennial hunger in Karamoja, government has produced a comprehensive Karamoja Action Plan for Food Security (2009-2014). The plan focuses on a zoning programme based on the competitive advantages of the different parts of the sub-region.”

We have laboured in vain and raked our minds to figure out what zonal competitive advantage exists in this drought-stricken pastoral land. In the end, we were reminded, in the circumstance, of Cain’s response to God when asked about the murder of his brother Abel, “I am not my brother’s keeper.”

In 2006, we counselled government that the challenge of Karamoja was not just the removal of the gun, but the lack of a comprehensive strategy and holistic approach to addressing the issues of development, geographical and socio-economic isolation, and the failure of the state to address the water and pasture crisis to promote settled agriculture, and to provide adequate security and protection in the region to individuals and their cattle. The President’s pronouncement on Karamoja is certainly unrealistic and wholly inadequate.

Good governance

The central element of good governance is the state of a country’s politics and its administration of justice, law and order. Given the importance of this in defining the environment under which the people live and undertake economic and other development activities, and given the fact that the next general elections are less than 18 months away, we are disappointed that for the second year running, the President did not bother to address the nation on our state of politics and governance.

Political situation

On the political situation, we the Opposition remain fully committed to the pursuit of state power through a peaceful democratic path. To this end we have continued, over the years, to build our individual parties and to reach out to the electorate. We have collectively advocated for the formal institution of the inter-party national consultative forum provided for in the law, so that rather than us talking at each other the way the President and hon. Bidandi Ssali have recently been doing, we are able to dialogue constructively and to forge a common way forward. 

We have also tried our best to put together proposals for needed political and electoral reforms so that the next elections will usher in for our country, a new political era, rather than us leaving the country to slide into the same post-election path that Kenya and Zimbabwe took, of chaos followed by power sharing between those who steal elections and the victors they steal from in those elections. Unfortunately, our overtures have not been reciprocated by the President and his government, confirming the worst of our fears.

You see, last year on the political situation we asserted, “In spite of the apparent improvements, it is now clear to us that there may have been merely a change in approach to dealing with the Opposition by those who now find the civilised suit of multiparty democracy discomforting, and that the basic goal of curtailing freedom for the Opposition remains.”

The key strategy seems to be the instilling of fear in the people, and ensuring that the Police and other state organs will be able to act violently and resolutely against the Opposition whenever directed to do so.

In Teso, Karamoja, Lango, Acholi, Kasese and in the whole country generally, the resident district commissioners and their assistants and the internal security organisation operatives (DISOs, GISOs) are vigorously mobilising for the NRM as if they are not public officials. This Parliament needs to take a hard look at the partisan conduct and interference of these people into politics. 

But most dangerous is the message emanating from the highest authority in this line. We remind you of attempts by the President to intimidate and control the Judiciary, the custodians of justice and civility, and to remove bail for treason suspects so that the Opposition and even errant NRM Members can be put out of action. (Laughter) 

More importantly, we recall the President’s utterances in Arua in February this year when he declared that - and I quote: “If you vote for Besigye you will have voted for civil war. It is a no joking matter but a serious thing that you vote for NRM.” 

Hon. Members, can anyone be surprised that some of the state security agents such as Lt Ramathan Magara, the convicted killer of two FDC supporters, look at the Opposition as traitors, deserving only death or brutal incarceration in the so called safe houses, the fascist way?

When strong radio critics of government, such as the late Kasirye William, Nankunda Muwanga or Lugonvu Vincent die mysteriously or are gunned down by killers as Tom Jjulunga was, regardless of his story, don’t we see what is coming? Should we even be bitter about the brutality of the police when this previously civil force has been transformed through fear, neglect and sectarianism, into coercive, insensitive and dispassionate force, the way an oppressive regime does? 

Hon. Members, we must also remind you of the fact that to date the President has refused to appoint a full Bench to the Supreme Court. This, we know, is partly to prevent final resolution of those political cases leveled against the FDC President, Dr Kiiza Besigye and others - cases that will be conveniently resurrected during the next election as part of the President’s strategy to victory.

Have we considered what will happen if the presidential elections are again rigged and the Supreme Court to which we must turn cannot sit because of lack of quorum; or is filled with seconded and politically-biased cadre justices, to hear our petition? 

On our part, hon. Members, we remain steadfast in our commitment to fighting for democracy, freedom, liberty, justice and the rule of law and in our unflinching belief that in the fact that sooner rather than later the people will take back their country from the hands of the gunmen. In this, we are comforted by the words of George Orwell, author of the famous Animal Farm when he said thus: “When a leader turns tyrant, it is his own freedom that he destroys.” 

Madam Speaker, the other matter that is a cause for anxiety in the governance of our country is the scourge of corruption. Right from the first State of the Nation Address in 2006 when the President declared that he would exercise zero tolerance to corruption and announced various legislative measures to underpin the stand, we stated emphatically then, and every year since, that the NRM Government can never act decisively to corruption. Time is bearing us out.

Hon. Members, in his first address to this Parliament, the key commitments the President made on the fight against corruption were: increase powers for the IGG and support to the Inspectorate of Government, the Auditor-General, Director of Public Prosecution, courts and the CID. 

He also made a promise then, to “soon” bring to Parliament, a Bill to repeal the outdated 1970 Ant-Corruption Act and replace it with a tougher new law. He also talked of bringing the Whistleblower’s Protection Bill. That was in 2006.

In 20007, buoyed by the bungled up arrest and prosecution of three former health ministers by the IGG over the GAVI fund, the President talked expansively of the actions that his Government was taking against proven corrupt persons. He heaped praises on the person of Justice Faith Mwondha, the then IGG and referred to the Bills that government was working on. 

Then in 2008, the President went completely dead on corruption. He said nothing in his State of the Nation Address. This year, the President re-emerged to declare and I quote: “During the period under review, our commitment to fighting corruption wherever it may be existing is demonstrated by the following: (1) the enactment of the National Audit Act, No.7 of 2008; (2) the establishment of a special court to try corruption cases; (3) the presentation to Parliament of the Ant-Corruption Bill, 2008; and (4) the presentation to Parliament of the Whistleblowers’ Protection Bill, 2008.” Are we back to 2006?

Hon. Members, when the President addressed Parliament, Transparency International had just pronounced Uganda the third most corrupt country in the world jointly with Cameroon that also has a life-presidency project. The World Bank had also declared Uganda the sixth worst investment destination in the world on account of many biases. 

That day too, when confronted by our Members on the Temangalo-NSSF land sale saga of hon. Amama Mbabazi, the Security Minister and NRM Secretary General, the President’s body language and his fumbling and political defence that the Opposition wanted to tema mutwe or cut off the head of the NRM, was most telling. Surely, hon. Members, any attempts by the President to fight corruption now seem to us figuratively, like a futile effort of the dog to bite its own tail! (Laughter)

For us, any serious effort to collectively fight corruption must start with a reclassification for what it is and really is – plane theft. To the best of our knowledge, no Ugandan language has an exact equivalent word for the word “corruption.” The people, therefore, remain unsure of how to view and respond to it. If it is made known to them that corruption is plain theft, glorification of the corrupt will end; the corrupt will be lynched like chicken thieves and the existing cultural, administrative and legal instruments will all be effective against corruption.

Secondly, the country must appreciate the reality that President Museveni set up the Office of the IGG and ant-corruption agencies initially to prime the image of his regime, but largely also as instruments to selectively do his will. When such agents or its head begin to threaten closer to home, they will be stopped in the tracks.

Hon. Members, the best example of this is the Inspectorate of Government and the fate of Justice Faith Mwondha as IGG. In 2007 when the IGG acted on the GAVI funds abuse that have ramifications close to the President and he loudly and encouraged her, we who watch the President knew that the IGG and her institution were marked and in real trouble.

We, therefore, at that time warned the IGG in our response to the President that: “In all this, hon. Members, we must caution the IGG. Which she and her institution were acting in good faith, they must avoid being manoeuvred into the corner of public rejection. For them, like has happened to others, those who are now pushing her forward will disown her”. I said that in this House, in 2007.

As of now, nobody, and I repeat, nobody will convince us the Opposition that the President’s mixed instruction that created gridlock in the inspectorate was not deliberate. The President is neither confused nor senile; he is deliberate and ruthlessly calculative. On corruption, hon. Members, our assertion is that this country needs a complete rethink and a reawakening.

Before I conclude, let me turn to the economy and the Prosperity-for-All programme that were the first focus and the greatest preoccupation of the President in his address to the nation this year. Since the President’s exposition on the economy was similar to the Budget Speech, the specific technical details on the economy will be responded to by hon. Oduman Okello, our Shadow Minister for Finance. Let me therefore deal only with the fundamentals of the Presidents address on these matters.

Madam Speaker, the President once again elated that our economy registered very high growth, this time despite the global economic crisis, a relationship he referred to several times in his address. As before, we congratulate the government for the said good economic performance but we once again assert that this performance is something we must not be unduly excited about.

Firstly, we have always maintained that against our abundant gifts of nature, we correct policies, adequate investments in agriculture, infrastructure and rural economy, absence of corruption that yearly sucks Shs 500 billion out of our public funds, prudent spending and an environment of liberty and freedom of all Ugandans local and Diaspora, our economy is capable of growing by 15 to 20 percent annually. A growth rate of 7 to 9 percent per annum is therefore a gross under-performance –(Interjections)– Mozambique’s growth rate is 20 percent and they are on agriculture.

Secondly, for a developing country such as ours, economic growth is only meaningful when it is about the people, directly impacts them, and secures their future. In the President’s analysis of our economy, the people are nowhere. Challenges and benefits are bout sectors and sub-sectors and their statistics and not about the people. 

Last year when the President declared our economic growth rate to be 8.9 or 9.1 percent, even when the global economic meltdown had not occurred yet, we bluntly castigated government for its continuing, “To delude itself with high growth figures generated using fancy economic calculations rather than focusing on the gaps in our economic growth that have practical meaning to our people”. 

Then, we asked whether the President was aware of the widening disparities between the rich and the poor, between urban and rural people, between commodity producers and service providers and between geographical regions of our country, particularly the Greater North verses the rest of the country.

We further asked whether the President was aware of the misery of the Ugandans who daily plod the streets of our towns in search of non-existing jobs; who walk home from work because they cannot afford transport fares; who stay in slums because they cannot afford decent accommodation; who are forced into risky relationships just to survive; and who eat “Mugongo wazi” for fish because food prices have hit the roof and are way out of their means.

Hon. Members, why has the President not talked about the challenges these Ugandans will face in the coming year when economic growth is projected to reduce to 6.0 percent? What about the impact on the people of the global economic crisis that is already here with us in spite of official attempts at denial, but whose full impact, especially higher prices and steep decline in remittance we are yet to face and suffer?

What is wrong with defining these challenges to the people and outlining to them the measures they must take and the steps government will take to address them? Is it not dishonest of Government that it paints a rosy economic picture and hides from its people the reality of hard times ahead that we surely cannot run away from?

On Prosperity-for-All, our consistent assertion is that this government cannot deliver to the poor with this programme has finally dawned on even the President. You see, in the early years of his address, the President used to confidently refer to this programme with its campaign name of Bonna Bagaggawale. This year, the nomenclature has been dropped – it being a damned reminder of a promise un-kept. 

Also, previously the target of the programme was the rapid empowerment of the more than 68 percent of our population who are subsistence producers, starting with six households per sub county – or is it per perish. This year, however Prosperity-for-All is once again being realised and is now hinged on the framework of the old failed plan for Modernisation of Agriculture (PAM).

The President in his address on Prosperity-for-All stated the following: “This programme will continue to require Government concerted intervention in the following areas: (i) holistic integrated development of agriculture and rural development; (ii) development and maintenance of infrastructure including rural national and regional roads, energy and communication; (iii) development of human resources through educations, skills and vocational training; (iv) continued peace and security for all, and good governance including the fight against corruption and rule of law”. How far this is from the Bonna Bagaggawale in his manifesto?

To us, this is a welcome admission of failure on the part of the President. More importantly, however, we see two underlying explanations and the usual duality in action by the President in this change of course.

Firstly, when the President attempted to convert NAADS into Prosperity-for-All, with its high political undertones, the donors who fund NAADS objected to the President’s blatant disregard of the NAADS Act and his attempt to breach the protocol of NAADS funding that they signed with government. 

In the usual way of doing things, attempts are now being made to sanitize the programme in public pronouncement while implementation continues in its intended form. Our simple advice to Government is that there is no gain in politicising the programme.

Secondly, with the general elections not far away, the President is not worrying about the explanation to give to the rural poor who voted for him at the last election on the false hope of instant prosperity through Bona Bagaggawale. By dropping the nomenclature, the President is repositioning himself to repackage his old promise to the gullible rural poor of ending their poverty so that they may once again vote for him. Unfortunately, as of now, the President can only run away from the failures of his programme but he has no successes to hide in!

For us, poverty and economic disparities will not be addressed by a focus on statistics and sweet rhetoric. As we counselled in 2006, the country must address the real economic challenges facing us namely: the need to shift away from dependency on donor and external resource inflows as a stimulus and even basis for development to building a sound national base through enhancing production and productivity across the economic and social spectrum and sustained savings and investments instead of the current wicked consumption; developing and implementing medium and long-time policies and programmes for coherent national development with clear goals and target; putting real money in agriculture, agro-processing and rural development to address the question of poverty. 

Unfortunately, with this government’s infatuation with growth data and foreign investors, we are unlikely to see any concrete shift in direction.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, as we conclude, we cannot help going back to the reality that the President’s address was totally lacking in the software aspect of the state of our nation. Beyond those concerns that we brought out in our reaction to the President’s address, there are real non-material issues that afflict our nation.

Hon. Members, let us ask ourselves what the blatant robbery of public funds and the social acceptance and even exaltation of those who do so hold for the future of our country. How worse off will our children who have accepted our thieving ways and will steal from their colleagues in schools and call it shopping lead this country when they take over from us? 

Where is Uganda heading when at the funeral of former Speaker of Parliament, late hon. James Wapakhabulo, a whole Bishop who should impartially minister to his flock and fight corruption stands up to declare that there was no opposition in his diocese even when his most prominent diocesan is hon. Nandala Mafabi, FDC MP and Chair of the Public Accounts Committee and then hastens to remind the President of the kitu kidogo promise of a car that he desperately needed?

Hon. Members, what about the silence of many of his collared colleagues on the grave political ills now afflicting our country: the false arrests, torture and incarceration of the innocent in safe houses, suppression of people’s rights; kiboko squad’s assault on innocent demonstrators and bystanders; wanton abuse of state power with unprecedented impunity in use of resources and deployment of kith and kin key public offices? 

What about the current balkanisation of our country and the boiling hatred amongst Ugandans whether arising from land-grab by political elites, perceived dominance of one group over the rest of the country, wicked accumulation of wealth by those in power while the rest of the country wallows in poverty, or fight over ethnic identity on account of new districts and land? What about the collapse of our common sense of belonging that in the past bound us together as one Uganda and one people? 

You see, during the UPC Obote I reign in the 1960s, Uganda was largely a very united country. Our economic performance was at the same level as those of the Asian tigers like Malaysia, Singapore and Taiwan; our government was non-corrupt, focused and non-sectarian. We had the best civil service, best education system; we had the best health services and best road infrastructure in sub Saharan Africa. We had prosperity across communities and our people were vibrant, caring, honest, patriotic, generally united and very optimistic of the future.

Hon. Members, the only major discontents then were the bitterness of the Baganda and other royalists on account of the abolition of their kingdoms that naturally generated some degree of ethnic hatred. The other discontent was the suppression of political opposition; the DP and Kabaka Yekka but even then, the ordinary Police were civil and generally neutral and did not take joy in breaking up opposition heads, limbs and rallies. There were no safe houses and arrests and detention procedures were followed. 

Yet in spite of the generally positive balance in our lives and the stable social fabric and contentment that existed then, when Idi Amin took over power in January 1971, people poured into Kampala and other centres to welcome the military coup with the hope of a real return to true liberty. As they did, except for outbursts against extremist UPC functionaries, they respected the privacy of property and the sanctity of life.

Reflecting on our circumstances now, if the Amin coup took place today, what would our people’s response be? What would happen to our country? Hon. Members, should we continue to judge the performance of this government and define what we all must do for the future of our country and children merely by rosy economic figures and selfish gains? Can we continue to bury our heads in the sand and disregard the realities of our country that we all hate to talk about but that we cannot run away from? If we sit and do nothing, how will history judge us?

Madam Speaker, hon. colleagues and fellow countrymen and women, the answers to all these questions are in your hands. I thank you for your kind attention. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for the elaborate response. At present you have both the State of the Nation Address and the reply of the Leader of the Opposition. You may wish to refer to either or both. So, I would like to ask you to do two things. One, I would want as many Members as possible to contribute to the State of the Nation Address. Those who will miss should be able to contribute to the debate on the Budget. 

To that extent, I would want to ask the Independents who want to speak on this item to register with my office; the Government Chief Whip to register those Members on his side and the Opposition Whip to register the members on your side so that we proceed in an orderly manner. Everybody will get five minutes. And as I said, those who will miss in this debate must be given an opportunity in the other debate so that everybody in this House is covered. So, I will adjourn the House to Tuesday at 2.00 o’clock. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.09 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 7 July 2009 at 2.00 p.m.) 
