Friday, 7 July 1995

The Council met at 9.30 a.m. at Parliamentary House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

The Deputy Vice Chairman, Mr Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair.

The Council was called to order.

MOTION

(Debate continued.)

MRS KIRYAPAWO KAGENI (Women Representative, Tororo): Thank you Mr Chairman. I stand to support the Motion and in supporting the Motion, I have a few observations which I wish to share with hon. Members here in this House.  I know some Members who are here, are saying that, should we turn this House into CA; while we are commenting about is what taking place in the CA? But allow me to quote the President, when he gave his Speech on page 4, I know these small books are not numbered, but it is on page 4 when he said, I quote: “And you, he said, and you, meaning we, in this House, that and you the architect of the Constitution, must add your voice of sanity to the constitutional making exercise.” It is for that point, that Members here some of us, feel that definitely, we have to add our voices on what is taking place in CA. (Applause) 

He further tells us to be vigilant, otherwise the Constitution is derailed.  It surprises me to find that some people who are in the Constitution making exercise, what they are saying makes some of us fear. When I can refer to the New Vision on 2nd - Sunday Vision, where you find somebody  - I call them our veteran politicians; discrediting a system where he has been defending for all the nine years and he threatens that if he is not given what he wants, there will be chaos.

That makes me fear, some of us who are here, we have never had the chance of going to exile and many Ugandans  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order, hon. Members.

MRS KIRYAPAWO KAGENI: And because of that, we have experienced all the hardships of chaos here in Uganda and I am sure most of the Ugandans do not have that chance, they do not have the ability, they do not have passports, they are not nationally known, they are locally known.

MR KARUHANGA: Point of information. Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  I wanted to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that one of the most dehumanising experiences you can ever come across is experience of going in exile.  This time you cross your borders and know you can no longer come back to your back to your country, you become emasculated; that is the expression I can use which is closed to dehumanising, because emasculation means that process of losing your manhood and womanhood, it is the closest that I can come to in explaining to what being in exile is about, it is better actually, to stay in the country and suffer than to go outside; because even if you get a job outside, even if you drive a nice car, even if you have good schools and you have good food, you will always be asked a question, when are you going back to your country? Our people want this job you are having and even in that seemingly comfortable circumstances, it is dehumanising enough, because you are always reminded that you do not belong here and you always look forward to the day when you can return and I tell you, all those people in exile today, if they got a chance to come, they would be happy about to do, and we should make every thing possible to fight, to make sure that our people never go back to exile again.

THE CHAIRMAN: Could you wind up, please.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Supplementary, point of information, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us wind up.

MRS KIRYAPAWO KAGENI: Mr Chairman, I said that because if those people who have ever been to exile, they know how bad it is, and yet, those who are always preaching chaos are the same people who have tasted exile life; they have homes there, then they should not be talking the way they talk, of saying, if you do not give us this, there shall be chaos.  Definitely, I know if somebody knew that you can tolerate the life back home, then somebody should not try to go to exile.  

I want all of us as Ugandans - Ugandans who cannot even cross to the nearest border country with Uganda, who remains here, who suffers under panda gari; whose wife is raped in front of him, if he is a man, whose child a girl is a raped in from of you as parents; because when there is chaos, those are the things which happen.

I appreciate the life in exile is difficult, but at the same time, I want those people to appreciate that when there is chaos the life here back home is terrible, is more than that in exile, you are always under pressure, you do not know what next; even to get what to eat is difficult, there is no body who is sympathising wit h you, at least that one who goes to exile, he has sysmpathisers, but here, you do not have any sympathiser and they know when they go to exile, when they come back, they get a package.  For those who stay here, they have never got packages.  So, that is why -(Interruption)

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Lady holding the Floor that, His Excellency, in his Communication, is aware of these particular type of people and that is why he has warned CA Delegates, who happen also to be Members of this House to be vigilant, to watch against these people, who are there, to derail the Constitution making process, the fact that these people were vigilant and they have now been marginalised and I think they will not cause chaos. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Could you wind up, hon. Member.

MRS KIRYAPAWO KAGENI:  I thank the Member for that information, but you find that these are the same people who have been supporting each other in leading this country, but have started calling others uncivilised; the same paper, that New Vision, calling each other uncivilised.  I do not see how a civilised man or woman, can decide to work with an uncivilized person for nine years; then may be you are more uncivilised than that one; because if you were civilised, you would not have accepted working with uncivilised persons.  Otherwise, if you had your own intentions of being in power and those are persons, but not to defend this Uganda. I always say that, this makes me fear and people say, eh, do you fear? Yes, I have to fear for the sake of my children. Yes, I am a mother, so we are parents here, we should put a Constitution for not ourselves, but for our children; because when you say, they talk about having multiparty, but the way you have done, Mr Chairman, you are one of those, tell everybody in that Constitution, I do not see why there should be any more quarrels that I am left out.  Why should people want to be there, and others not to be there; because when we say to go to multi-partism alone, then you would have left out those who do not wish to join multi-parties and even during multi-parties if I can inform the Members here, that even during multi-partism, we heard of abrogation of the Constitution and five cabinet Ministers were detained, and the opposition was just there, just watching, what did they do?  Nothing! They never walked out in protest, they stayed they were there.  These people stayed in prison and caused a coup, it was after that coup that is when these people left Luzira, it has become another university.  So, these are the things we should look at, when we are making - those who are making the Constitution.

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Friend holding the Floor of the House, that we, because I was in that ‘University’ of Luzira at that time, we never cause a coup, we were released by the authority on the 20th February 1971, by authority, not coup, the authority.

MRS KIRYAPAWO KAGENI: MrChairman, that is why I am saying, even with multi-partism, there is what - there is this Cabinet.  What caused those five Cabinet Ministers to go to Prison, I am sure it was disagreement within the same Cabinet; and even right now, we are seeing divisions in the multi-partism people - because otherwise, others would not be declaring their candidates -(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order, hon. Members.

MRS NAMUGENYI:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I want to inform the hon. Member speaking, that even among the NRM, there is division now.  I want again to inform her that, to associate is allowed in Uganda. We, who are pro-party, we like to associate with those whom we like to associate with politically.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MRS KIRYAPAWO KAGENI:  I am glad Mr Chairman, to announce here, that even under the Movement, I am always associating with my hon. Sister CM for Kalangala District, politically even.  I always associate with her. But what I am saying is that, what we are seeing now, that we cannot go to multi-partism immediately; even in the multi-parties themselves, there are divisions, we want to give them time, so that they sort out that divisionism within the parties.  You hear of Michael Kagwa - can I finish? (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  Hon. Member, could you wind up?

MRS KIRYAPAWO KAGENI:  Thank you Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Please, wind up.

MRS KIRYAPAWO KAGENI: Thank you Mr Chairman.  I see we are talking about tolerance, but you can even see here, people cannot tolerate each other, when we are under the Movement.  What if we go to multi-partism multi-partism and what are the safeguards these people can give me, that when they come here under multi-partism, they will not be coming here through people from the other side to cross over the other side, because that has been the trend in Uganda.  I am asking the Veterans politicians, those who have stayed in politics for many, many years, to allow new politicians also to have modern politics; every thing is being modernised; what about politics?  Should we always remain the same in politics?  Or, we should have a change - more modernising it! I think before Independence, there were not many vehicles in Kampala but today, they are many; I think that is another way of life! But if we want politics to be static, without moving from where - if these people cannot change, if they cannot change, then let them leave to the young generation to continue in politics.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR OKURUT: No, I was only giving information.

THE CHAIRMAN: Excuse me, please; he has already finished the contribution.  If you want to contribute, I will give you time.  (Interjection) No, she has finished her contribution, but if you want to contribute, I can give you time.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA (Bamunanika County, Luwero): Thank you Mr Chairman. I rise to support the Motion and I would like to contribute on two points.  I did not like to make an intervention when hon. Members were contributing, but I think there are some misleading information which was given all along since this debate started, particularly on the exercise of privatisation. 

Mr Chairman, we have already provided hon. Members the books on background to the Budget.  I hope they have and there is a very good section on privatisation to indicate that since His Excellency’s intervention regarding the restructuring of the PERD: the thing was split into two units, and since then, the idea was to increase the speed at which the exercise was being undertaken.

You may realise that following the exclusion of the Asians in 1972, quite a number of public Enterprises were left in our hands and many of them were run down due to mismanagement.  It was through this House, that we all agreed that it is important that these enterprises be privatised and some return to the former owners.  So to correct those ills, government took measures intended to improve the performance of those companies, thus the creation of enterprises Development Project, which is funded by IDA was in line to pursue that policy.  The Public Enterprises sector comprises of 107 enterprises excluding the subsidiaries as per the Statute which you all have. 

Todate, 34 public enterprises and assets have been divested; realising a total of 51.72 billion.  As of June 1995, 11 public enterprises have been offered to prospective investors amounting to Shs19 billions; 35 public enterprises are under preparation and 18 for redegration.  It is expected that during this ensuing financial year, 1995/96, many of these enterprises will be fully divested.  The funds have been mainly - there was this problem on funds; the funds have been banked in U.C.B. and the funds have been mainly used for industrial promotion and clearing of liabilities of public enterprises.  I could give some examples of those enterprises where we had even encumbrances.  The key beneficiaries of these proceeds so far, have been the Kinyara Sugar Works -(Interruption) 

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Point of clarification.  Thank you Mr Chairman. I think the issue in this House is not that we should privatise; I think the issue is that how are we doing it? What is the methodology?  The issue is lack of transparency, lack of nationalism and lack of consideration that in future, our people, our Ugandans should own the economy.  I will give an example; we are not talking that Nile Hotel should not be sold. But we are saying, when you are selling it, how are you considering the Ugandans? If you are going to sell Uganda Commercial Bank go ahead and sell it, but what alternative do you have for the people who are banking in the villages? What alternative do you have for these people who want banking services?  If the cash in circulation is Shs150 billion, which is half the total cash - the total money in supply, how are you going to handle that, if you bring in a foreign - expatriate Bank that is going to concentrate itself in the town.  

I want the hon. Minister to clarify to us, whether we are against privatisation per se, or whether we are against the methodology where Ugandans are not being given a chance, even opportunity to own their own properties.

MR MUKASA MURULI: Point of information. I want to inform the hon. Minister that while we disputing privatisation, we want to have some important essential services for our society.  For instance, the proposed sale of Post Office, it is not a bad idea, but there are several questions which have to be answered.  First of all, who is going to buy it and what interest has he?  Is he going to run the postal unit in Kalangala, his interest is to make money; he is not going to run a postal unit in Kyotera.  Can we not reserve some essential services? 

The other consideration is that, what are the interests of those people who have been in those institutions.  The other time I briefed you interest of workers in Nile Hotel and even the interests of Government.  Government is running activities in Conference Centre continuously, there is no any other alternative.  Now, when you sell Nile Hotel together with Conference Centre at exorbitant amount of money, it is not in the interest of the society.

Now, back to the post office. The post office has got ex-telecommunications; I once attended a very heated debate at International Labour Organisation, ILO. Britain has even refused to let out the ex-telecommunication and in fact, they have made a law to make it part of the military or security forces. Now here, we are a Uganda developing country, saying, we can even buy ex-telecommunication, which is essential for our security and other factors.

We are saying, privatisation is acceptable, but let us all discuss; let us be involved. There are interested parties and in case, I think with respect this is in interest of the Government.  If any thing goes wrong and in case we are all involved, we share the blame all of us, if there is credit, we share the same credit, but supposing in the long run things go bad.  Supposing, Chairman - I am finishing Mr Chairman. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order, hon. Members, please, give the information and finish.

MR MUKASA MURULI: Point of information.  We want the hon. Minister to clarify the position.  Will this privatisation be conducted in the interest of -(Applause)

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: I thank the hon. Member for the information.  But I have been really caught prematurely because I was trying to say that the key beneficiaries to these were - one of them is Kinyara works and the Rehabilitation project and also Uganda Spinning Mill, on which we had some liabilities.  Now if these funds are used in such areas.   I think it had a big impact on the economy.

Secondly, regarding the interest of Ugandans, statistics available now, indicate that most of the public enterprises so far sold, have been bought by Ugandans, e.g. lake Victoria Bottling Company, TUMPECO, Rock Hotel, Margarita, Mountain Moroto Hotel, Lira Hotel, Mount Elgon Hotel, Acholi Inn and quite a number of others.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order, hon. Members.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  As regarding Nile Hotel, here Nile Hotel was sold, and it is being rehabilitated; those who are rehabilitating it, are making monies better than which we were making through this.  Instead of subsidising these services, let those who can do business out of them and offer better service run them.  What we cannot do, which is beyond our control, is how does this person use his profits; what he earns?  The obligation he has is to pay what he signs for and to invest it in those areas which we agreed upon and signed.  

Yesterday, there were some members who were contributing, saying that, he was collecting money, every day, every two hours, take it to a certain room - even they know a certain room.  I hope he is safe, and they fear that they converted it into hard currency.  I think in liberalised economy, as it is now, there is no way we can control, how he deals with what he has earned. What we should watch, has he paid what he agreed for?  Secondly, has he invested as it was agreed? 

CAPT. GASATURA KAINGANA: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I want to seek clarification from the hon. Minister who says rather than subsidise Nile Hotel why not give it to some businessmen, who in fact, make better profit. Was it subsidy to Nile Hotel when owned by Uganda Government, when they were making $.3 million dollars a year as the then hon. Prime Minister Adyebo informed this House sometime back? Nile Hotel was making Shs3 million and Sheraton Shs10 million, was that a subsidy? Where is subsidy today when we owe property to some foreign investor?

MR NDEGE: As investors, we as shareholders, we said, let us put the risk to the private individual and when we look around, really other than Nile Hotel, there are so many good Hotels coming up and this I this is from a point of privatisation.  You look at Imperial Hotel, you look at all other Hotels which are coming up. If Nile Hotel is inefficient, the others will take over and will die a natural death, and the one to loose is the one who invested.  That is the theory of privatisation.  As far as creation of jobs is concerned, you cannot see it over night, it grows like a mushroom.  People are putting up industries everyday and we should give it a time - chance for it to take root.

When you look at Government, has put more than 100,000 people are out of work. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ndege, you are now contributing.  Please wind up.

MR NDEGE: When we look at Government itself, it is putting people out of work; we cannot blame others for reducing an over staffed position. I think we should take these in mind.

Hon. Minister, wind please.  Order, could you wind up.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Hon. Chairman, we may not only dwell on that, but I think I will have to bring more statistics regarding Nile Complex, so that we become satisfied.  But when we are talking games of this exercise, we should not look just point out just one enterprise; there are so many other games.  For instance, Lake Victoria Bottling Company as I have told you, reduced its work force, of course, but since then, it has increased its capitalization to 1.8 million crates per annum to the present, from 1.8 crates to 4 million crates; and they have increased the salaries of the workers - have also been increased substantially and more workers have been recruited.  

Take Hima Cement Factory.  After the sell of Hima Cement Plant, some workers were laid off but production was increased by 5 fold and now the production currently is at 500 tonnes.  So these are other gains which come in increasingly.  We recruit.  Secondly, while some are losing jobs of a certain category, then other skilled jobs are being crated.

THE CHAIRMAN: Would you like to take the information.

MR ONGOM:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I am giving information in relation to Hima Cement Factory. I am giving information to the hon. Minister about Hima Cement Factory which was a factory belonging to Uganda Cement Industry.  Now, when this company was divested, a lot of mistakes were made in the divesture exercise and these mistakes were even accepted by the Ministry concerned.  The mistakes cost UCI more than a billion shillings. What happened was that as the negotiation was going on, and it was decided to offer the enterprise to a company.  In good faith, the management allowed somebody from the buyers to go to the factory to see what was going on.  When they were there, they spread rumours that the factory was being vandalised. It was not the case.  Because of these rumours, the Ministry of Finance, instead of checking first whether this was true, directed that the factory should be immediately given to the buyer.  This was contrary to the agreement.  The agreement was that they were to pay at least 75 percent of the amount agreed before the factory could be handed over but what they had paid was less than 50 per cent.  Now, when this was going on, UCI had negotiated a loan - fuel which is very important for the running of the industry from Total which was nearly half a billion shillings worth of fuel on credit and of course, with the loss of some other materials on credit from suppliers, these amounted to over 600,000 million shillings.  Now the condition of sale was that you handed over everything to the buyer and the buyer was not responsible to pay any debts.  

As soon as the Ministry directed that the company be given over, the whole thing was given over in one day over night with all the things that were acquired on credited, which of course, UCI have to pay.  The company took over and sat on the agreement until they dragged their feet.  Of course, using now the materials that were acquired by UCI on credited to producing more than before but these materials were already in the factory and UCI would have done the same anyway.  Now, the company is left with paying all these debts.  The buyer is not responsible and they are now using the money which earning from the production with the material that was bought by the company to repay and this is what we are being proud about Mr Chairman.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Yes, it has been very informative but the factory now is producing at a higher capacity and within two months it will be producing more than what it is producing now which was not there before.  Secondly, where there are some obligations, all these are being taken care of because in some cases, in some of these - there are some government liabilities.  

So, whatever liabilities are left, will be really cleared.  It depends on the time framework.  I think winding up on this subject of privatisation, one thing we should look into, is how are we benefiting from this exercise?  How is it being done?  It is being done transparently to enable those who have better management and capacity to run, to take over those enterprises.  Whoever wishes even those who have not been disposed of, is free to apply.  

Secondly, what we are looking for, can these enterprises be run better than they have been running so that we get more production to benefit the economy; more people could be also employed, though, the structure could change.  We could lose five or ten porters and maybe recruit five clerks.  It is just restructuring because we are in a transitional period.  You cannot remain static.  Thirdly, that these people, have they capacity even to invest in other enterprises which hitherto we could not invest into.  So, because this is going to go on and on, winding up a point which I would like to comment is that of regional imbalance development. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, I raise a very important question for the Minister to answer and this is the Statutory requirement of the Minister for Finance to report every six months to this House.  I asked the Minister why has he taken so long to report and to show the House precisely when he is going to report in accordance with law.  The Minister has not answered.  Is it in order for him to actually refuse to answer?  (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members there were two important issues raised, in fact about three to the Minister.  There was a question asked as to how many new jobs, if any, had been created since privatisation took effect.  I think as hon. Member asked how many people had been displaced to date and how many new jobs had been created for the Minister to answer and then, two, this time of reporting, the Member would like to know.  I think just those questions and wind up because you are attracting so many. (Applause)

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, in Parliamentary Procedures, there are what we could call substantial questions, for which I need to do homework to show how many jobs have been created, how many people have lost and in what category?  I am willing to report to the House.  That is one. Two; regarding the report Mr Chairman, I could not ignore the hon. Member.  I had said that maybe it was just an oversight because we have a lot on which we could report and I promised that I am coming with a report in course of this Session.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, there are so many of you who would like to contribute and according to our Law of Procedure, each Member should take a maximum of ten minutes but as you noted a Member can take more than 20 minutes and therefore, depriving others of contribution.  We have very little time.  I would like everybody to contribute but we have very little time.  So, please restrict to not more than 10 minutes.  

MRS RHODA KALEMA: But as you see the great in the House, in this Communication from the Chair, is it possible that in your wisdom, you could consider a Motion to suspend this and we go to the Vote on Account and we continue next week. (Applause)  In which case, if -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order!  I think the point which hon. Gad Gasatura raised is important and if our procedure allows us to be flexible, I see no problem but I have also to urge you that we have so many, we have a lot of work ahead of us here in this House but let us see how we can proceed.  Hon. Rhoda Kalema.  Procedure from hon. Abu Baker Mayanja.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Mr Chairman, I wanted to suggest that we could cover more during the time to the contribution of an hon. Member if he is not interrupted by points of information, point of what ---so that he makes his speech and whoever wants to make a point, makes a contribution.

THE CHAIRMAN: Very good.  Thank you very much.  In fact, that is the better procedure I was trying to insist on, hon. Rhoda Kalema.

MRS KALEMA (Kiboga County): Thank you Mr Chairman.  I support the Motion.  I thank His Excellency, the President for the very good communication which he delivered to this House on the occasion of the opening of the 9th Session of the NRC which is the last Session in this interim parliament.  I understand to cut my contribution short for the benefit of others.  So, I will really be as brief as I can.  I consider myself very fortunate, that once again I have been a Member of an interim parliament.  I was a Member of the interim parliament of 1979 to 1980 and I am mentioning that - because I want to compare that period with the period we are just ending now.  The NCC - National Consultative Council of 1979 to 1980 was formed by the liberators, by the UNLF when they ousted Idi Amin. When they got here, after a few months, something like to about two or three months, they decided also to expand the NCC. They expanded the NCC by asking District Councils each to nominate two or three members of the stayees. I was a Stayee.  Members were to apply but very few people know about this.  I had people who were Members of Kampala City Council who asked me whether I would like to apply.  I was so concerned that after Idi Amin’s era, it was a must for us to have a stable government; so I applied and I was picked among the three in Kampala.  Kampala was represented by three.  So, that is how I came to this House.  

Now, how does that relate or compare with the present interim parliament - the NRC of today. Without using the same procedure, but with the same idea, that people who stayed here, should also join the parliament - the NRM Government also decided to expand the NRC in 1989.  It is clear to all of us that they started with 38 and when the expansion was made in 1989, a method of election by Electoral Colleges - colleges of the NR System brought the expanded Members of the NRC.  It was much criticised that it was not democratic; correct it was not democratic but it was the best that could be realised and I remember even the foreign embassies after or at the end of it, they accepted that although it is not as democratic as they would expect but it was the best that could be realised in the circumstances because there was no money to carry out the general elections. 

So, I am very grateful for the work that has been achieved by the present interim parliament and when I compare this with the NCC of 1979 to 1980, I am extremely grateful.  I will give one example that then soon after we were trying to build up the country, to build up the country, to build up the parliament, this parliament was frustrated by lack of quorum.  As soon as we were about to delete a bad decree which Amin had created, and certain interested groups wanted those decrees to remain.  They would leave, most of them would leave and one remaining would remind the chairman that there is no quorum.  Then we would adjourn.  This went on until the period that had been agree upon by the Moshi Conference.  This Moshi Conference is the one which brought here the NCC, that we will have elections after two years and given the mode of the elections where under multi-parties or not would be decided after two years. As most of you are aware, the multi-partists could not wait for this, they frustrated the vote.  I have already mentioned it and we had a - the interim parliament had a very short life and what followed was chaos.  

I am comparing that with what we have here.  An interim parliament of nine years is a record and here, I wish to congratulate the president, to congratulate NRM, to congratulate you Members of NRC for what -(Applause) has been achieved as an interim Parliament and to keep the country together as an interim government in nine years.  In addition to that I am extra grateful that with this expansion of NRC, the NRM thought it fit to include women to come and be part and parcel in the Legislature of this country.  In the NCC, the NRM thought it fit to include women to come and be part and parcel in the Legislature of this country.  In the NCC, by the way I was the only woman here.  Possibly other women applied in their different districts but they were not picked, they were not successful.  Now, when I look at the number of women which has been made able by the good far sightedness of NRM to know that women are not just part of development of a country but they are fundamental; that their leadership is fundamental.  It has made a lot of difference and a lot of impact not only in parliament but in all spheres of development in our country.  So, I am extremely grateful and I know this has a great dividence.  

However, I have a word of warning to my fellow women.  My fellow women who are in parliament and elsewhere, I would like to realise that we are not here particularly the women - if you allow me to say - women who have come as representatives of their districts, a formula that was specially tailored by NRM.  You are not here by accident or by privilege.  You are here as a responsibility to our community.  I would like you go beyond this House, the life of this NRC and of course, most of you are already aware that in the new constitution, it is being provided for that once again all districts will have a woman representative.  Please, take this work seriously.  We realise that it is a duty and not just to be hon. Members. How can you be hon. Member when you cannot do any service. I think the greatest honour in life is to be a servant. (Applause)  Is to serve other people.  

I would like to remind my fellow women; Mr Chairman, allow me, that the struggle for women to be emancipated, started quite a long time ago.  It was really supported by the former leaders but unfortunately during the case of Amin, and Obote II, it as suffocated until the NRM restored it or uncovered that development that was going on.  Allow me to read just a short text of a speech that I gave in 1980 when I was a Deputy Minister of Culture and Community Development.  I discovered this only several months ago and I was surprised to see that what I said then, was still very relevant today.  I was talking to a conference for women.  

As a way back as 1958, for instance, Uganda Council of Women started on a long struggle for the status and equal rights for women with men in this country.  The Conference sent questionnaire all over the country at all the then existing women organisations.  There were well responded to and the result was the setting up of a sub-committee on the status of women.  I was the Secretary to this Sub-Committee.  The Uganda Council of Women untiring consulted all political and religious leaders in the country at progressive stages stating their willingness to participate in the life of the country.  In April, 1961, they sent a memorandum to the Archbishop of the Church of Uganda asking for the revision of marriage laws.  On 26th of May 1961, five women met the first Prime Minister of Uganda.  The late Ben K. Kiwanuka and among other issues, they asked for representation at the constitutional conference in London in 1961.  

You can imagine that as long ago as that, women wanted to take part even in the constitutional making. This time there was no need for women to have to ask for that.  In fact, I have been assuring the women in the C.A. that the men in this House were very strong on including women in the C.A. per each district.  In August 1963, the then President Obote, announced a commission to look on the status of women, married women to be set up and the rest of it.  This say it just for the benefit of the women here to known that there has been a struggle to see that women emancipate and help others.  The other point which I have to touch on -(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Could you wind up hon. Member.

MRS KALEMA: While I wind up, I wish to also mention the - or to thank this NRM Government for the restoration of traditional leaders and their assets.  (Applause) Therefore, the repealing Article 118 of 1967.  I do not need to say more about it because this House was part and parcel to see that this restoration was done.  We who believe in monarchies and traditionally have lived with them, we found that NRM fulfilled a very important point of the Ten Point Programme and this created a great deal of appeasement and peace and stability and good will among a quarter of the people of this country. 

I end by just mentioning about the constitutional making. The constitutional making is another success of the NRM.  NRM promised this when they were still in the bush and it has been fulfilled. I wish also to thank all the countries which have made it possible for the constitution to be made because financial-wise because it has taken a lot of money for such a long time since 1990. So, It is my hope and I appeal to Members here that the work that has been done should be really upheld by us as responsible people; that we should not expect that democracy is a democracy is of who wants it to believe that democracy.  there is no democracy of the minority.  A democracy, from what I understand is the democracy of the majority.  We did not get the federo, we, Baganda who wanted it.  the very federal we wanted because of democracy and all other decisions have been decided along consensus and a democratic vote.  

The corruption which the president touched on is still a cancer in our society. It is all over.  I remember I was a civil servant myself in the 50s and 60s and I remember a Permanent Secretary was immune to corruption. That is why they were called Permanent Secretaries.  They stayed in the Ministry for a long time.  But today what do we see? Permanent Secretaries are in court.  There is even a late Permanent Secretary; after he had failed to account for the funds of his ministry before the PAC, a lot of several millions, even after his death, more money was found to be missing.  This man was already dead, we had no one to trace it.  He could not be brought back.  

So, it is my hope that when we start a new leaf of life, with a new constitution, this should be closely watched by us the leaders. It is put in the Constitution - good provision for the IGG’s office will be more facilitated.  There is the Leadership Code which also is going to look into all the lives of us the leaders and there is the provision of recall from presentation from all areas and all levels so that is possible that leaders -(Inaudible) themselves properly and they do not live on the funds of the country.  Mr Chairman, I end here and I support the Motion.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes.

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, looking on the Order Paper today, we have an important Motion to follow for the House resolve itself into a Committee of Supply which is very important that we get into today to permit government to have some funds to operate. At the same time Communication from the Chair for any parliament is the one time when the Chairman does and did touch just about every issue open to him, some would say - under the sun.  

I would like to move, therefore, and do move that under the rules of procedure, Rule No.10(2), I quote: “The Council may, by a specific vote determine to proceed to any of the items we may want to tend of this Section out of the regular order on a Motion which may be made without notice and shall then take precedence of all other business and Communication from the Chair ordinarily would be No.2 after Administration of Oath which we are having right now.” I move, therefore, that we suspend debate on Communication from the Chair and move to the next Motion on the day’s business Committee of Supply and we return to debate on Communication From the Chair for at leat another two days thereafter.  I beg to move Mr Chairman.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Seconded.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION

Item 4:

MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, ENTANDIKWA (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, I would like to move that the National Resistance Council do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for the consideration and approval of the Supplementary estimates of the Revenue and expenditure for the fiscal year 1994/95.  I beg to move.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Proceed, hon. Minister.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, we have already circulated the supplementary Schedule No.1 and No.2.  The Supplementary Schedule No.1 of 1994/95 before you reflects the revised estimates from various votes and heads for the year 1994/95. Though government expenditure for the year must be limited by the approved estimates, the regulations on Supplementary expenditure under the Public Finance Act allow the Minister for Finance and Economic Planning to raise additional expenditure for essential government services. 

I would like to inform the hon. Members that the amounts appearing on Column of Supplementary are a result of authorised expenditure by the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Planning to cover unforeseen activities which have to be financed during the course of the year.  Hon. Members may be aware that government has had to spend more on particularly the following services; namely, security, famine relief, national fuel reserves, facilitation of the president, vice president, vice chairman and newly appointed ministers, improvement of water, transport, capitalization of UCB and National Medial Stores, Public Administration, Medical Services and a Deposit Insurance Fund.  

In light of that, we could or the Minister could not avoid spending more than what had earlier been approved. It is to that purpose that we have to consider this to clear way for the voting of accounts.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)


COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

SUPPLEMENTARY RECURRENT EXPENDITURE, 1994/1995

VOTE 001 - OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

(Question proposed.)

MR WASSWA NKALUBO: Mr Chairman, as the Minister of Finance is requesting for the provision of this amount, the Minister should be aware that over a period - from the year 1989/90, he had excess expenditure, excess other than the supplementary one which was raised by the Auditor General of which the Public Accounts Committee advised him that under this Vote he had excess expenditure which required regularisation which he has not done.  For several subsequent years, it has been exceeding.  This is an estimate; an additional estimate.  It is not the actual but for the subsequent years, after he has got the approval, it does not bring Schedules 2 to indicate the actual amount he has spent.  As much as he is requesting us to approval this amount, this is not the actual expenditure. This is also an estimate because as much he is telling us that is what requesting us to approval this amount, this is not the actual expenditure.  This is also an estimate because as much he is telling us that is what he is telling us that that is what he is going to spend as 30th of June, 1995, he has not compiled his accounts.  Now he should come back and tell us the excess expenditure.  The Auditor General has been complaining that the Minister for Finance has refused to come to this House for approval.  Now, as much as we are going to approve this one, I would request that before we approve, let him bring the excess expenditure which he has incurred without the authority of this House.  Otherwise, this one is just - we are wasting our time if he does not come back when he has incurred on top of what we have approved.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, the hon. Member is aware that in normal circumstances, this should have been cleared earlier than today and the Financial Year normally closes at the end of June 30th and therefore, one could not give actual expenditure until we have closed the year.  So, the point he is making is pertinent but the time framework has to be taken into account. (Interruption)

MR KANYOMOZI: Mr Chairman, on item 7010, I have always wondered (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, we are still under Vote 001 - Recurrent Expenditure.

MR KANYOMOZI: Yes, that it where I am; Item 7010.

THE CHAIRMAN: Continue.

MR KANYOMOZI: Mr Chairman, I have always requested and I have always wanted to know this programme.  The details of it under that Item. It is called Committees and Councils.  Up to now, I have never got any good explanation from the Minister for Finance.  I tried to ask the Members of the Committee of the Parliament to give me this information because that is where all the money is going; and I would like to know Mr Chairman, before we approve extra funds, whether that information can be given.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the details are in the book, hon. Minister.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Well, though the question was time barred because this Vote has already been approved.  Item 7010 - Committee, Councils, etc. normally incurs because these take care of the mainly unforseen meetings and committees created for the good of running of this country.  They happen to refer to the President and once it is held, we have to meet these expenses.  It is only that after a long time, it is necessary to increase its estimates in future so that we do not have these regular excess expenditure to come for supplementary.

MR KANYOMOZI: Mr Chairman, the explanation the Minister is giving is even more confusing because surely the committees and councils are known and the way he is going around it that it is an expenditure which just occurs, it becomes even more meaningless.  Generally, on the General Vote, this is an element which appears to be going up and up every year without being stopped and unless it is checked it could lead to misuse of funds and misallocation of resources.  Surely, the committees in the Office of the President must be known. Equally, the councils which are attended must be known.  I just cannot get the explanation as being conclusive. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information. (Interruption)- being stated that increased activities from security and these are the committees that you cannot foresee.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think that gives you the explanation.  It is unforeseen security activities which had to be handled by the country and as you know before security you cannot do anything and hence this account allocation.

AN HON. MEMBER: Hon. Kanyomozi’s concern is 7010 and it is stated there really - is to increase board expenses.  That is what he is concerned about.  On security, it is 300,000,000 but this one is 648,000,000 he is talking about.  There are two different items

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, if you look at 001 - President Office for those who have - this is on page 7 because many of you seem to be on the summary.  We are now on the details.  001 is President’s Office under which there is Item 7010 and if we go across, you see increased provision by 300,000,000 and then approved provision is also solved and then at the end there are some remarks to show and that is increased activities on Security.  So, I do not see why - that is what I said when I was answering that this is due to unforeseen commitments of councils and committees which sit as a result of - for the good of running this country and security is one of them.  Thank you.

MR NKALUBO WASSWA: As he clarifies as he comes to this figure, which is being indicated as supplementary because when I go into the details, I fail to see how he comes to this figure.  When he comes to this detail, this figure of 407,089; how do you come to that figure?

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  There is wrong arithmetic here.  The figure we are asking for that item is 300,000,000 and down;  total increased provision. 407 first on 00 Item for programme, again 701 but Programme 07 - Security  Service.  The provision is 407, then plus this one 300; what does that come to? Because there are two provisions.  The ones in million with the item we have just discussed and the other is the one which was - on no question was put and total down is Shs4, 167,405.

THE CHAIRMAN: Excuse me hon. Members.  Please, let us go back to the query.  Item 7010 which is being queried.  If you look at that one hon. Members, you find among budgeted or which is being requested of 300,000,000 but down there take note of Luwero. Minister of State for Luwero, Sub-Programme 01 Management and you go down on your right - Increased Provision but they do not end but that figure is 107 and 107 if you add to 300, it comes to 407 but you can cross-check by adding those figures of Item 1060 which is 14310 and you add Item 1080 which 10551.  If you add those figures, it will come to 107 and if add 107 to 300, it comes to 407.  If I could clarify.  I now put the question that a total sum of Shs407, 089,000 under Vote 001 - Office of the President be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 002 - STATE HOUSE

(Question proposed.)

MR ONGOM: On this Vote I notice Item 6040 - increased Presidential donations which I think is 600,000,000.  Already approved on that vote was 1,258,000,000 and we are being asked to approve yet another 600,000,000 shillings for increased presidential donations.  My concern, Mr Chairman, is that perhaps in the future we should be given a bit more details on these donations so that we know where these donations go and possibly the spread in the country because what one hears when the president is in various places, he announces various donations and you hear in some places the donations are very high, in some places the donations are small and we do not know under what criteria these decisions are made.  Is it possible for us to get some details on this?

MR TUMUBWEINE:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, it would be impossible and almost impracticable for all the donations that the president gives countrywide to be put on a sheet of paper and be brought here.  Actually what exists in the accounts and some of us who have been that they are even and they actually give details of the various donations which some of them are so small and some are very big.  But I think it every time we are going to Debate this kind of thing here.  However, I think the spread could be easily availed.

DR TIBERONDWA: Point of information. Mr Chairman let me speak in my capacity as chairman of the Committee.  Office of the President and State House.  My Committee has met and we have sent a message to the Chief Accounting Officer of the State House requiring him at the appropriate moment to be able to brief the committee on the allocations of these donations and I think when we come to this House during the main debate, we will be able to brief the House on how this money has been allocated to various groups and organisations and how much is outstanding.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the chairman of the Committee has already handled it.

MR KANYOMOZI: Gifts and donations are normally from what one hears on radio; there is when the president donates and when - in normal circumstances when a president donates, then say the government of Uganda or the President’s Office and if he donates as an individual, the two should be separated but my own feeling is that there is confusion because at times, when you went to Mbarara for example, you gave a donation on behalf of Parliament, you gave a donation on your own behalf and your family as you said.  

What confuses me in most cases and what I am seeking clarification of, is for example, when we hear that President Museveni has given the Bishop of West Ankole a car; or Mufti or the Archbishop of somebody.  Is that car from Mr Museveni, the President or is it from the President in which case it is accounted for here.  We need to know this before the chairman of the committee stands up to answer.  We need to know this because there is Museveni the person, Museveni the President and the amount we vote for here.  The two should be separated because we do not want them mixed up.

DR TIBERONDWA: As far as I know, from what we have been doing in the committee dealing with these donations.  Well, the donations we deal with are really from President Museveni, as President of Uganda, not from Museveni as a person.  (Applause) The only thing which I think comes from Yoweri Museveni as a person are some of these cows. He gives cows one or two.  That is what we do in Ankole.  We usually give a cow to a friend.  (Laughter)  Those do not come into our books but for these vehicles to the bishops, even to the scouts, these come from the President in his capacity as President of Uganda.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.  The total sum of shs4,167,405,000 under Vote 002 - State House be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 003 - OFFICE OF THE VICE PRESIDENT

(Question proposed.)

MR KANYOMOZI: Discussing money, I do not know whether we hove a quorum to proceed with the business.  It seems we have no quorum.

THE CHAIRMAN: The question is that the total sum of Shs150, 000,000 under VOTE 003 - OFFICE OF THE VICE PRESIDENT BE PROVIDED FOR

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 004 - OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER

(Question proposed.)

MR MARWAS: Mr Chairman, unlike Vote 002, I know the Prime Minister has gone out of Kampala to prepare some pledges which money has ever bee paid but then I do not see the reflection here.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, what is reflected here is I explained before is what has been paid but which has not been approved in this House at the beginning of the Financial Year.  Now if the Office of the Prime Minister finds that in this Estimates, next Financial Year, can meet all its obligations, then there was no need to explain that matter at that material time.  The question will be pertinent when we come to the Financial Estimates for 1995/96.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of shillings 42,180,000/- under Vote 004 of Office of the Prime Minister be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 006 - FOREIGN AFFAIRS

(Question proposed.)

MR KABUGO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. This Item that we are discussing and for which you seek approval of this House has no any explanation.  It is just a clear Figure of Shs1, 028,000,000, no corresponding information of how it came about.

THE CHAIRMAN: There are two reasons given there in the explanation.  I now put the question that the total sum of shs1,028,000,000 under Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs  be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 007 - CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of shillings 250,000,000 under Vote 007 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 008 - FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING

(Question proposed.)

MR MWONDHA: May I know from the Minister what this country is ensuring?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, the provision was that there was an insurance which we had actually passed in this House. Here we were required to deposit some money in Bank of Uganda.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of shillings 2,400,000,000/= under Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 012 - LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

(Question proposed.)

DR ORYEM: I am seeking an information from the Minister of Finance whether there was need to really purchase another vehicle when this Minister was already a hon. Minister and had co-owned the vehicle.  Was it necessary to purchase another vehicle?

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Yes, it was necessary.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question hat the total sum of shs36, 000,000/= under Vote 012 - Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 015 - NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

(Question proposed.)

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, kindly I would like the Minister to clarify because it appears what was approved which was amended a few days ago by letter is more than what is here.  So, there should have been no supplementary in my opinion.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, it is true there is some corrections which are made around this item Vote 015 - National Assembly.  The Budget Provision remains the same - 4067 but the revised Estimates come to Shs7, 612,091.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO: Mr Chairman, this is what I was hinting to the Minister. Hon. Minister this is Schedule No.1 which we were considering.  That one is normally taken care of what hon. Ndege is bringing up.  That is where the Minister is failing to bring in the action.  This is another provision.  So, we do not need to delete this because this is another provision depending on the trend of things.  But if we are to go in that we have revised today, we amend; I think we should keep this figure.  When we have compiled the actual expenditure, we come up with Schedule No.2 which will indicate what you have spent.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Definitely we are obliged to produce the Expenditure.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs155, 500,000/= under Vote 015 of National Assembly be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 017 - AUDIT GENERAL’S OFFICE

(Question proposed.)
 
MR KABUGO: There were some errors in compiling this Report, and this figure which the Minister is submitting.  Is this the first time for us to go by the original? Can we not correct the error Mr Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Kabugo, with due respect, when the Minister last stood he promised that he is going to bring the details. That is why I put the question.

(Question proposed.)

MR ONGOM: Mr Chairman, there is this explanation which is throughout the request for supplementary.  There is obvious that we ask for supplementary because of the activities.  I thought we should get a bit more specific reason why we ask for supplementary rather than the activities as a general reason.  In any case that is why we are asking for supplementary because there has been activities.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, as hon. Members may notice in the course of this Financial Year, I am bound to Lay on the Table a number of audited Reports which ave been in arrears.  There is a very substantial improvement in the auditing and therefore, in the activities.  (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs170, 000,000/= under Vote 017 of Audit Department be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 018 - MINISTRY OF INFORMATION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of shillings 85,000,000/= under Vote 018 - Ministry of Information be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 020 - LABOUR AND SOCIAL WELFARE

(Question proposed.)

AN HON. MEMBER: I want the Minister to clarify to us, what are these materials?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING ( Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): This is just a technical language. There is a no way we could put food and what have you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs600, 000,000/= under Vote 020 - Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 021 - MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs16, 300,000,000/- under Vote 021 - Ministry be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 022 - MINISTRY OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of shillings 454,632,000/= under Vote 022 - Ministry of Internal Affairs be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 023 - MULAGO HOSPITAL

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose the question that the total sum of shs1, 000,000,000/= under Vote 023 - Mulago Hospital complex be provided for.

MR KALULE: I am disturbed by this very big Figure of 1 billion, whereas in other cases -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, I am saying the Minister is requesting for 1 billion shillings.  Can he inform this House whether this amount takes into consideration that Mulago is now cost sharing?  If so, how much has been collected in the cost sharing?  The information I have is that Mulago has been able to collect over 600 million shillings as cost sharing and this has to gone to Consolidated Fund and has been used at source.  I do not know when it was providing for this. He was aware of that amount which has been collected and used as at source; and if so, can he tell us what provision, what amount he expects to have been contributed patients and whether it cannot off-set against this figure which is being requested for as supplementary.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, the funds which I am requesting for here as indicated, as in respect of increased rates and maintenance charges.  The funds he is talking about cost sharing really go to improve on services and it is shared among the consultants, staff and what have you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1, 000,000,000/= under Vote 023 - Mulago Hospital Complex be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 024 - MAKERERE UNIVERSITY

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total of shs946, 455,000/= under Vote 024 - Makerere University be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 029 - MINISTRY OF NATURAL RESOURCES

(Question proposed.)

MR ELYAU: Mr Chairman, I wanted to find out why the supplementary is bigger than even the approved Budget initially.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, I share the view of the hon. Member; but according to remarks here this is in respect of national fuel reserves.  When the level is low you have to fill it up for the good of the whole country.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs3, 028,464,000/= under Vote 029 - Ministry of Natural Resources be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 038 - UGANDA POLICE

(Question proposed.)

MR MARWAS: Mr Chairman, the problem here is that it is well known that the Local Defence Unit does not feature in any of our statutory books.  Now here we are spending money on an illegal entity.  I want to know from the Minister how he gets money from the Consolidated Funds to use for a body that is not legalised in the country.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, there is a Police Act and Provisions governing the Police Regulations.  The Police has a right to deploy any of the citizens who can assist the Police to keep law and order in the country. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs950, 200,000/= under Vote 038 of Uganda Police Force be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 039 - UGANDA PRISONS SERVICES

(Question proposed.)

AN. HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, I would like the hon. Minister of Finance to explain to the House the usefulness of the Prisons Farms, because I can see this money is for buying rations.  Thus food; but we have got plenty of land on a lot of Prison Farms and if they could be utilised, I think government would spend less money on buying food.  But many prisons farms are not being capitalised.  They are not given enough money to produce.  But for example, in my area of Nyabwishe Prisons, because the officer in charge is a very had working person, they produce surplus of food and people come from Kampala to get food from there.  So, if all Prisons Farms were working hard, I think they would be spending less money on food rather than spending so much.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs350, 000,000/= under Vote 039 - Uganda Prisons Service be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 052 - LIRA DISTRICT

(Question proposed.)

MR KABUGO: Mr Chairman, why is it that Lira has nothing to justify an additional 220 million shillings and above.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs225, 000,000/= under Vote 052 of Lira District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 055 - JINJA DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of shs200, 000,000/= under Vote 055 - Jinja district be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 072 - MOYO DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs200, 000,000/- under Vote 072 - Moyo District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 074 - NEBI DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of shs 30,000,000/- under Vote 074 - Nebbi District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

 VOTE 076 - SOROTI DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs405, 000,000/= under Vote 076 - Soroti District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE 

Head 101 - Office of the President

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of shs279, 212,000/= under Head 101 - Office of the President be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 102 - STATE HOUSE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of shillings 883,894,000/= under Head 102 - State House be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Head 103 - Office of the Vice President

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the sum of shs 203,262,000/= under Head 103 - Office of the Vice President be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 104 - OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of shs157, 819,000/= under Head 104 - Office of the Prime Minister be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 105 - MINISTRY OF PUBLIC SERVICE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of shs119, 712,000/= under Head 105 - Ministry of Public Service be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 106 - FOREIGN AFFAIRS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of shs1, 487,000,000/- under Head 106 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 107 - MINISTRY OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of shs266, 600,000/= under Head 107 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 108 - FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of shs8, 432,314,000/- under Head 108 - Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 109 - TRADE AND INDUSTRY

(Question proposed.)


AN HON. MEMBER:  which was to be done with a view to selling them off, and Yet here we are being asked to provide funds to buy more vehicles. Now, it seems to me contradictory. Can some explanation be made?

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  I think it is quite a general question, but I will answer also in a general manner.  Much as there is an exercise of selling the vehicles, some departments will be left a skeleton of vehicles for each. Secondly, there were some reshuffles recently and new appointments, there was need to provide ministers some form of transport.  What they are selling are not the new vehicles, but those which mechanically government cannot run.  So, there is an exercise of selling and buying.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of shs303, 000,000 under Head 109 - Ministry of Trade and Industry be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

 HEAD 112 - LAND HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs43, 000,000/- under Head 112 - Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 113 - MINISTRY OF EDUCATION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of shs71, 733,000/= under Head 113 - Ministry of Education and Sports be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 115 - NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs97, 936,000 under Head 115 - National Assembly be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

 HEAD 116 - MINISTRY OF WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1, 494,882,000/= under Head 116 - Ministry of Works, Transport and Communications be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 118 - MINISTRY OF INFORMATION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of shs34, 541,000/= under Head 118 - Ministry of Information be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 120 - MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND SOCIAL WELFARE

(Question proposed.)

MR KABUGO: Mr Chairman, thee remarks we have here is that additional funds were sought to purchase, fullstop.  What are we purchasing?

THE CHAIRMAN: The answer is that they are buying vehicles.  I now put the question that the total sum of Shs111, 900,000/= under Head 120 - Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 121 - MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

(Question proposed.)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, from information that we have, I think, Defence left Bulange sometime back.  So, what was this money for renovating Bulange when they have already left.  Also, I think, there was some rent involved; is this appearing in the Recurrent, I did not quite see it in the Recurrent. (Interruption)

MR RWABITA: Point of information. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Mr Chairman, when the Bulange was handed over to Buganda Government or the Kabaka, there were a lot of items not yet completed and the company Roko why had the contract completed the works and even left there some building materials and their labour was costed at this; so, this is our final account on Bulange House, for Roko, and therefore, the Government had to pay Roko for the work and materials left there.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs326, 869,000/= under Head 121, Ministry of Defence be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 122 - MINISTRY OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1, 347,102,000/= under Head 122 - Ministry of Internal Affairs be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 125 - MINISTRY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs96, 516,000/= under Head 125 - Ministry of Local Government be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 127 - PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs84, 812,000/- under Head 127 - Public Service Commission.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 128 - MINISTRY OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES

(Question Proposed.)

DR BYARUHANGA:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman. I am seeking clarification from the Minister of Finance; this item of purchase of vehicles, it is really running through all the ministries, but on our streets, Mr Chairman, I see all sorts of vehicles, short chasis, long chasis, saloons, pajeros, Daewoos; does the Ministry of Finance have a policy on type of vehicles we need in this country, given the cost of fuel and maintenance? Because we do not seem to have a policy of the type of vehicles that we have on our streets.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR TIVU: Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, sometime in the middle of this month passing, there was a Press release that government vehicles will be sold, and yet we are seeing vehicles being purchased.  These seem to be contradictory policies ca the Minister clarifies on that? 

THE CHAIRMAN: That one was answered.

MR MARWAS: Mr Chairman, my first complaint is, I want to know on this furniture, is it for the office, or is it for the residence for the minister? It is for the office, the current Chairman of the Constituent Assembly was the last minister there before the present one, and I happen to have frequented that office and the furniture in that office is very excellent.  So, I want to know; is it a system that any or every minister who goes in must go with a new vehicle, new furniture in the office or something like that.  

Secondly, when we were discussing on Internal Affairs - I know the Minister of Internal Affairs has just been appointed, but I have not seen requisitioning for a new vehicle, and yet the Minister of Education who cost shared just recently, is already asking for a new vehicle.  

So, I am wondering, what is so special at the Ministry of Internal Affairs who has just gone in - I am asking about this furniture, because I know in that office, and also, in 1989 when we came here there was an idea that once you are appointed a minister in NRM government and your residence is furnished, even if you are demobilised and come back later that furniture is expected to continue within your house.  So, I am wondering what is the system?

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Almost a similar thing, because if you look at natural resources - I am just adding on what hon. Marwas has just said.  If you look at natural resources, you will find purchase of vehicles, and they are saying funds were sought to purchase a vehicles for Minister of State; here is a minister who was already there, he was already a minister at that time.  Now, were they buying him a new car because he has been uplifted or change of title? Really government must be consistent, otherwise - because ministers are supposed to co-own, and he must have been one of the minister who co-owned at that time.  Now, what is all this extravagance?

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, I have concern about the type of vehicles our various ministries are using today.  In some cases, you find vehicles with spot wheels, and these spot wheels were different types of tires which are not locally available in our markets.  I know of some vehicle now of that kind or type, which are now parked, cannot be used because they cannot get tires.  Can the minister tell us what plan they have to common type of vehicle for government so that repair either by the Ministry of Works or our local people can be easily done? If I can tell you, some vehicles are already parked just because of the tubes, leave alone the tires.

MR WAPAKABULO: Thank you Mr Chairman for giving me the chance to clarify this I think my Brother Marwas was mistaken.  When I was in Tourism, there was no official car for the minister as such. I was using a Toyota vehicle which had only two doors but a very long one which had come from a project that had closed in the national parks, it was a green long vehicle.  The only other vehicle I was using was this one which has been around for quite some time.  I came with it from Cooperatives and then went to Industry and took it to Tourism.  In other words, I was looking after the Laurel very well, but now I think it is giving up the ghost.  So, when I left, actually there was no vehicles left behind; the minister who replaced me was, in fact, borrowing the vehicle intended for Tourist Board, the vehicle intended for promotion of tourism.  So, the purchase of the vehicle was to enable him to surrender the other one to the Tourist Board.  Thank you.

MR MAYENGO: Mr Chairman, on the question of vehicles, there is what people in Kampala are talking about lately; there is a very beautiful elegant Mercedes Benz which the former Vice President used to use; nowadays it is rather a shameful site going around town; and one wonders why such a lovely vehicle, could not be only washed and be used instead of spending money to buy these new ones and let such a vehicle be used by children who sort of abuse it.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  I think it is really a general question on the policy of vehicles, it is not specific on this vote.  I think in due course the Minister of Works, Transport and communication may be asked to come up in his policy statement on how does he intend to synchronise all these, by this government.  Otherwise, this attempt was made some four, five years ago and it never caught up, and in some cases most ministers have been - for instance, in Agriculture, the ministers have been using project vehicles; this is also a problem, in encroaches on the running of those projects. So, it is important that ministers are provided official vehicles. 

Secondly, and this may be more important, is that in most of those ministries which have projects there are some purchase which has not been controlled and all donations of different types of vehicles.  The ministry which mostly famous on this is the Ministry of Information; they get donations of different types of vehicles.  It is very rare in such an atmosphere to refuse a vehicle when you do not have any, simply because it does match with them, and this is how they use to penetrate the markets.  Since we are also inviting the investors, this is another way also - if we are given a vehicle and one wants to invest, we are at times on a weak side to accept such a thing.


THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs54, 685,000/= under Head 128 - Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 129 - MINISTRY OF NATURAL RESOURCES

(Question proposed.)

MR KABUGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Under this item of expenditure, I can see that funds were sought to purchase a new vehicle for the minister of State, and the present Minister of State was then the Deputy Minister within the same ministry and he had a motor vehicle, brand new Pajero! In this case, what happened to that one and what was the necessity for him to get another new vehicle?

MR MULONDO: I do not think, Mr Chairman, that this was intended to provoke me to say something, but ever since I was appointed a Deputy Minister I have had no official vehicle.  As the hon. Minister of State for Finance was stating, I have been all along using a project vehicle, and it is a big embarrassment to government for these vehicles to be used by ministers and, therefore, I have been all along pressing Government to give me a vehicle; and it is most appropriate when I was elevated to the post of Minister of State to really have a vehicle; and even with that the vehicle is not with me yet! So, when it comes I will show it to the hon. Member there.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, under the same Head there is renovation of office.  I wonder whether the minister can confirm to this House the statement that each time a new minister goes to an office it has to be fully renovated; even the carpets removed and the furniture taken away and new furniture brought it, and repainted; regardless of whether that office had recently been renovated, that a minister always demands that each time he move into an office - you know, after a reshuffle that the office he goes into must be fully renovated, carpets removed, furniture removed, curtains removed so that new items are actually, replaced.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, I cannot confirm that whenever there is a reshuffle furniture has to be changed, curtains removed and carpets replaced; but ministers are also people, you can find that you go to an office when the previous minister could tolerate the situation as it was and another minister would wish to upgrade and he comes at a time when it is - everybody feels it is overdue to renovate that office, then it can be renovated, and it is just a coincidence; otherwise even if there is no reshuffle offices ought to be renovated!

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs49, 776,000 under Head 129 - Ministry of Natural Resources be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 140 - TEACHING SERVICE COMMISSION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs48, 800,000/- under Head 140 - Teaching Service Commission be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered and approved the Supplementary Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for the Fiscal Year 1994/95 and approved them without Amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the National Resistance Council do resolve into a Committee of Supply for consideration and approval of Vote on Account 1995/96 Financial Year.

Mr Chairman, the hon. Members are aware that the Government Financial Year ended on the 30th June 1995.  As of now, we have not considered the Estimates for 1995 and it will take time before we can approve the Appropriations Bill.  In the meantime it is necessary for the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning to approve funds for running government services.  Section 13.1 of the Public Finance Act, gives the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning authority to issue funds from the Consolidated fund Account for the purpose of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the government until the expiry of four months from the beginning of the Financial Year; or the coming into appropriation of the Appropriations Act, whichever is earlier.  

It is in this respect of this provision of the Act that I now move the Motion so that the council can consider the amounts set out in the schedule against various ministries, departments and districts votes and approve Vote on Account so that such funds can be spent to run the government services.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 001 - OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs7, 810,499,000/- under Vote 001 - Office of the President be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 002 - STATE HOUSE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs3, 059,381,000/= under Vote 002 - State House be provided for.

(Question pub and agreed to.)

VOTE 003 - OFFICE OF THE VICE PRESIDENT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs288, 841,000/- under Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 004 - OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs362, 517,000/= under Vote 004 - Office of the Prime Minister be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 005 - MINISTRY OF PUBLIC SERVICE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs23, 357,000/= under Vote 005 - Ministry of Public Service be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 006 - MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs5, 690,888,000/= under Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs provided for.

(Question put and agreed.)

VOTE 007 - MINISTRY OF JUSTICE 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1,245,715,000/= under Vote 007 - Ministry of Justice be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 008 - MINISTRY OF FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs10, 689,379,000/= under Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 009 - MINISTRY OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs708, 394,000/= under Vote - Ministry of Trade and Industry be provided for.

VOTE 010 - MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES 
THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1, 645,315,000/= under Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 011 - JUDICIARY 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1, 261,144,000/- under Vote 011 - Judiciary be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 012 - MINISTRY OF LANDS HOUSING AND PHYSICAL PLANNING 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1, 268,718,000/= under Vote 012 - Ministry of Lands Housing and Physical Planning be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 013 - MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs8, 815,549,000/= under Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 014 - MINISTRY OF HEALTH 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs3, 312,972,000/= under Vote 014 - Ministry of Health be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 015 - NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs2, 432,937,000/= under Vote 015 - National Assembly be provided for.

Vote 016 - Ministry of Works, Transport and Communications 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs2, 883,246,000/= under Vote 016 - Ministry of Works, Transport and Communications be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 017 - MINISTRY AUDIT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs488,869,000 under Vote 017 - Audit be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 018 - MINISTRY OF INFORMATION 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs666,309,000/= under Vote 018 - Ministry of Information be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 020 - MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND SOCIAL WELFARE 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs618, 859,000/= under Vote 020 - Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 021 - MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs32, 694,813,000/- under Vote 021 - Ministry of Defence be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 022 - MINISTRY OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs337, 595,000/= under Vote 022 - Ministry of Internal Affairs be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 023 - MULAGO HOSPITAL COMPLEX 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs3, 103,613,000/= under Vote 023 - Mulago Hospital Complex be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 024 - MAKERERE UNIVERSITY

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs6, 776,144,000/= under Vote 024 - Makerere University be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 025 - MINISTRY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs664, 221,000/= under Vote 025 - Ministry of Local Government be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 027 - PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs257, 867,000/= under Vote 027 - Public Service Commission be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 028 - MINISTRY OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs511, 798,000/= under Vote 028 - Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 029 - MINISTRY OF NATURAL RESOURCES

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs663, 687,000/= under Vote 029 - Ministry of Natural Resources be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 030 - MINISTRY OF GENDER AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs336, 366,073,000/= under Vote 030 - Ministry of Gender and Community Development be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 031 - INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs315, 016,000/= under Vote 031 - Inspectorate of Government be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 034 - MASS MOBILISATION 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs576, 205,000/- under Vote 034 - Mass Mobilisation be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 035 - KARAMOJA DEVELOPMENT AGENCY

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs140, 312,000/= under Vote 035 - Karamaja Development Agency be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 036 - UGANDA MANAGEMENT INSTITUTE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs156, 550,000/= under Vote 036 - Uganda Management Institute be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 037 - LAW REFORM COMMISSION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs176, 172,000/= under Vote 037 - Law Reform Commission be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 038 -UGANDA POLICE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs11, 024,628,000/= under Vote 038 0 Uganda Police be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 039 - UGANDA PRISONS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs2, 516,618,000/= under Vote 039 - Uganda Prisons be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 040 - TEACHING SERVICE COMMISSION 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs374, 502,000/= under Vote 040 - Teaching Service Commission be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 041 - CABINET SECRETARIAT 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs75, 963,000/= under Vote 041 - Cabinet Secretariat be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 042 - MBARARA UNIVERSITY

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs809, 707,000/= under Vote 042 - Mbarara University be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 43 - MINISTRY OF NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH ORGANISATION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs616, 775,000 under Vote 043 - Ministry of National, Agricultural Research Organisation be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 044 - Institute of Teacher Education Kyambogo

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs781, 684,000/= under Vote 044 - Institute of Teacher Education Kyambogo be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 050 - ARUA DISTRICT 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1, 779,493,000/= under Vote 050 - Arua District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 051 - Gulu District

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1, 074,645,000/= under Vote 051 - Gulu District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 052 - LIRA DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1, 517,292,000/= under Vote 052 - Lira District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 053 - MBALE DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs2, 167,166,000/= under Vote 053  - Mbale District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 054 - TORORO DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1, 541,474,000/= under Vote 054 - Tororo District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 055 - JINJA DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1, 242,176,000/= under Vote 055 - Jinja District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 056 - MUKONO DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1,727,558,000/= under Vote 056 - Mukono District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 057 - MPIGI DISTRICT 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs2, 297,574,000 under Vote 057 - Mpigi District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 058 - MASAKA DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1, 370,189,000/= under Vote 058 - Masaka District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 059 - MBARARA DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1, 849,545,000/= under Vote 059 - Mbarara District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 060 - KABAROLE DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1, 282,794,000/= under Vote 060 - Kabarole District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 061 - KABALE DISTRICT 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1, 231,300,000/= under Vote 061 - Kabale District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 062 - RAKAI DISTRICT 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs773, 296,000/= under Vote 062 - Rakai District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 063 - APAC DISTRICT 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs121, 150,000/= under Vote 063 - Apac District be provided for.

(Question put and greed to.)

VOTE 064 - BUSHENYI DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1, 265,776,000/= under Vote 064 - Bushenyi District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 065 - HOIMA DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs596, 313,000/= under Vote 065 - Hoima District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote - 066 Iganga District 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1, 681,329,000/= under Vote 066 - Iganga District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
VOTE 067 - KAMPALA DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1, 433,527,000 under Vote 067 - Kampala District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 068 - KASESE DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs721, 374,000/= under Vote 068 - Kasese District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 069 - KISORO DISTRICT  

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs371, 562,000/= under Vote 069 - Kisoro District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 070 - KITGUM DISTRICT 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs880, 773,000/= under Vote 070 - Kitgum District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 071 - LUWERO DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs973, 909,000/= under Vote 071 - Luwero District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 072 - MOYO DISTRICT
 
THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs364, 325,000/= under Vote 072 - Moyo District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 073 - MUBENDE DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1, 015,427,000/= under Vote 073 - Mubende District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 074 - NEBI DISTRICT 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs666, 230,000/= under Vote 073 - Nebi District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 075 - RUKUNGIRI DISTRICT 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs960, 921,000/= under Vote 075 - Rukungiri District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 076 - SOROTI DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1, 426,925,000 under Vote 076 - Soroti District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 077 - KALANGALA DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs92, 230,000/= under Vote 077 - Kalangala District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 078 - KIBALE DISTRICT 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs571, 071,000 under Vote 078 - Kibale District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 079 - KIBOGA DISTRICT 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs307, 629,000/= under Vote 079 - Kiboga District to provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 080 KUMI DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs707, 591,000/= under Vote 080 - Kumi District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed.)

VOTE 081 - MASINDI DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs632, 795,000/= under Vote 081 - Masindi District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 092 - KOTIDO DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs463, 760,000/= under Vote 082 - Kotido District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 083 -MOROTO DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs237, 168,000/= under Vote 083 - Moroto District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 084 - NTUNGAMU DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs632, 795,000/= under Vote 084 - Ntungamu District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 085 - KAPCHORWA DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs375, 227,000/= under Vote 085 - Kapchorwa District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 086 - KAMULI DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs632, 795,000/= under Vote 086 - Kamuli District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 087 - BUNDIBUGYO DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs298, 115,000/= under Vote 087 - Bundibugyo District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 088 - PALISA DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs787, 618,000/= under Vote 088 - Palisa District be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE - VOTE ON ACCOUNT 1995/96

HEAD 101

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification from the Minister. There are some statutory bodies which we set up ourselves here in this House, and has always been a problem, particularly, in the infant stages of these statutory bodies like National Drug Authority, like UTTC; in the initial stages their parent ministries request them to go and solicit for their own funding from the Ministry of Finance, and the Ministry of Finance throws them back to their parent ministries; as a result they find it difficult to renumerate the members of staff who have been seconded from their parent ministries! This has cause confusion; for example, now for the case of National Drug Authority, there are about a hundred members of staff seconded from the Ministry of Health, now they are not being paid; and ministry of finance cannot send money directly to these statutory bodies, because they have not had the initial stage to negotiate with them directly.  So, what do we do in this case?  Thank you.  

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, I do not have here a copy of our rules and order, but the general Debate on the Budget is normally scheduled for five days and then the estimates would have been approved within a matter of a fortnight.  So, the period during which we could have used the vote on accounts would be essentially about one month, and vote on accounts would be able to clear such a problem. But the trend has been that we spend more time on the general debate and we spend a lot of time on estimates and starve the government services for almost three or four months.  This time it has been arranged that we shall arrange in such a manner that since all the books required for us to debate are available, we shall confine ourselves to the rules and order so that within one month we could have funds released. Otherwise, the priorities for each ministry are set by the accounting officer in that area.  Thank you.

HEAD 104 - Office of the Prime Minister

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1, 367,600,000/= under Head 104 - Office of the Prime Minister be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 105 -Ministry of Public Service

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs58, 600,000/= under Head 105 - Ministry of Public Service be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 107 - Ministry of Justice

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs38, 467,000/= under Head 107 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 108 - Ministry of Fiance and Economic Planning

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs4, 059,633,000/= under Head 108 - Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 109 - Ministry of Trade and Industry

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs153267, 000/= under Head 109 - Ministry of Trade and Industry be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 110 - Ministry of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1, 367,600,000/= under Head 110 - Ministry of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 111 - Judiciary

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs103, 333,000/= under Head 111 - Judiciary be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 112 - Ministry of Lands Housing and Physical Planning

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs54, 200,000/= under Head 112 - Ministry of Lands Housing and Physical Planning be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 113 - Ministry of Education and Sport

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1, 175,833,000/= under Head 113 - Ministry of Education be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 114 - Ministry of Health

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1, 916,367,000/= under Head 114 - Ministry of Health be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 116 - Ministry of Works Transport and Communication

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs4, 246,300,000/= under Head 116 - Ministry of Works Transport and Communication be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 117 - Audit Department

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs42, 167,000/= under Head 117 - Audit Department be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 120 - Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs54,333,000/= under Head 104 - Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 121 - Ministry of Defence

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1, 700,000,000/= under Head 121 - Ministry of Defence be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 122 - Ministry of Internal Affairs

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs77, 767,000/= under Head 122 - Ministry of Internal Affairs be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 123 - Mulago Hospital Complex

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs193, 133,000/= under Head 123 - Mulago Hospital Complex be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 124 - Makerere University

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs487, 033,000/= under Head 124 - Makerere University be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 125 - Ministry of Local Government 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1, 375,333,000/= under Head 125 - Ministry of Local Government be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 128 - Ministry of Tourism, Wild Life and Antiquities

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs18, 467,000/= under Head 128 - Ministry of Tourism, Wild Life and Antiquities be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 129 - Ministry of Natural Resources

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs1, 430,967,000/= under Head 129 - Ministry of Natural Resources be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 130 - Ministry of Gender and Community Development

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs354, 735,000/= under Head 130 - Ministry of Gender and Community Development be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 135 - Ministry of Karamaja Development Agency

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs24, 567,000/= under Head 135 - Ministry of Karamoja Development Agency be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 137 - Law Reform Commission 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs37, 000,000/= under Head 137 - Law Reform Commission be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 138 -Police Force

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs500, 000,000/= under Head 138 - Police Force be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 139 - Prison Service

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs116, 667,000/= under Head 139 - Prison Service be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 142 - Mbarara University

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs354, 700,000/= under Head 142 - Mbarara University be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 143 - NARO

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs489, 033,000/= under Head 143 - NARO be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 144 - ITEC

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs23, 100,000/= under Head 144 - ITEC be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Council to resume and the Committee of Supply do report there to.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered and approved the vote on account from the physical year 1995/96 and approved them without any amendment.  I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that the Report is adopted; and this brings us to the end of today’s Session we adjourn the Council until next Tuesday Starting at 2.30 p.m. Thank you.

(The Council rose at 12.45 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 11 July 1995 at 2.30 p.m.)











