Tuesday, 4 July 2006

Parliament met at 2.23 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you back from the weekend and to appeal to you to empty your pigeonholes. We have several policy statements, which have come in but we cannot put them in your pigeonholes because they are still full. Please, take them out today so that the sergeant can service you by morning.

Secondly, I would like to ask you to join me in welcoming our guests from USA; they are sitting up there in the gallery. Please stand up. The girls are students from Forest Sacred Heart Secondary School in Seattle, Washington. The young men are from South Kitsap High School also in Washington.  They have come here courtesy of hon. Alintuma Nsambu. They come here each year to go and service schools with computers and that is what they are doing here. I think you better be close to hon. Alintuma so that next year they come to your constituency. Hon. Alintuma, thank you so much for that support.

Now, honourable members, I am aware that in the past, we used to allow some contributions after the Communication from the Chair but we found that we really spend so much time on impromptu communications and also the minister is unable to answer immediately. So, when we amended our rules, we agreed that on Thursdays, the first two hours are for our business as private Members. I have had some request today but what I have done is to notify the ministers to be available on Thursday to answer the matters so that we stick to our rules and try to do our work. Thank you very much.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO PARLIAMENT ON THURSDAY 8 JUNE 2006

2.26
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for granting me the opportunity to add my voice to the much that has already been said about the State of the Nation Address. As the motion was read, the State of the Nation Address is clear, precise but it is inadequate. I am going to add what I see as constituting the inadequacy so that we can use what the President gave and what we are giving here for the common good of our country.

I refer to that part of the speech that handles peace, security and human rights. The President omitted the significant point that would lead us to attaining peace and stability in this country and that is reconciliation. We have mechanisms of resolving conflict and one of it is amnesty but there is a difference between amnesty and reconciliation. Amnesty talks about forgiving a criminal who otherwise deserves to have been punished. It is one side giving in and usually it is the weaker side giving in when the stronger side remains stationary.

But reconciliation is a give and take process where nobody is considered as a loser and it is the best means of bringing peace in this country. We would like to see the conflict in Northern Uganda end. Those of us who come from West Nile have suffered the same problems like those who are in Gulu and Kitgum, especially when you pass along the road from Kampala to Moyo District and to Adjumani. This started a long time ago. The amnesty never touched the hearts of our people and that is why we still have people maybe who are still fighting. 

I would like to appeal to the President to talk about reconciliation like the way the people of South Africa talked about reconciliation when they completed a fight against apartheid. If it were not for amnesty, we would not have had the peace that the South African people have. 

I know everything has got a price and we know that there is that thing of opportunity cost; when you choose this one, you must leave something out and this brings us to areas of challenges. We, as leaders from Northern Uganda, have challenges; the President of the Republic of Uganda has challenges; the people of Northern Uganda have challenges and I would like to draw your attention honourable members to these challenges. 

As people of Northern Uganda and as leaders from there our challenges are:

One, how to overcome the economic disparity between the North and the rest of the country. The North has remained as the most disadvantaged, the most underdeveloped and the poorest region of this country. How do we bring the people of Northern Uganda to the same level of prosperity like the other people of this country?

Two, how do we break the iron curtain of prejudice that is put in the minds of the people who think negatively about us. As long as our people do not have any place to turn to when they need to be comforted, they will feel rejected by the Ugandan community, they will feel like second hand citizens, they will not feel at ease. 

So, to bring peace and co-existence, let us give confidence to one another, give confidence to the people of Northern Uganda to feel that they are also people of Uganda, give confidence to the rebels in the bush so that when they come home they do not feel that somebody is going to persecute them, they do not feel that they are living at the mercy of the person who has forgiven them in accordance to the principles of amnesty. This is what I appeal to all of us.

Now, the challenge to President Museveni and the historicals who went to the Luweero bush and brought him to power is one of accepting the position of reconciliation without recounting your notion of invisibility in the field of war. If you can throw away from your mind the concept that for you, you are invisible and you cannot be defeated by war, you will not continue thinking about using war as a measure of bringing conflict to an end in this country. How do you accommodate other people’s interests without recounting your position and your convictions about yourselves? 

Of course, there is a way we also believe ourselves and so if we do not give out part of our beliefs about ourselves and if other people also do not give out part of their beliefs against us, we are not heading to one country. We are heading to a country like China and Taiwan: one country, two systems. But we are going there and if that is the best way to go, why do you keep quiet about it? Why do we not set a system like the one of Taiwan where we can have one country with two systems?  

With due respect to my party leaders, my Chief Whip, hon. Kassiano Wadri, the party has imposed on me and I have accepted that let us talk about one Uganda, one people. By saying, “One Uganda, one people” I would like Uganda to be together but you be reminded of the people who do not say, “One Uganda, one people”. If you do not say, “One Uganda, one people” then you say, “One Uganda, two people”. Thank you.

2.35
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are a few matters I want to raise which come from the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency, the President. The first matter, which I wish to speak on, is the issue of the IDPs and the resettlement programme. In Lira Municipality, we have acted as a host to IDPs coming from other constituencies within Lango and some from further. At the height of the influx of the IDPs, there were 91,000 IDPs within Lira Municipality. By 2004, the IDP population had fallen to about 28,000 within the municipality and this occurred because many of the IDPs had moved to rural camps as they found it was difficult to live within the municipality.

Initially, there was a feeding programme being run by the World Food Programme but the World Food Programme feeding programme ended in 2004 within Lira Municipality. At that point, there were two organisations, which took over the feeding and they targeted vulnerable groups within the society and this was CCF and Light Force International. The vulnerable groups they targeted were the elderly, the widows, the widowers, child headed household and the disabled but their programme strictly ran for one year and that feeding programme also ended in October last year.  

Since that time, the IDPs living in Lira Municipality have not been receiving any assistance in the form of food. The health facilities have also ceased to be delivered and now they have to go to various places for help. Further, the learning centres, which were established within the camps in the municipality, have since been closed.

I had a discussion with the municipal Government and they are trying within their meagre resources to provide teachers within these learning centres, although the learning centres were hard-strapped to provide education and were essentially just providing schooling and organising children to sing together and to play together. At this material moment, even that is not available.

Currently, the World Food Programme is supplying roughly 50 per cent of household needs in the rural camps. The basic plan seems to be, by denying the IDPs in the urban camps they would then go to the rural camps. But another thing I found out is that, in the rural camps, if you transferred today from the urban camps to rural camps, it can take up to four months after verification to receive a ration card and start receiving food.

So, at this moment, Madam Speaker, the people in the camps are going through a lot of difficulty. In May, the official figures of residents within the camps were 4,731 and these are the ones who are not receiving any assistance whatsoever at this moment. As of this week, the figures seem to have gone down to about 6,000 IDPs remaining in Lira Municipality. 

What has happened with the closing of the schools is that, a lot of the children are doing odd jobs which some were doing earlier, making bricks, but also we have a strange phenomenon developing in Lira Municipality at places where for example they are roasting pork: the children have displaced the dogs in fighting for the bones. This is a situation, which was raised earlier that we have more than one Uganda; the Uganda, which I am representing, is suffering and does not know the meaning of peace. We can talk that we have brought peace to this country, but until peace covers the whole country, we are not at peace. As one nation, if the nation is at peace, we will all be at peace.  

I wish to talk about the matter, which the President raised in his speech concerning the power generation. In fact, when he was making his speech, there was a point where I felt so embarrassed and this is the issue where he said that at the time of the NRM coming into power, Uganda was only generating 60 megawatts. I was embarrassed because the figures show that by that time, the capacity for generation was 150 megawatts and there was a programme initiated by UPC to increase to 180 megawatts. In fact, electricity consumption in 1986 was 107 mega watts, 1987 it went down to 103 megawatts, in 1888 it went even further down to 94.6 megawatts. 

So, my concern was the researchers or the assistants who were to assist the President with this information. They seem to have misled him to the belief that Uganda only had 60 megawatts when the NRM came into power. Due to the long time taken to establish power generation, UPC had embarked on a programme, which began with feasibility study the results of which were submitted to the NRM in 1986. 

At that time, the favourable site for the next power generation (hydro- generation project) was at Ayago falls which was to generate 480 megawatts which seems to be greater than the two projects which seem to be in offer now. How those projects failed to come to fruition is something, which you can blame on the civil servants or on the Sixth Parliament. It appears to be a change of programme and total lack of forward planning.

Lastly, I wish to congratulate all Members of this House but most especially, I wish to send a congratulation message to Members of the Uganda Peoples’ Congress, the Democratic Party and Conservative Party specifically because of reasons which were stated in the NRM revolution such that those political parties so named were supposed to cease to exist. The fact that we are here, it means we have survived. (Laughter)

As for FDC, I thank you for joining us in the struggle for competitive multi-party politics and on that basis, we hope we can have interactive and value addition to the politics of this country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

2.43
MS BETI KAMYA (Lubaga Division North, Kampala): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to discuss the President’s State of the Nation Address and I bring greetings from Lubaga North.  

Madam Speaker, I also begin by thanking the President for his State of the Nation Address because I trust that the President did his best. Whether his best is good enough for Uganda will be the subject perhaps of another day. But in his introduction, the President claimed all credit for the restoration of multi-party politics in Uganda. I would like this Parliament to set the records straight that the opposition fought for every inch of the space that we occupy in this Chamber and outside this Chamber.  

Madam Speaker, we remember how hard it was to gain inch by inch; we remember the battles in court, on the streets, in the media, in European and American capitals. We battled in the streets against tear gas and live bullets; we battled everywhere. We remember the street battles between police and Popular Resistance Against Life Presidency (PRALP); we remember UPC’s Jimmy Higenyi; we remember how hard it was for FDC, even as late as December 2004, to get registered. We remember the fictitious funerals that we had to stage just to be able to hold a political gathering. We even remember the over zealous eye of the Police which burst genuine funerals so that the opposition could not get together. We remember trotting the globe selling our case everywhere until the President came to this House and admitted that he had succumbed to international pressure to open up political space in this country.  

We, therefore, would like Parliament to set the record straight and recognise all groups that fought for democracy and are still fighting for political pluralism in this country.

Madam Speaker, in his speech, the President further emphasised that multi-partism will work in Uganda. But working is one thing and working effectively is quite another. Multi-partism will work effectively only if Government can demonstrate political will to walk the talk and put affirmative action to ensure that multi-partism works. Luweero Triangle suffered only five years of devastation but 20 years under patronage of a very friendly regime, Luweero Triangle still needs affirmative action. What about political parties? We need a Government to walk the talk.

On the question of constitutionalism and the rule of law, the President pledged to strengthen constitutionalism and the rule of law in this country. But I am persuaded to believe that the President of Uganda did not mean a thing he said, or if he did, he must have implied that the presidency is exempted from the obligations of the Constitution. 

The President of Uganda has been a principal offender of the Constitution. We remember that he has broken almost every law in the book: arresting his political competitor without an arrest warrant; holding him in custody without written charge; fidget with Police records to back date the charge; holding suspects in custody in blatant violation of a court order granting them bail. Bribing witnesses, voters and Members of Parliament; awarding contracts outside the provisions of the law as was done in the case of the Shs 2.5 billion to KAA; sending the Army into foreign territory without the approval of Parliament; indiscriminate allocation of land; arbitrary donations of huge sums of public funds without the approval of Parliament; besieging court by the military. I could go on and on but the point is made.

Madam Speaker, if the treason charges against Dr Besigye and the 22 others is the most legally significant case that the state has brought in Uganda, natural justice and the Constitution dictate that the state did not merely win by outspending the defence. There is a reason why criminal cases’ prosecution is done in the name of the people not so and so against so and so. Criminal lawyers are not just lawyers but they are ministers and custodians of justice. They must take care that both substantive and procedural justice are not only done but must be seen to be done.

Madam Speaker, the Eighth Parliament must not and cannot just sit back and watch the rights and freedoms of even one Ugandan being abused and do nothing about it. We are obliged, we are required, we are mandated and highly paid to protect this Constitution and good governance in Uganda under Article 79(3) of the Constitution. This Constitution is planted thick with laws about individual rights. It is an obligation of this Parliament to ensure that every individual Ugandan is protected under this Constitution.

Madam Speaker, under Section 24, sub-section (2) of the Constitution of Uganda, all persons placed in positions of leadership or responsibility as the Eighth Parliament is, shall in their work be answerable to the people of Uganda. The Eighth Parliament is answerable to Dr Besigye and to every individual Ugandan on the way the treason case against Dr Besigye is being managed. We are also responsible to Haruna Byamukama who is lying in Mulago Hospital after being shot by a Government soldier in Bulange. He has no medicine, he is destitute, he is suffering and no one takes care of him. This Parliament is answerable to Haruna Byamukama and the likes of him that are suffering so.  

Madam Speaker, in the interest of time, I will conclude by quoting one man, Dr Martin Luther King Jr who once said that if a man be called upon to sweep the street, he should sweep the street even as Michel Angelo painted art, or be it Hoven composed music, so that one day the angels in heaven will look down and say, “Here lies the man that swept the street to the best of his ability.”  My wish is that, at the end of our term, somebody will say the Eighth Parliament did their best for this country. Thank you very much.

2.53
MR FRANCIS KIYONGA (Independent, Upe County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just let me interrupt you. Honourable members, I am delighted to inform you that we have in the public gallery our pupils and the teachers of Winston Boarding Primary School, Kawempe North Division, represented by hon. Latif Sebaggala and hon. Nagayi. Please stand up children! (Applause)

MR KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to say something which the President has tempted me to bring out. Some times the President is expected to be a very well informed person. He is sometimes expected to be the most intelligent person in the country. But because of what he said on these two points I am going to say, that belief in me has been reduced.  

Madam Speaker, the President stated that it is NRM of recent that encouraged multi-partism in this country. I would like to say that that is not true. Those of us, who have been in NRM until recently in the month of February, were made to preach against multi-partism as a bad practice. For all these years, we were told to say that although we did not have time to make some research - then just within a short time, the very preachers against multi-partism, the very cadres of Kyankwanzi who are with the population and who had been together with the population for all this time preaching against multi-partism, were just made to turn round and told the people to vote for the tree which was the symbol of multi-partism and oppose the house symbol. 

This created a lot of confusion especially with us in Karamoja where the people out of serious commitment had believed the story of parties being bad. But those people in Karamoja, the Pokot, I am sorry to say, because of that commitment and coupled with a lot of illiteracy are even going to be the last people to leave NRM. That is the situation there. So, I would like to put it on record, Madam Speaker, that it is not true that we encouraged multi-partism; there was some pressure somewhere. Some people know where those two pressure points came from.  

If we were prepared for multi-partism, some of us would not even be here as independent candidates. That is one sign to show that we did not prepare enough and now the majority are seated on the other side, a few are here including myself. That was lack of preparation; there was pressure.

Maybe to add on that, I would like to state here clearly that the problem was not the concept but has been the personalities. Now that Obote and Amin have passed away, we should stop even talking about those who mismanaged our multi-partism some time back.

Now on this other point of the insecurity, Madam Speaker, it is not a simple problem as the President has been made to believe. Just last month, we have lost 22 people, 17 of them are women in this disarmament process. Is that a simple problem? That conflict in Karamoja has cost our people an average of three people dying per day for over ten years. Is that a simple problem? That conflict has cost lives of our soldiers (over 1,200) by those warriors. Those are their sons. They are their children, but because of this conflict, they have been forced to clash and fight with our brothers in the UPDF. Is that a simple problem? It is not. This Government will cease to exist and leave that problem there if we are not well cautioned, if we do not believe and appreciate the gravity of that situation. It is not a simple problem as the President states. Thank you.

2.59
MR SAM NJUBA, (FDC, Kyaddondo East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to make a few observations on the State of the Nation Address speech by His Excellency, the President. I would like to associate myself with the contribution made by my sister Beti Kamya on a genuine desire to have multi-parties by the President. Now that the President has accepted the necessity of the opposition to re-exist and develop democracy, should we expect that he will stop insulting some of us on the opposition and will ask his ministers to stop making statements like, “You find other places to live in” as if we are not Ugandans; as if we are not entitled to be in this country! 

I notice in this speech, almost at the end, he remembers and tells us that he has heard from the press that some permanent secretaries who did not support the Movement are going to be thrown out and he quickly says that this should not be done. It should be done according to the law. This is welcome but it is very shallow. Already we have ministers, as I have said, who have said those who do not want NRM to rule can find elsewhere to go.   Some district councils have passed resolutions saying those who will be employed here must be NRM.  Now, Government must come out clearly and say they will not discriminate against anybody –(Interruption)

DR KIBIRIGE: Madam Speaker, I have been watching hon. Njuba for the last three minutes and for all the time he has been talking, he has been pocketing. Is that in order, Madam Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Njuba, you have not offended any rules. Please, proceed. 

MR NJUBA: I would like to thank you for saving me from my old boy who does not realise that I enjoy dressing properly. Madam Speaker, before I was rudely interrupted, I wanted to put it on record that Government must cease and take active part in prohibiting discrimination based on sectarianism –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But this is a protected speech. (Interjections) No, the point of order was on his hands and there was nothing wrong with his hands.

MR NJUBA: Madam Speaker, I am saying and in very simple English that we must all work together; we must not be abused; we must be considered part and parcel of this nation. We pay tax, which the government is enjoying and we should not be discriminated against. 

Now, on a positive part, I would like to welcome the negotiation between Uganda Government and the rebel Kony. This has been the policy of FDC. All along, we have encouraged and pleaded that we should negotiate with Kony to stop the suffering of our people in the North, and I am glad the government has at least agreed with us. 

I would like, however, to note two things: One, that in the delegation that went to the Sudan with hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, they should have included somebody from the opposition. You can see the front bench is very well versed with the situation in the North and if we had some from the opposition to accompany and take part in the negotiation, it would have been beneficial to the country. I hope it is not too late.  

The second point I would like to raise is that, for the first time in many years, the President has said that if Kony continues to disturb people and go to Congo and the UN does not prevent him, he will come to this House and see what to do. I am encouraged to record that at least he recognises that dealing with foreign affairs or interfering with other states, he should have the backing of this august House.  

The thirdly, I was disappointed by the fact that the President did not touch on the issue of land in Uganda. The land in Uganda is a big problem and all over the place his representatives, the RDC and their assistants are messing up the whole thing.  They are adjudicating on land in disregard of the constitution of the law prevailing. You can inform the tenant of Plot 1 Nakasero that I am prepared to give a lecture to his RDCs so that they know what they are talking about. They are messing up this country on land. Of course, it did not make matters easy to appoint a Minister in charge of Land who at one time encouraged the Banyoro residents in Buganda to cut any Muganda talking about the land. But that is a small matter. We are prepared to teach – (Interjection)- yes, he said it. Well, he apologised and I am not going to have a dialogue with the honourable minister across the front bench.  

Lastly, it is the regional tier. I was encouraged when I heard that one of the ministers at the front bench said that regional tiers would be suspended for the time being until there has been agreement.  I do not know whether that is correct. If he was reported correctly, it is good news because we do not want friction to develop between one region and the centre permanently. Let them talk and talk until they have settled. After all, Government was in for decentralisation; if it cannot grant them federo and then continue talking, let the status quo remain. Let these districts run the show until we reach amicable settlement. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. 

3.06
MRS BEATRICE MAGOOLA (NRM, Woman Representative Iganga):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want first of all to congratulate you for having gone through the elections and these people of Kamuli returned you the way you did. I also congratulate you for having become our first Deputy Speaker during this political dispensation. I congratulate all of you honourable members and more especially the opposition because you are here for the first time officially. You are welcome! (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I want to pass my congratulations to the President for having gone through the national sieve and become our first President during this new political dispensation. It was not easy because we all had to go through a lot of squeezing but we are here. I want to appreciate the President’s address and I have one or two points to comment on.

I want to commend the Minister of Public Service for the reforms, which have been on where there has been improvement on the service to the people and increase in pensions. The pensioners are happy except that the pension is not going to all of them at the right time. They improved from manual to computerised recording and this will go a long way to making things better and better. But I have to say this about the service. In connection with those who are being given money at wrong times, when people take two to three years before they can get their pension, there is a lot which remains desired. Because you find that there is dramatic suspension of pensions, people continue to travel from their places to the ministry and the attention that they get there is not really desired. 

I want to urge the Ministry of Public Service to continue delivering service to the people. I have two living examples where a pensioner went to the ministry and when she presented her problem that she had not got her pension for six months, she was told that she was dead. How can you be there when you are dead? She tried to explain herself by presenting her papers and she was given a long way to go through to prove that she was the one. 

Then another living example is where some people just give up. They go once, one year, two years and the bureaucracy there makes it difficult for them to get their pensions so they give up. But I know that the ministry is willing to improve on those services as long as they can touch those people. I do not want to call them civil servants but those offices who are there should improve on their delivery.

Madam Speaker, in the address, there was UPE and USE. I really thank the President for having introduced USE so that those children who will leave primary education will have somewhere to go and those are the secondary schools where they gain more and more skills to become literates. People are asking, “How about the watered standards?” 

I want to quote from the President’s address on page 26. He did say: “You know, when a child is beginning to walk, he walks and falls down. In Luganda here we say ‘tengerera’ to encourage the child to continue walking. I have never seen an African saying the child will never walk because he has fallen down the first time he has tried to walk.” I want to follow that argument that when we bring about changes, we should not reject them. We should not abuse them. Let us see what we can get out of the changes. And I am sure if some people are not interested in UPE and USE, there are hundreds and thousands who are interested in these programmes. 

Now, there was one thing, which was not touched: it is the education of the people who are in private schools. My dear colleagues, those children are not private and even the private owners are not private. I am requesting that Government does something to help the school owners so as to improve standards there. Maybe it could pay the teachers’ salaries, maybe it could give them laboratory equipment or library books. I am sure the private school owners would be happy to receive some kind of hand from the government just like the private hospitals are getting a hand from the government. And even those who come to invest, if they get a hand from Government, let private school owners also get a hand from the government.

Finally, the water provision was not touched in this address. I want to urge Government to provide water to the people at the grassroots. The boreholes that are sung from time to time are not sufficient and women and children spend half a day or more lining up to get water. I want to advise Government to take a deliberate effort to build or construct spring wells because we have those wells but we have no capacity to construct them. I am sure this good Government of ours will be able to give 50 per cent of the Iganga people and elsewhere who do not have clean water. I thank you.

3.15
MS MARGARET MUGISA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. After you have made a lot others to sit, I am really proud I have been picked to speak this afternoon. I would like to first of all congratulate everybody here including His Excellency, the President who is not with us and those others who may not be here.

I want to raise an issue on Prosperity for All because when we sought the people’s mandate, like the President has said in the State of the Nation Address, we told people there is going to be money and poverty will be no more. But, Madam Speaker, I have interacted with Gen. Saleh, the one in charge of micro-finance, and he is a very frustrated man on bonna bagaggawale. I am actually more frustrated than him because I had already told people in Kabarole that they should organise themselves in groups because money is coming -(Laughter)- and poverty will be no more.  

Madam speaker, it is not that the money is not available, but Gen. Saleh’s dilemma is that - and I think that is why he does not even come to the House - the money is scattered in so many ministries and he cannot access it. Gen. Saleh being a very practical man, he really needs to have this money so that he can deliver. Madam Speaker –(Interjections)- you and me and even the opposition who are trying to ridicule this know that Afande Saleh is a performer only that this money is scattered in so many ministries. He cannot access it and even any one of us who wants to deliver in our constituencies cannot access it. 

But we have met people in the Ministry of Finance in charge of micro-finance, we had a study group, they addressed us and we came with very good proposals, highly academic, very elitist and very inapplicable. We told them we really need a practical solution to bonna bagaggawale because, if you tell me you have the money, but you are going to build the capacity of the officers to deliver the money, the officers whose capacities are at masters level, why do you not build the capacity of the beneficiaries, the people in the villages using little money? Because building our capacity here, as Members of Parliament, is really expensive but building the capacities of the people who are supposed to be the beneficiaries of bonna bagaggawale is very cheap and that was our suggestion to the people in the Ministry of Finance, the technocrats in charge of bonna bagaggawale. 

As they were delivering the elitist speeches to us, we could interpret what they are saying, but we said, is this what you are going to take to the villages, explaining in the hardest terms to these peasants how they are going to use bonna bagaggawale? Is this how you are going to run it, surely in the Ministry of Finance when you do not even have the money with you? Do you liase with those other sectors of Government where the money is based? Because for us in the NRM when we raise a problem, we give a solution we do not just come to criticise. We offered our skills; we told them to collect this money in one place. 

We know that this is money in Ministry of Finance, but this is for Agriculture, this is for Trade, this is for this and the other, fishing and all that such that if we have a group of fish mongers, we know how to cater for them in bonna bagaggawale. If we have a group of agriculturalists, then we know how to cater for those other than having money scattered everywhere and having our General a very frustrated man and failing him to deliver.

Madam Speaker, I have read a lot of research done at post-graduate level here in Uganda on micro-finance. And these people who have done research actually have done it on the grass root group circles that have been beneficiaries of micro-finance. If micro-finance is not well handled, it will make Ugandans poorer than they were. People who got this money when they fail to pay they take their blankets, take their shoes and if we have to save them we need to move quickly, avail this money to the beneficiaries, build their capacities and we move on. I thank you.

3.20
MS FARIDAH NAJJUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I will begin by adding my voice of congratulating everyone on their elections and appointments. I stand up to support the motion, which was moved by hon. Sarah Nyombi. I am really grateful and I commend His Excellency, the President for having fulfilled his constitutional obligations. This shows that our President is really law abiding and a good citizen of this country. (Applause) We are really very grateful!  

In his State of Nation Address, he raised many issues of national importance and I would like to make a few comments on just three: The first one is bonna bagaggawale. This is something, which we thought was maybe a cash prize, maybe trying to pull people’s votes. But in his address, the President really came out strongly and he showed serious intentions for the people of this country and his serious commitment to reducing the poverty level in this country.

However, on this note, after us coming to Parliament, people out there are anxious, people are waiting, people are looking at us; what are we doing? People imagine there is lots of cash stuck somewhere that the ministry in charge is just going to give it out. I think it is time and it calls for the minister in charge to come out strongly and clear the air. They should expedite the process of institution of guidelines for this programme such that it enables us the Members of Parliament to do effective mobilisation, when the guidelines are in place.

For example, the issue right now is that, we are busy in our constituents mobilising people to form groups, to form circles, formalise their groups so as to benefit from this programme. But when you talk to the technical people, they are like having another idea in this. They are very sceptical about this, so we need to synchronise our positions and this is going to be through institution of guidelines such that we speak with one voice. But before those guidelines are in place, I think the minister should come out more often to provide Parliament with statements and also to the general public such that people’s anxieties are really cooled down so as to move on.

Then more information on bonna bagaggawale, in my district Mubende, there are some unscrupulous people claiming to be from offices above that we do not understand and telling our constituents that they are in charge of bonna bagaggawale, people should talk to them, give them some money so as to have access. But I have told my people to take these people to police then we sort ourselves out because as far as I know, there are not higher offices anywhere as far as this programme is concerned. So, this is information to the minister and it calls for constant information to us and to the people. 

My other comment is on education. I commend Government’s endeavours and His Excellency brought it up very well in his address and he said, they are going to continue providing budget allocations to improve infrastructure of UPE and in Mubende we are really grateful; people have benefited from UPE and we are looking forward to many other issues.

But on the issue of School Facilitation Grant (SFG) Mubende has a problem. The indicative planning figures presented to the districts showed that Mubende was to receive an SFG of Shs 593 million.  The district went ahead to plan according to that figure, they received community proposals from people identifying schools where classrooms will be built, teachers quarters will be built and the other because Government also took on many schools without even the basic infrastructure. And on top of that, the district had an outstanding debt of Shs 177 million, which we thought would be offset in this financial year as far as SFG if concerned.  But as we talk right now, the figures at the district show, Mubende District is not going to benefit from SFG.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Two minutes please.

MS NAJJUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The reason being that districts from Northern and eastern Uganda and the cattle corridor are going to be considered. But as far as I know, the biggest part of Mubende District lies in the cattle corridor, so at least we are entitled to get this SFG. It would not be the whole figure, but at least part. Because when you look at the sub-counties in my district with the worst classroom pupil ratio, are those cattle corridor sub-counties. So, I call upon the minister to please really clear this out, the district has no capacity to pay the Shs 177 million, which is owed to the debtors in the district. So, the minister should come out and help us on that.

Lastly, about the health, in Mubende health centres are coming up at every parish. We are very grateful to the government.  But we have an issue of Mubende District Hospital, which was earmarked long time ago (I think six years) to be elevated to a referral hospital status. Conditions were set, I was a member of the district council and we had to task the executive to meet those conditions. We tarmacked the road going through the hospital, the land was surveyed and everything is in place. But up to now, we have no communication. The catchment area of Mubende is really big and the biggest part of the population is from the rural areas that would benefit from the specialist services offered at the referral hospital. 

We also have the Mityana - Fort Portal road which is a blessing to us but on the other side, it has its negative effects like the road carnage there. We have lost very many people on that road who get to Mubende Hospital but they do not get the basic special attention needed. I call upon the minister to give us an explanation to take to the people. With those few remarks, Madam Speaker, thank you very much.

3.28
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. Allow me to make a few remarks.  First of all, I would like to associate myself with the remarks in the statement of the President. After along time of politicking, it is time for everybody to cool down and do his or her own work. Our people were subjected to very long campaigns: the referendum, presidential and parliamentary campaigns. And having gone through all that exercise, it is time for everyone to do his responsibility until 2011 when we are waiting for another round of elections. 

Madam Speaker, I would also like to associate myself and thank the President and the government and the gallant soldiers of UPDF for finally coming on top and returning peace to the Northern Uganda. It is good to note that people are now returning to their homes after so many years of staying in IDPCs. Three years ago, it used to take about 12 days to go and return from Kitgum mainly because of convoys and insecurity but now, two days a truck would go and come back from Kitgum. I thank once again UPDF who paid their ultimate price with their own blood and lives to return this peace to the Northern part of the country.  

Madam Speaker, I would also like to thank the government on the programme of UPE particularly on the increment of teachers’ salaries. Contrary to what is generally said outside and within the House that the increment of salaries to Shs 200,000 to primary teachers was peanuts, I would like to report that actually teachers outside there are very happy about it. I would like to note that teachers, especially primary teachers, are among fairly well paid civil servants within that grade of civil servants. They actually earn more than secondary school teachers in private schools and that is a fact. 

I would like to say that what is popularly said that UPE is useless and graduates are weak is not true. For example in my county, Kajara, out of the 10 best performing schools in the county, nine of them are UPE schools. So, like any other area of management, it depends on how institutions are managed. UPE can produce results and they have produced results both within Kampala and especially upcountry. 

On the question of secondary school education, one Member has already mentioned it but I would also like to add my voice that, as much as Government is supporting private health centres, private secondary schools should also be supported because they are doing a very good job for this country. It could be a good idea to support them in form of teachers or in form of facilities like laboratories and libraries because at the end of the day, they are adding value to the education of our country.  

Madam Speaker, on the issue of bonna bagaggawale, I would like also to associate myself to what has been said before that people up there do not understand what bonna bagaggawale is all about. In actual fact, I was in the village over the weekend and I was told of a true story where people were told to go and attend a seminar about bonna bagaggawale but people have been so impatient waiting for money from Kampala. When they heard of people coming from Kampala to teach them, they actually went with bags thinking that some money would be distributed. 

I would like to call upon the responsible minister to come out clearly and tell people how much money first of all is available, what it is targeted for so that people know what is coming up and maybe this education should even start with Members of this House. I am not quite sure that all of us know how much money is going to be available for bonna bagaggawale and to what purpose it is going to be put. 

In this respect, I would like to call upon the responsible ministry to look seriously at the department of cooperatives and Uganda Cooperative Alliance because those two institutions have to know how and have the capacity of managing circles. If you do not have people educated, if you do not have follow up, if you do not have audit and supervision of this money, you may end up losing this money. It is important that UCA and the cooperative department are facilitated and empowered to supervise this money.

Lastly, in this respect, I should also add that it is also important to look at the staffing of the cooperative department. As we are talking, the department has only two members of staff at the head office and if these are the people going to supervise the circles and are going to manage all these sums of money - it is important that you get sufficient staff to manage these funds. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.34
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE BIRAAHWA (NRM, Buliisa County Masindi): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the President for doing his part in as far as inspiring the Parliament of Uganda about his intentions and his dream for this country. It is now, therefore, the responsibility of the Eighth Parliament to do our part in complementing and making sure that the aspirations of this country are implanted. 

I would also like to congratulate all honourable members for going through the vigorous elections. Members have talked about reconciliation of the President and the loser candidate, but before we do that, have we ourselves reconciled with those who lost to us. How do you expect reconciliation on top when at the grassroots we are not practicing what we preach? I therefore, encourage all of you to go down and reconcile with those brothers and sisters whom – you are the victors and they are the vanquished. 

We are also aware that we are now trading political dualism. We are trying to nurture a young multi-party dispensation but at the same time accommodating Independents. We are aware that most of these Members got problems. Could I request the Eighth Parliament to find time to allow the prodigal children get back and reconcile with their parties if we are going to build our parties?

I would like to take this opportunity to remind the Members of the Eighth Parliament that Uganda and the whole world is looking at them for the success of multi-partism. We know what our people think about multi-partism. It is, therefore, incumbent upon us to make sure that this time round, multi-partism works. Multi-partism is about unity and diversity, tolerance and co-existence. Multi-partism is not about championing party interests above national interests. 

About prosperity for all, I would like to thank the President for that dream. However, I should inform Members of the front bench that the people expect a lot from you. My constituents continue asking me what the roles of different ministries are. Therefore, as our Constitution puts it, power belongs to the people. People want to see the relevance of different ministries and Government departments as far as service delivery down to the grass root is concerned.

Madam Speaker, it is also clear that we are struggling to deliver the prosperity for all programmes through savings and cooperative societies; but in Masindi, we have Kigumba Cooperative College, which I think has excess capacity to train the citizens of this country. There are sub county chiefs who could now go back as change agents to revolutionalise the whole programme. 

May I, therefore, request this Parliament to upgrade Kigumba Cooperative College to a university status so that we could have the vanguard and the cadres for that training?  Remember, most of our universities are all based in Kampala and we should start decentralising them so that we do not just build Kampala and let people struggle to always come to Kampala, when we could develop other regions as well.

About the education system, I would like to thank the President for USE. The mistake we made in UPE was that, when Government introduced it, parents and local communities left the entire responsibility to the government and yet UPE was not free primary education, it was simply universal. Could I therefore encourage leaders that as we go for USE, we should do our part? These children belong to us, before they belong to the nation.

I would also like to encourage Government to have a massive recruitment and training of postgraduate diploma in education for all science unemployed graduates. There are very many on the street. All we need is to make it a Government-sponsored programme instead of what is happening now. I am sure they would be able to take on the USE programme.

I would also like to re-echo the issue of the children of Uganda in private schools. Whereas private schools provide secondary education when Government does not have enough resources, it would be wrong for Government not to supplement and appreciate what they have done. I, therefore, recommend that we finance secondary school education according to enrolment so that these citizens of Uganda who happen to be in private schools because of the situation pertaining are also beneficiaries. After all, it is their entitlement to access Government services. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR BIRAAHWA: Buliisa is a constituency, which is in the Lake Albert oil rich area of the Bunyoro Kingdom. Unfortunately, the tarmac road, which the colonialists had targeted to work on that oil, was the Busunju-Butyaba road. This road does not go beyond Hoima. I request the ministry to think of a programme to access the rift valley area of Butonya, Kibiro and Butyaba with tarmac so that this oil, which is everybody’s dream, can well be accessed. 

We also do not have electricity in that oil rich area. The people of Buliisa were last year invaded by nomads, who came and wanted to claim ownership of land. I request the ministry to discourage nomadism and find some land to settle these people, if they are citizens of this country.  

Finally, I would like to state a security matter. Buliisa and Lake Albert area is a border area with Congo. Unfortunately, we do not have the necessary migration centres so we have a free border. Whereas we are trying to keep security in Uganda, on the Congo side it is free.  We also have a problem with the conservation of Lake Albert. We cannot conserve the Uganda side when the Congo side is not conserving. 

I would like to end by appealing to all Members of the Eighth Parliament to put the country interests first and the party interests last. We have to work for the common good of the people of Uganda, who have many expectations from us. We have to complement and supplement the Executive, which I am sure will find time to make this Parliament useful.  I thank you very much.

3.43
MR GAUDIOSO TINDAMANYIRE (NRM, Bunyaruguru County, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker, I would like to congratulate all my colleagues in the Eighth Parliament and especially those who are getting in for the first time. I thank my friends, like hon. Wadri who are making this Parliament their home. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to add my voice to the issues raised by my colleagues about the President’s speech. Politically, I think Uganda is on the right track. Uganda is described as a developing country, but a developing country that does what people want is a country on the right track. I thank the President and his Executive for allowing Ugandans to decide their fate, when they chose to go multi-party. He gave them an opportunity to participate in multi-party politics and elect all of us to be in Parliament.  

I would like to give special thanks to the government for encouraging all special interests groups to join Parliament and appreciate their roles.  

Madam Speaker, in 1994, I was in Brussels and I remember that is when the cabinet reshuffle was announced in Uganda. Ambassador Kachuma Tambi came and said, “Oh in Uganda we have a new Vice-President, Dr Speciosa Wandira Kazibwe.” The Whites were also very excited about this achievement. She was Africa’s first female Vice-President. I thank the Movement Government for this achievement.

On the same note, I thank the Movement for having demystified the office of the First Lady.  I think the First Lady has humbled that office to the extent of going and standing as a Member of Parliament. However, my request is that whenever you, hon. Janet Museveni, invite first ladies of Africa, ensure that they go to Ruhama or Lira. Do not take them to State House. Your constituency is Ruhama and as they go to Mweya, ensure that they go through Bunyaruguru and we could give them –(Laughter)– some fish.  

About security, I encourage the government to continue protecting all Ugandan citizens.

I would like to talk about Bonna bagagawale, which is a micro-finance aspect. This micro-finance aspect is micro in its nature and for it to succeed, there must also be a macro project going on at the same time. If people in Mbarara want to utilise micro-finance, they should first ask, for instance, “GBK, what is your production capacity?” If it is 40 per cent, then increase this capacity to 80 per cent so that people who work in the macro are able to utilise the micro.
 
On the question of power, Madam Speaker, I encourage the government to develop small dams all over Uganda. For example, before 1979, Kikagati used to generate enough electricity for Mbarara. In Bunyaruguru, River Kyambura has the capacity to generate electricity. This way, we will have constant power supply.  

Norway, which has 26,000 mega watts, has over 100 small dams generating electricity. Therefore, we should encourage the government and when we make big ones we should be able to invite some visitors to come and visit these places. I visited Hoover Dam in America and I was told Americans get more money from tourists who come to Hoover Dam than the money they get from the electricity generated there. If we were to make our dam at Bujagali, we should ensure that we do not destroy our heritage. People who come to the dam should be able to pay us to see what is there. That is when we will get our comparative advantage.  

In the same way, I propose that all regions should have factories according to their comparative advantage. If we go to Lira and Apac where there are good mangoes, why don’t we make a juice factory there? If we are in the cattle corridor, there should be a factory to harness our animals. That is the only way we shall get employment for our youth who were the greatest problem during elections. 

I remember during campaigns, one political party used to say, “Our people, continue playing matatu; your President is coming.” When a party encourages youth to play matatu, how many tons of matutu will they import when they come to power? Therefore, we should make sure we harmonise and build factories for our people to get jobs.

Madam Speaker, I wind up with the CHOGUM, which is a very good innovative opportunity for Ugandans. I suggest that meetings are not only held in Kampala; we could have a meeting in Lira, in Mbarara, in Mweya or even in Karamoja. Some of these hotels built in Bunyaruguru, like Aghakan is about to build a Kichwamba Serena Safari Lodge, a four-star of 70 rooms which will employ 100 people in Bunyaruguru. Therefore, when we have CHOGUM spread all over, our people will get jobs and we would supplement this with Bonna bagagawale. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.51
MR YAHAYA GUDOI (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is my first time to speak. I have been listening to both the opposition and the NRM side. My prayer is that we interact freely and avoid criticism.  

I will talk about the address the President made on 8 June 2006. During the address, our President endeavoured to summarise his appeal and piece of advise. Our colleagues on the opposition will act as our mirrors. The purpose of a mirror is to show you clean and dirty parts of the face. I have never seen a mirror, which shows only the dirty parts. Therefore, I am appealing to you to acknowledge those good parts as well and try to advise on the bad parts. Therefore, our duty now is to discuss the areas where the President may have misfired so that we put things right.

As a professional teacher, I would like to make comments on USE. I have been a teacher for long and I would like the minister to assist us. If secondary education is universal, that means every sub county should have it. However, we have a problem especially in Mbale where most of the sub counties have no Government-aided secondary schools. Does it then mean that if it is universal, come 2007, every sub county will automatically have a Government-aided secondary school? If not, the honourable Minister of Education should advise in that venture.

In my constituency, since October 2005, schools have never accessed the UPE grants. I do not know whether the minister is aware of this. I do not know how a school operates without chalk, pens and prep books, games and sports. Therefore, I would like to bring it to your notice that Bungokho North and even Mbale District generally has suffered a great deal. To make the matter worse, the neighbouring districts, including Mbale Municipality, Sironko, Manafwa have been getting this money. I have all these records. I am, therefore, appealing to the minister to take interest in knowing what is happening in the entire country.  

Madam Speaker, my constituency has been forgotten since 1962. This is a constituency, which is near Mbale town but roads are very impassable and we have no electricity. However, I thank our State Minister for Housing, hon. Werikhe, who sometimes spends his own money to help in some of the issues there. This time, he should not help like that; Government should help my poor people in Bungokho North.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to talk about micro-finance. I have been a supporter of NRM for a long time. There was a time when we had entandikwa.  I am developing some fears because entandikwa came to our people, but on average, the chanced individuals got around Shs 40,000. If one wanted to buy a blanket, that small amount was not enough.  Therefore, if this bonna bagagawale is to help our people, they should be sensitised first. We should know on average how much money each poor person in the village will get so that we work out how that money will be profitably used. I am sensing some danger. The genuine poor people may not even access that money. Therefore, we should use the experience of the entandikwa and handle bonna bagagawale very sensibly.  

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, I appeal to my colleagues on the other side, not to talk as though the President made a mistake to even address us on 8 June 2006. They should begin by acknowledging what the President did before they criticize the negatives. 

To the whole House now, I know President Museveni has done many good things. He has been one of the initiators of the multi-party system although some people deny it. As a man who lived during the leadership of Iddi Amin - because when I look at your faces, I notice that some of you were born after that regime; I find some of the things you say very strange. Madam Speaker, I thank you very much.

3.58
MS MARY MARGARET SEKIZIYIVU, (NRM, Woman Representative, Mukono): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda for winning the mandate of Ugandans to govern their affairs for the next five years. In the same spirit, I congratulate all my colleagues who went through an election to get where you are now.  

Madam Speaker, I support the motion moved to thank the President for the precise and clear exposition of Government policy that was included in his Address on the State of the Nation to Parliament.  I want to thank him particularly for coming out to emphasise commitment on the issue of increasing power supply to this country. 

On that note, I remind Government of the President’s pledge in 1996, of providing electricity to Najja Sub-county health centre. Work started but stalled along the way. Electricity has never got to that facility.  However, the people of Najja in Mukono District are happy that the line from Najja to Kiyindi was completed and we have electricity in that area.  

I would also like to thank the President for including something to do with waterways. Mukono District is made up of 29 sub-counties but five of these are located in Lake Victoria islands and the issue of waterways is quite important to us. I will particularly talk about the Buvuma ferry. Buvuma is one of the counties that make up Mukono, with four sub-counties. These sub counties are made up of numerous other islands that are bundled up together to form one sub-county. 

The ferry being used is very old and it is in a sorry state and has holes. This is a threat to the lives of the people of Mukono who use it. And even then, this ferry does not connect to all the islands of Buvuma. It only connects to Busamuzi Island at Kilongo. The rest of the sub-counties are not served by this ferry. Therefore, my request is that, since the waterways were one of the issues that were conspicuously covered by the President in his address to us, the islands of Buvuma and Koome be surveyed. In any case, these areas used to be linked to ferries, to ship from Port Bell and the masts are still upright in the lake; they just need to be revived.

Madam Speaker, still on that water transport and the Buvuma ferry, we have a problem. Given the fluctuating water levels of Lake Victoria, the ferry does not reach the pier. It only stops somewhere in the lake where the local people have constructed some movable wooden bridge. This is at a fee, which one must pay to offload their vehicle and similar heavy cargo. 

The people of Mukono and I are aware that constructing a new pier may be expensive since the water levels may rise when the environment improves.  However, now that the locals made a moveable wooden bridge, I request the government to make a metallic removable bridge through the Ministry of Works.  I am sure this will work in the meantime, as we think of a long time solution.

I would like also to talk about the indebtedness of Mukono district.  Mukono had a very big debt stretching as far back as 10 years for some ambitious projects it undertook. This was under the previous governments.  Despite the government’s intervention to help with this indebtedness, the Bill is still above Ugshs 700 millions.  

To make matters worse, during the recent restructuring carried out at local Government level, Mukono had quite a big number of civil servants retrenched and these are now demanding Ugshs 660 million in pension. I am afraid that if the government does not intervene, Mukono district will not afford to pay off these civil servants’ pension.  We are also afraid that these people could organise and sue Government, as was the case in Mbale.

Madam Speaker, we have Kawolo hospital in Mukono, which serves almost every part of Uganda. This hospital is overwhelmed by the magnitude of accidents along that road, especially around Mabira.  I am very grateful to the staff and management of the hospital because they have tried under all odds to save people’s lives.  My call is to Ministry of Health that they treat Kawolo as a special unit, to be well equipped with blood and the necessary drugs to help the accident victims and staff to handle the magnitude of the emergencies the hospital faces.  

As I conclude, I would also like to air out this concern. Across the board, all districts in Uganda were required to have only three secretaries. Secretaries are the equivalent of ministers at central Government level. While three secretaries may be enough in districts that have one county, for we have districts that are as big as one county in Mukono’s district. We have four big counties making up with 29 sub-counties, five of which are in the island. As I have already said, every sub-county has a bundle of a number of islands that are combined to make a sub-county.  

When it comes to monitoring and supervising the big sums of money that Government remits to Mukono district, we find that the hands of Mukono local Government are tied up.  What we are asking Government to consider is that Mukono district be given special treatment, given its geographical area. We would be glad if three more secretaries were added. I know it has some financial implications and maybe Government did it with the intention of budget management, but there is some local revenue raised. The extra number of secretaries could be catered for using the local revenue.  I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

4.10
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): I add my voice to my colleagues’ in congratulating the Deputy Speaker. I think the President’s State of the Nation Address was very timely because it came at a time when we all needed some guidance. I am going to dwell more on the economy, which is my area of competence. Unfortunately, the President’s treatment of this subject was crowded by energy crisis. It was so severe that he felt it good to draw our attention to this crisis so that the Minister of Finance could justify the measures that were taken in the Budget to solve it. All nations depend on their natural resources. 

There has been a lot of discussion in the press and radio stations during the last few weeks about the discovery of oil in this country.  This was expected for many years. When I was a youth, we always heard something like oil out there in Hoima but nobody had ever discovered it.  This has got a great impact on this nation’s development. I wish to request that to avoid all this speculation, the ministry responsible for this very important resource makes a statement in Parliament clearly stating what is actually on the ground. 

We have been informed of the likely revenue of Ugshs 200 billion every year, but we could not confirm this, by mere hearing it from the press.  We would like to know whether this is real and how much it will affect our budget.  We have also been reading in the press that some people are speculating as to how much they should take out of this. Others are saying we must increase our share from 20 to 40 percent. It looks like there is now a scramble like it once happened about the gold scramble in South Africa. We would like to know what is really in there for the whole nation. 

Uganda is definitely waiting to benefit from this source. Some of us come from very impoverished parts of this country. For instance, West Budama County North wonders how this resource will help them to come out of the rampant poverty in their county. My constituency is a very rural one. From what the people say, it appears it has been neglected for a long time. 

Madam Speaker, poverty is very rampant and in fact many people live below $1 a day. The water coverage in my constituency is below 30 percent, out of the national average of 64 per cent. 

My constituency has no electricity. People are asking, “If there is load shedding elsewhere, why can’t we share in this load shedding?” Electric poles are erected in other places and immediately electricity is distributed. However, the ones that were erected in West Budama about 10 years ago are falling because the white ants are eating them up.

The schools in my constituency do not perform well at all. The drop out rate is also very high for both boys and girls. In West Budama, aggregate 4 in PLE is unheard of. I am told that we shall soon have Eastern University. However, I wonder who will join this university. Shall we import students from other parts of the country? I know it is a national university but we also want to benefit by getting our own children to this university. However, we cannot do this if we are not able to bring them through the primary and secondary system, to enable them gain acceptance into this institution.

The health of my people is in the most precarious state. Mortality rates are very high, we do not have any ambulances and the health clinics, which are supposed to be in every parish, have not been constructed. As a result, we have decided to use people’s homes as clinics. Therefore, we request Government through the relevant ministry to take this up and provide a solution.  

The roads are in a very sorry state and since the time is short, I would like to just talk about one more point, which has been a big problem in our district. This is in the new district of Tororo. We need to have the report by the committee, which made recommendations that are yet to be implemented. 

Over the weekend, there was a lot of apprehension in Tororo town where people were saying the other group is coming to take over the district headquarters. It is very important that this issue be resolved. The Minister of Local Government went there early last week. I think he could not make a statement because there was so much confusion. It is important that this issue be resolved. I thank the President very much for having made this important statement.  

4.18
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. I also congratulate all Members of the Eighth Parliament upon their successful election campaigns. I also want to take this opportunity to thank the entire leadership of the opposition for having found me suitable to take over the portfolio of Shadow Minister of Housing and Urban Development.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, because of the change in our sitting arrangement, the Hansard would like to know who you are and your constituency.

MR MABIKKE: Madam Speaker, this Parliament has only two lucky Members of Parliament, who have been sent to this Parliament by God. The two are the Member of Parliament from Ruhama and I -(Laughter)- We are about to form a holy caucus in Parliament -(Laughter)- I will be the chairman of that caucus and the Member for Ruhama will be the treasurer -(Interruption)

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, you wisely advised the Member to mention his name for record purposes. Is it in order, therefore, for him to digress from your advice and begin innuendos that even put his repetition into jeopardy? 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is not a joke when I ask you to record your name and constituency in the Hansard. Therefore, please, comply. Tell the Hansard who you are and your constituency. The other godly business could then follow. (Laughter)

MR MABIKKE: Madam Speaker, my name is Michael Mabikke. I represent the people of Makindye East Constituency in this Parliament. I was elected to this Parliament as an Independent.  The President alluded to Members who stood as Independents in his speech, as having been undisciplined. I would like to take sometime to talk about this matter of Independents. 

The party, which I formerly belonged to, DP, elected me as chairman of the constituency in November 2005. The party constitution is very clear. It is the party delegates conference in the constituency that elects a Member of Parliament in the party primary elections. To my surprise despite the fact that I am the Chairman of DP in Makindye East Constituency, a handful of people sat in somebody’s house they selected a Member of Parliament without the chairman.  No way!  There is no way I would stand that injustice.  This kind of injustice is not only in DP; it is also in the Movement because we have Independent Movementists -(Interruptions)- Injustice is also in UPC. Injustice is everywhere. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.  

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much for warning my friends against the chorusing- (Laughter) Madam Speaker, injustice is everywhere and this is a challenge of multiparty democracy. As we build multiparty democracy, we should not repeat the mistakes we committed in the previous elections.  This injustice must be fought everywhere, including in DP, Movement, FDC and UPC.  That is the only way we shall build and sustain a truly multiparty democracy.

I represent a constituency that is urban and my constituents expected some particular issues addressed in the President’s State of the Nation Address.  The President’s address had many positive issues but also very many contradictions. For instance he alluded to Independents as having been Undisciplined. As I have already said, I am not undisciplined.  The President’s address was lacking in as far as painting the future vision of this country is concerned. We expected that this having been the first address in the multiparty dispensation, he should have clearly painted a complete picture of where Uganda is heading.  

I represent people who are suffering from urban poverty, people suffering from urban unemployment. My people do not sleep well; they do not eat well.  And yet, they are so near here, just a few kilometres away from this House and State House.  This is an issue that has not been given national attention.  

When we talk about poverty, we are talking about rural poverty; we are talking about poverty eradication in different parts.  We have not addressed ourselves to the issue of banning urban poverty and urban unemployment, which are causing restlessness among our people. In fact, my people in Makindye East refused to vote President Museveni. Dr Kiiza Besigye scored 59 per cent and President Museveni scored –(Interruption)- Madam Speaker, you must protect me from that over zealous Movement cadre from Kamwenge.  

The reason President Museveni did not perform well in my constituency was because the majority there are dissatisfied with Government’s failure to address the burning issue of poverty, unemployment, housing and very poor living conditions.  In future, we expect the President to come out very clearly and precisely on the complete steps he intends to take to address this matter. 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Two minutes.

MR MABIKKE: Madam Speaker, I have got a problem with this time keeping and management. As you may realise, there is only one Opposition Member of Parliament to three Movement Members.  I think we should speak for a time equal to three Movement Members of Parliament- (Laughter)

Despite the sloganeering of “bonna bagaggawale”, for a fact you will not agree with me, this “bonna bagaggawale” thing is just sloganeering.  Government is not ready in the next four or five years to put this programme in action.  And I believe that in spite of the sloganeering, it will not be very good. I warn that it will not be advisable for Government to come out sloganeering without making adequate preparations.  

Madam Speaker, in the same way, the President talked about Universal Secondary Education.  This is a very good programme, just as UPE.  However, is the country ready?  Why can’t we for God’s sake, first address the inadequacies in UPE before we concretise another ambitious project? Anyway, your mistakes are our advantages, our campaign tools. Let us wait for 2011- (Interruptions) I am here as a Shadow, but just give me time.  

Madam Speaker, by way of conclusion, Government should come out and only pronounce programmes and projects for which we are prepared.  You cannot talk about “bona bagagawale” when you are still the leading borrower.  

Uganda was the first country to benefit from Highly Indebted Poor Countries programme (HIPC).  You were forgiven a debt and at the same time you are still the leading borrower from World Bank.  You are forgiven but you keep borrowing.  In fact, we are supposed to be declared bankrupt.  And here you are sloganeering “bonna bagaggawale”. It is not possible for every family to be given Ugshs 1,000.  Let us not joke about serious national matters.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable member.

MR MABIKKE:  Madam Speaker, I thank you for this time and I will get more time to contribute in the following debate.  Thank you very much.

4.29
MR ALBERT ODUMAN (FDC, Bukedea County, Kumi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to speak. This is my maiden speech.  As I join the rest of the House in thanking the President for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the State of the Nation of Nation Address. I wish to make observation on two areas of his speech.  

The first is the issue of poverty.  I expected some radical departures from policies that have not worked before. However, I have seen some of those recycled back into economic policy.  I am not a believer in universal policies because these were applied by God in the creation of the universe.  They apply where you have no scarcity of resources. God would wake up and say, “Let there be sunshine” and there it was.  This works for rich countries, which have a good pool of resources. They can afford to say, “Health for All” because they have the resources.  

For poor countries, research has shown that there is a shift towards targetism rather than universalism. A good example is Chile as a country, which adopted a philosophical shift from universalism to targetism.  

When you go to war - I am not a soldier though - but when you go to war, you shoot where you are sure you are going to kill on the other side.  Therefore, UPE as an example of universal policy misses the target because what we are targeting here are poor people.  

Madam Speaker, you know that when we talk about poverty, we mean the 38 per cent poor living below the poverty line. What I am advocating for is that we must go right to the poor.  UPE in the current design does not target the 38 per cent.  If you, for example, as a Member of Parliament take your child to Buganda Road Primary School, your child will be admitted and you will benefit from UPE credit. That is not a pro poor policy.  A pro poor policy targets specifically the poor ones. We need to know who is poor and go right for him.

Successful policies like, “Kick Polio Out of Uganda” have been successful because of good targeting.  You know who is affected by polio; you know who is between one year and five years. You call them and immunise them. For poverty, we should be able to say, “Where are the poor?” We should be able to say, “We want to meet the poor today. We have a meeting with the poor.” The way it is at the moment, Madam Speaker, it is like going to war and instead of shooting the target; you shoot in the air.  

Therefore, to say “bonna bagaggawale” is to miss the target because of inadequate knowledge of who the target is. All we know is general information; 38 percent are below poverty line. But where are they?  Let us go for them and identify them. When we talk about poverty, we are talking about a specific category of people.  

Madam Speaker, on another occasion we could debate whether or not UPE is a success. When the concept of UPE was initiated, it was meant to help the graduates of primary seven. When they leave primary school, they should be able to read a medical prescription because that is one way of fighting poverty. However, reports indicate that our pupils cannot read properly and apprehend a medical prescription even after primary seven. 

The District Inspector of Education closed Katekwani Primary School in my constituency during the first week. Ever since it was reopened this term, the students have never studied. Whereas one arm encourages UPE, the other frustrates it. I am happy to report that I have already passed on the message to the minister concerned and she is working on it.  

As I said, we must target policies to the rightful poor, who are the beneficiaries rather than spreading resources. Otherwise, the outcome will be very poor delivery of resources. Benefits meant for the poor end up becoming sub standard. 

Madam Speaker, I also wish to mention something about the issue of Karimojong.  I have had the privilege of working on the Karamoja question while I was in civil service. The question of disarmament misses the point of what the issue is in cattle rustling. 

The point is not the gun. In order to handle the Karimojong question, we must understand the Karimojong. The Karimojong are warriors, a term which comes from the word “war”. They have never been to Kimata college of training but they can fight using the gun or the spear. If you take away their gun or spear, they can even use stones. Therefore, as you can see, disarmament is not the solution to the Karimojong question.  

Madam Speaker, I recommend that the policy focus shift from disarmament to understanding the Karimojong and the problems affecting them. I recommend that we adopt a traditional approach if we are to solve Karimojongs’s problems. We need to understand how the Karimojong conduct raids. I have been there and I know what happens there. When the Karimojong decide to go for a raid, they consult a soothsayer, elders and in those consultations, a goat is killed. The intestines of the killed goat are then removed so that the soothsayer reads from the intestines what the outcome will be.  Therefore, I wish that as we understand the dynamics of cattle rustling, we target where the actual problem is.  

In civil society, there is a target to the Karimojong Initiative for Sustainable Peace.  Madam Speaker, that initiative is about elders themselves coming out in Karamoja and advising their own communities. They will say, “Don’t go for cattle rustling” because when the youth go for cattle rustling they consult the soothsayers and the elders. That is where we should start. The internally initiated mechanism of stopping cattle rustling is what I recommend will work to solve the Karamoja question.

4.38
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I salute you for having made it to that seat again though dreams were that you would have made it a little higher than that.  I salute all honourable members for making it to the Eighth Parliament.  

Having come from the left hand side of the Speaker, I stand to contradict what His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda brought as his address to this nation.  Therefore, I do not have anything good to talk about that address. I pray that I bite my tongue if anything good intends to come out of my submission.  

I pick from what my honourable colleagues said as far as security is concerned. My colleague talked about disarmament, in detail. Madam Speaker, you will agree with me that this process started 20 years ago when the Karimojong were attacking Teso and the neighbouring districts. That was way back in mid 1986.  Innocent Ugandans had to wait for 20 clean years before anything like that could begin. Was this a reality?  

We have not understood why the Karimojong are rustling and invading the neighbouring districts continuously.  We are disarming the Karimojong at the moment. However, what happens to the Dodoth, the Turkana and the neighbouring raiders?  When they surrender the guns, what happens? The borders are free. Is this a solution to Uganda’s problem?  I stand to strongly say this is not a solution. When His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda says, “we are now disarming”, he is just telling lies.  

About the issue of poverty, the president mentioned something to do with Bubonic Plague in West Nile. What President forgot was that by the time he went to Nebbi in 1999, if I understood him, he had been in power for 13 years. If he had been that patriotic, wouldn’t he have gone to do something better for these innocent Ugandans?  Did they have to wait for all this time?  This is in a country he has led for over 10 years. Is it realistic when he compares it with Europe?  It is not only in West Nile, but also very many other innocent Ugandans elsewhere are living beyond the poverty line. Therefore, it is time the President stood on his feet and got to know our problems so that he caters for the very affected areas.  

Madam Speaker, I mentioned the areas of Northern Uganda, some parts of Eastern Uganda and some parts of Bugisu coming down to Koboko. If the President had any good political will for these areas, I would be one of the happiest innocent Ugandans.  

In his state of Nation Address, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda was proud to talk about Constitutional amendments. What he was happy about is the raising of the term limits. He forgot that patriotic Ugandans knew that a lot of bribery went along to have these term limits lifted. Is this something to be proud of?  We stand in the opposition especially in FDC to say this is nothing to write about. To my honourable colleagues, if that happened one time, next time we will be very proud if any member of the –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I was very reluctant to stand on a point of order but considering that my dear colleague has mentioned something very fundamental in this House, I will interrupt her. She alleges that the passing of some of the constitutional amendments was influenced by bribery. I would appreciate that that be substantiated. If not, is she in order to raise that kind of allegation?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in making some of these allegations, you should be ready to substantiate. Hon. Ekwau could you tell us about the bribery details?

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When I was campaigning, most members of Kaberamaido district were not voted back into this august House because everyone in Kaberamaido claimed they signed for five million and Kaberamaido was number 46, 48 and 49 respectively. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you produce that list?

MS EKWAU: If I am asked to, I will.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Produce it now.

MS EKWAU: Given time, but in the interest –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you cannot produce it, withdraw the statement.

MS EKWAU: I withdraw it, Madam Speaker. 

The other thing I would like to talk about is the issue of energy. You will agree with me that hydro electricity power reached Kaberamaido in 1965. After ten years, it went off, until today. We have never had any electricity. Sometimes we feel that some animals are more equal than others. I will be knocking at the office of the Minister of Energy to see that Kaberamaido gets electricity again. 

As far as education is concerned, I wonder where the education of the Republic of Uganda is heading.  In the past, schools had textbooks, teachers had three bed roomed houses; they would go to school with only just a few of their belongings and be given beds and furniture. However, these days there are very miserable conditions under which the teachers live. What should we make out of this?  All I know about the education system of Uganda is that it is characterised by nothing else but cheating of exams. UPE would have helped other Ugandans but then what do we do with the level of education that has completely dropped?  Something had better be done. 

As I conclude, I beg my colleagues to think about other regions of the country that are very poor. Kindly think and mind about other regions of the country that are so poverty stricken, it is our responsibility and good will if all parts of the country could be moving at the same pace.  I do this if there is anything I have said wrong I have done it for only God and my country.  Thank you very much.

4.49
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu):  I was not privileged, Madam Speaker, to listen to the President because I was out of the country. But for the last 10 years I have been listening to the President delivering the State of the Nation Address. When I returned, I looked through the speech and found that they are actually the constant statements with the only difference perhaps in sentences. I would, therefore, like to take this opportunity to respond to basically two issues.  

One, is on the state and governance and the other on security. Madam Speaker, as leaders we should distinguish between the role of the state and that of the ruling political party.  The moment we as leaders cannot distinguish between the state and the role of the state - with the role of the political party in Government, we falter and we would not deliver. A nation is a nation.  Governments come and go, but the state remains.  

The major problem of this country has all along been a weak state. And ever since this President took over power in 1986, his emphasis has all along been building a strong state. But sometimes I really feel great pain when I see the same people who pledged to establish a state yesterday, manipulating the same state. And this explains why to many politicians it is very difficult to distinguish between the ruling party and the state.  It is even very difficult for them to distinguish between the role of the state and activities of the ruling party. 

For goodness sake, if we want to save this country - because when we stand here and say let us work for this country - I was happy when I read what the President said that we should stop politicking because politics is over and we work for this nation, I thought it was fine.  But when you listen to people and see the way they conduct themselves, how they handle situations and the way the Police as an institution is being manipulated, you wonder.  

Yesterday I was on a talk show on Radio One, one of my colleagues even had the guts to say: “Government is doing a lot; you see what the UPDF is doing.” But the UPDF is just one Arm of the state. The state is much broader than the UPDF. I hope and only wish that our leaders could get the nation to understand and distinguish between the state and the other activities because governments come and go, but the state must remain and serve all of us.  Whether you are in the opposition or in Government, the state must remain there to serve you and the people of Uganda.  

The Police as an institution must always remain there to serve and maintain law and order, simple. Law and order to either side whether you are in the ruling party or in the opposition, the Police must play their role. The Army must protect the sovereignty of the country -border to border; it must protect the nation. But sometimes I find a lot of difficulties in understanding, for example, why other parts of the country continue to suffer as if the state is not there.  What is the role of the state? Border to border protection of the sovereignty of this nation.   For many years the people of northern Uganda have suffered. I am happy now that many Ugandans have come to terms with it; they do understand it because part of the problem was ignorance.  

I was saddened when a colleague stood on the Floor of this House today and said there is peace in Uganda now – peace in Northern Uganda! And that goes back to the concept – what is peace? What do you understand by peace?  There is a group of Parliamentarians who have just returned from the North and they know the situation there.  

The state must function as a state. The state must not just be seen through the Army, the Army must be seen through its collectivity of activities. When you go to Northern Uganda now, you wonder whether the state is there in its full capacity. It is not.  And this is why leaders in the North complain. The Army is doing its work as a contribution.

The Judiciary is not there; the resident judge who is supposed to be in Gulu, for example, is not there and there is no magistrate in Pader district. How do you usher in peace if the state cannot perform its other responsibilities? We should grow up as leaders and I challenge this Parliament to grow up. Let us stop this politicking of assumption - the politics of following and assuming that somebody has said there is peace and therefore there is peace.  

What is the concept of peace? Why are people still in protected camps? Do you know the conditions in those camps?  Is there maintenance of law and order in those camps? Is there justice in those camps? What is happening? The state has not had the full capacity to perform and this is why the leaders in Northern Uganda in most times complain. But their complaints are always met by shallow analyses of the situation. This is why I say that even the President sometimes when you read through his speeches and his analysis of security is totally misplaced.

I wonder what those many advisors they are doing!  We have security people, for example, in Northern Uganda, what are they doing? Why aren’t they telling the truth? Why are they not giving the full analysis to the President? What does it cost the President to say: “The North is not peaceful.  As a Government we are sorry but it is our responsibility to deliver, maintain law and order of the state from border to border.”  Whether there is conflict or not, it is the responsibility of the state to do that. 

If you want to forge a nation this should be our focus and when you look at the voting pattern, it should tell you all that has been going on. So, as leaders in this Parliament, I would advise that we put all the other things apart and focus on making the state deliver in all parts of this country.  

DR NSABA BUTURO: Honourable Okumu is renown for consistently pursuing a line that says, “This Government is responsible for the suffering of our people in Northern Uganda.”  Honourable Okumu is the only person I can recall who hardly knows that the situation in Northern Uganda is caused or has been caused by a number of factors:  One, the Sudanese role in Northern Uganda; secondly, local support which for a long time made it very, very hard for our armed forces to do the job they were sent to do.  But hon. Okumu continues to say that it is this Government, which is responsible for this suffering of our people.  Is he in order, Madam Speaker?  Is he in order to distort facts, which are well known to everybody except him?  

Can I add this one, Madam Speaker?  When campaigns were in top gear, the FDC told our people in Northern Uganda that if they were voted in power, the war would end immediately.  What is the hon. member now talking about if his line is that the war is still going on?  But is he in order to continue distorting facts?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now honourable members, you know in this general debate, unless you convince us that what he has said is not true - but he was saying that he wants more attention paid to the war so that it can end.

MR OKUMU:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  It even saddens me further that the minister did not distinguish between what I meant by the role of the state and the ruling party, and he is serving minister in Government!  It really saddens me because I expect that the minister should understand what I was talking about. The state should perform, and it has its own responsibilities. 

My colleague has served many governments, including the Obote II Government.  He was a DC in Kampala, responsible for security in Kampala, responsible for “pandagali” at that time.  So, it really saddens me.  Let us face facts; let us not change goal posts and speak when it suits us because we want to defend something.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I am really pained and I would not actually have stood up, but because this is an old Member of the Sixth and Seventh Parliament.  This honourable member has been facilitated a number of times to go and make peace in his area.  He is aware that there is a programme under the Northern Uganda Rehabilitation Programme - these are huge sums of money.  Our children in UPDF have died defending these people.  So, this Hansard cannot continue to be fed with –(Interruptions)- I want to be polite.  

He is part of the state, because Parliament is an arm of the state, the Executive is an arm of the state and a local citizen at LC I or II is an arm of the state.  So, let these Members of the Opposition not ridicule us.  We know what we are doing; there have been problems.  Committees have been to this area and we have made our contribution.  

Madam Speaker, what annoys me, recently I was reading in the newspapers that even when hon. Rugunda - Government has accepted to go and meet people who are denying that they have not killed people, some leaders are saying we should not meet them.  What do some Ugandans expect us to do?  Let him not only think that it is him who cares for Uganda and the Northern Region.  Even other taxpayers are putting money in the budget to facilitate peace in Uganda.  Is he in order therefore to put bitterness and to distort facts?  

When Government comes to respond, Madam Speaker, I think the Minister of Defence, that of Northern Uganda - every minister should present what we have contributed in Northern Uganda so that Ugandans know how much we have done in Northern Uganda?  Have we been sitting?  This is the only President who has resided more than once in the North.  Why don’t people appreciate that?  When you head, you should also be realistic.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now honourable members, it may be true that there are some things that have not been well handled to your satisfaction, but it is also true that many efforts have been going on.  So, I think if you could abandon that line and conclude.

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I thought I was loud and clear.  For those who never understood me they can read the Hansard.  I said the state is not just one component of Government.  If Parliament has played its role and the UPDF are playing their role that is not all about the state.  I thought that is what I said.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I said, please abandon that line.

MR OKUMU: If the President, for example, has come in the North, how many ministers here on this Floor even in the last Parliament have crossed Karuma to go to the North to support the President, to do their work?  Yes, we are grateful for that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please conclude.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: So, I want to be loud and clear that lessons need to be learnt on what the state is all about and how it functions. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, I want to touch on the final thing about our foreign relations.  First of all, we are very grateful that the people in Southern Sudan are stabilizing - they are getting on their feet.  I only pray that we as neighbours continue to support them.  We should not do anything that will antagonise our brothers in Southern Sudan, but try to do everything possible to support them. And on that note, I want to salute the leadership in Southern Sudan for the support they are giving in the peace process to stabilise not only Southern Sudan, but Northern Uganda.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.   

5.06
MR MATHIUS BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I am a Member of the Democratic Party, the oldest party in this country: The party that ushered in self-governance and independence to this country. The party that at one time sat on your right hand side and another time came where I am; the party that values truth and justice, which everybody cherishes.  

Madam Speaker, at this point I bring greetings from the President General of the Democratic Party, hon. Sebaana Kizito to this august House.  I wish to also congratulate the Rt. honourable Speaker of this House, a son of the soil where I come from and also to congratulate you, Madam Speaker, for having been elected in that position. 

And in fact, I want to echo my friend hon.Okello-Okello who said that it is very important that leaders are given time to act so that they can be evaluated.  I am very much - in fact- I admire the way you have controlled this House these days, Madam Speaker, so I thank the House that elected you as Deputy Speaker. 

Coming to the President’s State of the Nation Address, first of all, I would like to support the motion moved by my sister the hon. Nansubuga. Although I have some few observations - that was the presidential aspiration for this country but I think there are some issues that must be brought forward.  For example, when the President was addressing the nation he said that the opposition – one Member in my party had said that Kyakwanzi should continue.  

What the Member said and indeed what the President of the Democratic Party emphasised was that any organisation whether religious or the Army always has training.  So, the Movement Government or the Movement Party if they want to sustain Kyakwanzi, they should do it on their own as a party but not at the nation’s expense. If my party is allowed to go and train using our own tutors, then there is no problem; but to continue spending tax payer’s money in Kyakwanzi is where we differ with His Excellency the President.

Madam Speaker, His Excellency the President talked about constitutionalism and rule of law. I would like to give credit where it is due. As a member of the Democratic Party, my party that suffered in 1980s; we lost several Members of Parliament: hon. Bamuturaki was shot, hon. African Sembatya and hon. Ssebugwawo was abducted. So, I want to thank the President for the rule of law so far –(Applause)

But, I would like the government to create a conducive atmosphere for the growth of multipartyism because you hear somebody somewhere talking: “If you are in the opposition, you either migrate or you hang yourself.” Can you imagine! If the President is thinking about constitutionalism and rule of law and the opposition is supposed to be here by law, how can you tell people to migrate?  

The Romans have got a saying, it is in Latin, it says, “Dime con quién andas, y te diré quién eres” the learned friends you know that.  It means, “tell me who you walk with and I will tell you who you are.”  So, at this point I would like the President to come out and say something when people abuse the opposition and look at us as if we are people just to scorn at.  For example, how can the President refer to the opposition as night dancers?  So, the President should be able to change the rule of law and constitutionalism.  

Madam Speaker, the right of peaceful demonstration –(Interruption) 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I have attentively listened to the Member holding the Floor and the President when he was giving his State of the Nation Address. I was present and I have read his speech nowhere have I met any clause or sentence saying that the opposition are night dancers.  Is, therefore, the honourable member in order to debate what is not contained in the presidential address?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know the State of the Nation Address is a general debate, which you cannot just confine to- because members are supposed to pick a sentence or two from the speech and then talk about their constituencies - talk about Uganda.  But when did he say that they are night dancers? (Interjections) 

AN HON. MEMBER:  In campaigns.

MS ALASO: I would like to inform my honourable colleague that His Excellency, the President said that we in the opposition are night dancers and sorcerers when he was in Kumi officiating at the launching of a classroom in Mulikala Primary School, he said it.
 
MR RUHINDI: Madam speaker, I wish to inform this honourable House that the matter of whether the President made that allegation that the opposition are night dancers was embodied in a petition challenging the election of the President.  That matter went to the Supreme Court and the Supreme Court adjudicated in favour of the President and indeed the entire NRM that that was not true.  Is he, therefore, in order, Madam Speaker, for members of the opposition to insist that that is indeed the truth?

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can the Attorney-General inform me the context of that judgment?  Did he actually say it, or he did not say it, or it was not true?  Can you tell us what the ruling was in respect of that matter? 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, can I make an undertaking to bring to you the exact ruling on that matter tomorrow?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR BIREKERAAWO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, what happens when an allegation is made against somebody who is not a Member of the House, is it the Prime Minister who responds or we invite this individual to come and be a visitor of the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: no, the Leader of Government Business and the Minister for the Presidency represent him here. Any of them will be able to respond. They will be given a chance to respond -(Interjection)- No, she was talking about one individual, not everybody. He has got representatives who will speak for him on that matter.

MR BIREKERAAWO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In constitutionalism and rule of law, we have freedom of expression including the media, which is needed for the flow of free ideas if we are to build a multiparty system. 

For those of you who have been reading newspapers, I was surprised when His Excellency the President was being interviewed by the Daily Monitor, and when he was ushered in he asked: “Where are the enemies?”  As a person who was in the struggle for the emancipation and liberation of this country, I know what the media did. In the early 1980s - I can see hon. Matia Kashaija there. Those were the people who were in the media, which played a great role to support the Movement in the liberation of this country. So, at this time if the Movement looks at the media as enemies - we cannot build a nation when you do not respect the media. 

About the reconstruction of the North, people have been exchanging words here in the House. I would request that in order to neither blame the government nor the opposition, let us have a Parliamentary Commission for the North - for Members from the government side and the opposition so that we form a commission for the North, then we shall not blame Government either for having neglected the North or the government side to blame the opposition that we support rebellions in the North.

Last is about land. I am the spokesperson for land matters in the Democratic Party. My party takes it very seriously the way chunks of land in this country are being donated out. When you look at – in fact those of you who are following Kofi Anan in West Africa, he said there is a new scramble for Africa in terms of investment. When you look at the way UBC was taken, Shimon Demonstration School and Nsambya Police Barracks! We are not saying they should not develop these things. 

Two weeks ago, during an induction course at Hotel Africana, we were told that Parliament plays an oversight role by protecting or safeguarding national assets. Not because I am in the opposition - each Member of Parliament here is responsible for the national assets. When national assets are going like this and we keep quiet as Members of Parliament, we shall be to blame. 

I have information today, you remember last time when you asked Rt. hon. Prime Minister about renovation and expansion of this House - he said there was five billion shillings, but when the Minister for Finance was asked to confirm that, he could not. I have information that even the Parliamentary Building and its gardens are subject for lease. If it is not true, I want the Minister in charge of Parliamentary Affairs to confirm in this House that these places are not subject for lease now and in future during the tenure of this Government. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.21
MR CHARLES OLENY (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I would like to join the rest of the Members who have moved and added their voices to congratulating the list of many of us in this country who have assumed the various offices. I as well add my voice to that. 

While I commend the President for his State of the Nation Address, I would like to make the following observations. First and foremost, I want to agree with the semantic treatment His Excellency gave to this State of the Nation Address. I have heard from some Members that this seems to be repeated. Honourable Okum has just stated that when he looked at it, it seemed not to change. 

I want to say that we have been in Uganda for as many years as you all know. The problems of this country have not changed a great deal; and therefore the fact that the President constantly addresses these issues in a systematic manner should not really raise a big issue. But I think it was commendable to note how he was treating these semantic areas in as far as what the government has done, what is in store and what are the challenges. I commend the President very much for that. 

As an Independent Member of Parliament, I think the President did mention in his State of the Nation Address that all the Independent Members of Parliament are applauded. I want to commend the President for having joined the host of voices in this House that have all along treated independents as no different from the rest of us who came in here through party tickets. The President indeed is one person that all along has advocated for the recognition of the Independent Members of Parliament. (Applause) The various deficiencies that resulted in a big number of independents emerging are well articulated in this address. 

And I want to go further to thank this House for having accepted as well to - as you remember initially the Independent Members of Parliament had attracted a lot of debate on the Floor of the House. I want to thank the House for having agreed as well to treat the Independent Members of Parliament the way they have done, both in terms of membership to the committees and their role in Parliament. 

 I would like now to move on to an issue that touches on constitutionalism and the rule of law.  I would like to discuss this together with the security as articulated by His Excellency the President.  Yes, in his address, the President endeavoured to a great extent to give us the genesis of the LRA war in the North and many of us should appreciate the prognosis there in articulated.  And Government has gone to meet the expectations of many Ugandans in as far as the prosecution of our struggle to realise peace in the North is concerned.  Of course this has not come easy, there are a lot of challenges.  

Indeed when hon. Okumu makes those observations, I share with him the pain that the people of the North have gone through.  But I also want to add that, it is only not just me and him who feel this pain, I am very sure from the exposition of many Members, we all do share and including the President, we all do share the pain that Northern Uganda is going through.

In addition to that, I also bring in under security the very matter that touches my own area.  This is to do with the question of the Karimojong and their rustling.  In his address, the President may have his own reasons, but over simplified the question of the Karimojong and insecurity within and between the Karimojong and their neighbours.  And indeed, he went as far as calling it a simple problem.  

But I want to inform the House that, simple problems sometimes if ignored develop into complex problems.  And whereas I believe that the problem of the Karimojong and their neighbours would indeed be a simple one, only in as far as the government would put in the necessary commitment - facilitation to particularly disarm the Karimojong.  

When I make this statement I want to disagree totally with the previous speaker, who literally put a flawed argument on the Floor of this House that the question of Karamoja is not the gun.  I want to reinstate very clearly here that categorically the question of Karamoja is one of the gun culture and unless we move in to remove the guns from the Karimojong, there will be no peace within Karamoja and between Karamoja and its neighbours.  

On that note, I want to commend and indeed encourage Government for the efforts so far that have been directed towards the disarmament programme.  For us, the people in Katakwi, “Asante sana” to His Excellency is not yet to come until this particular programme is driven into its logical conclusion.  

We very well know that the question of Karamoja and armament seem to go beyond the borders of our country and this takes me to some aspects of our security protocols within the East African Community.  I do remember that sometime in the late 80s, there was a joint disarmament programme that was run by both Ugandan and Kenyan governments.  I wanted at this point to remind this House that, and also to appeal to His Excellency the President that whereas I do know and urge for the disarmament in Karamoja, we do feel that it will necessarily lead us to involve the Kenyan authorities. I had a lot of other points, but maybe we will get an opportunity to reflect on some of these in other debates.  

The other one of course goes to the resettlement programme.  Indeed we as leaders of Teso, would like to commend the government for its undertaking of this programme.  However, there are inadequacies in as far as – we have documented this, we have had discussions on this, but unfortunately for the record, the President chose to sight the Teso leaders as one group of leaders who are de-campaigning the programme.  I want to categorically state it here that, we the leaders of Teso have not in anyway, anywhere de-campaigned the resettlement programme.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.32
MR HOOD KIRIBEDDA KATURAMU (NRM, Representative of Persons with Disability, Western): I thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity to make my maiden speech in the Eighth Parliament.  I have before listened to the State of Nation Address by His Excellency the President and on the 9th of June, I listened to His Excellency’s State of Nation Address to, which I regard in the new multiparty dispensation as pointing to a new bearing to our political destiny in this country.  His Excellency the President touched on many important issues concerning the governance of this country.  And of course because of time constraint, I will talk about a few of them.  

First, I wish to talk about institutionalism and the rule of law.  For a long time, our country has had bitter experiences as a result of bad governance because there has not been respect for constitutional governance and the reason was detected by the NRM and that is why in 1994, attempts to make a new constitution were made. Indeed in 1995 a new Constitution was promulgated and that marked a new era in constitutional governance in this country.

Madam Speaker, one of our colleague’s, hon. Nsubuga from Bukoto said here that some prominent Ugandans in the opposition were murdered in cold blood.  This was an indication that there was no rule of law and constitutional governance, which we have today and one that respects even the opposition. They are free to associate the way they want because democracy entails that the people form associations and political organisations of their own choice, which - hon. Nsubuga indeed now you are associating in the Democratic Party and we highly respect you Sir.  

We in the NRM did agree that all Ugandans should be free despite the recommendation from the Sempebwa Commission that Ugandans were not yet ready for multiparty politics.  One of the reasons why Ugandans were rejecting was the political bigotry that Ugandans had suffered under the multiparty arrangements throughout the 1960s to 1980s.  

I am very happy to note that in this new era of multiparty dispensation, it is fully entrenched in our Constitution that the opposition is fully entrenched. And His Excellency the President in his State of the Nation Address said that he would accept constructive criticisms from the opposition in order to build this country.  

Security is a prerequisite to development not only in Uganda, but also in any country in the world.  20 years for which the NRM has been in power save for the North where there has been persistent war but the rest of Uganda has been peaceful.  Security guarantees local investment, foreign investment and it is therefore not a surprise that we are seeing a lot of infrastructure development because both Ugandans and foreigners are confident to invest in this country. They are assured of security of their property and lives.  

As a representative of persons with disabilities, I wish to thank the President who has promised to inject more funds in the education sector.  Before the introduction of Universal Primary Education, we had 20000 children with disabilities and students in schools. After the introduction of UPE, children and students with disabilities are now at 70,000 in this country. This is a remarkable landmark – a positive development in our social sector, which I believe even Members of the opposition will also gladly applaud the government for having uplifted the welfare of the voiceless - the marginalised as enshrined in the affirmative action of our Constitution.

I wish to praise the Vice President of Sudan, His Excellency Salva Kiir for the efforts, which he has made and demonstrated to give handover assistance to the people of Uganda to achieve permanent peace in Northern Uganda. As we talk now, our Minister of Internal Affairs, hon. Rugunda, is in the Sudan. These are the tireless efforts which the NRM Government has been making not only now, but even before to the extent that some gallant Ugandans like Mr Aporu died in an attempt to talk peace with the Lords Resistance Army. 

I am therefore surprised and –(Interjection)- I conclude Madam Speaker that in the quest to have peace in Northern Uganda, I appeal to Ugandans, all our colleagues, Members of the opposition and we on the government side that the question of peace in Northern Uganda is not debatable. Government is making all efforts and we urge you to join hands and make sure that we get everlasting peace in Northern Uganda. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, the previous Speaker just said that the late Aporu Okolo died when he was pursuing peace with the LRA.  Hon. Aporu Okolo did not die in pursuit of peace in the LRA, actually hon. Aporu is said to have been poisoned and unfortunately there is no post-mortem report up to now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Alaso, I think when you are contributing you will talk about that. Let us not cause dialogue here.

5.42
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you Madam Speaker for this opportunity.  On the 8th of June the President recommitted our nation to four fundamental causes of our time. And these are causes personally I do care about, the most being the conflict in Northern Uganda.  

I have followed keenly the issues surrounding the effects of Northern Uganda, the fact that over one million people have been living in camps and thousands of children have been travelling at night in the name of night commuters.  I was happy to note that in his address, the President is committed to solving the problem of Northern Uganda - addressing the problem of Northern Uganda not to exploit the situation.  

On that note, I would like to thank the men and women in uniform who have made a tremendous contribution in ending the war of Northern Uganda.  I was happy to note that even though Joseph Kony is not yet captured, he is not living as a tourist in the Garamba National Park and I thank the President for his efforts.

I gladly welcome the resettlement programme of Northern Uganda. As previous speakers have spoken, this is an issue that - despite our political differences let no one criticise the issue of Northern Uganda. We should show our brothers and sisters that we care for them, and we should support efforts of reconciliation, including the recent development of our Dr Ruhakana Rugunda.  

We cannot debate the state of our nation without debating the state of over two million orphans and vulnerable children many of whom are a result of conflict and the scourge of HIV/Aids. My own experience and trials having been orphaned at the age of three forms this passion and we have a duty as a country to provide a secure future for these children.  

We can also not afford to debate of our nation without debating the image of our country in the international community. The fact that over 30 Presidents and Heads of State will converge here next year is a clear manifestation that the international community has confidence in our country and we should be able to utilise this opportunity to advance the tourism business, and the rest.

As a chartered accountant, I was happy that the President is committed to the course of micro-finance. It is the easiest way to provide credit facilities. You can provide capital to the 67 people who live on subsistence farming. All we need to do as this Parliament is to refocus the execution modalities and the execution strategy to enhance the cause for micro finance. I am aware of the Cooperatives and the Money Lenders Act, but I am not aware of a specific law that regulates these many groups that we are forming in the name of village banks in our rural areas. I think one of the strategies we need to advance as a Parliament is to pass a specific law that will regulate these village banks in our countryside. 

We need to work on these groups that are being formed in our rural areas, make sure that they are formed according to activities of production and once we do that, we connect production to marketing and if we did that we would be helping greatly the cause for micro finance. Also, we need to ensure as a country that this cause is well funded and there is stable flow of finance for this micro finance.

Let me say something about education. I was happy that the President is committed to his manifesto of Universal Secondary Education. The fact that Universal Secondary Education is going to begin in January next year is a good development and I am happy that it is aimed at taking on pupils from UPE and also help to banish the demons of school fees which have been haunting our fathers and mothers. I hope that the money our fathers and mothers have been putting into school fees will be saved and invested in other productive areas.  

Let me finally say something about a group of people without whose efforts none of us would be here, the teachers. I was happy that the President talked about the teachers, he is committed to the teachers and has increased their salary. In our part of the country we have a saying that if somebody is coming from the darkness or the grave, he cannot afford to despise the little sunshine he finds outside. I am sure that the teachers will appreciate the efforts of the President and not despise the Shs 50,000 increment in their salaries.

Madam Speaker, I want to thank you and appeal to Members of this Parliament that we have been sent here not to be masters of our people but to be servants and I hope that will be the basis of our debate in the years ahead.  

5.50
MR IDDI LUBYAYI (Independent, Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): Madam Speaker, I will center my observations on the policy of prosperity for all, bonna bagagawale. The people I represent are poor, they are anxiously waiting for the big amounts of money to be delivered to them. Now the problem is that this prosperity for all is ambiguous, we do not know exactly whether it is for those who are living in grass thatched houses to be transformed into rich people who can build bungalows. We actually do not know whether it is those people who are already rich who are to access this money but all in all, I thank His Excellency the President for identifying this problem of poverty. It is re-identifying because there was already an existing Entandikwa Scheme, which died on the way.  

The policy making process is the cause of the problem. As we are all aware, in policy making we have to follow the real process but we jump from formulation to implementation without following or making research. We should take this awareness seriously and make sure that we involve among the categories of policy makers the elected leaders, appointed leaders, interest groups, researchers and the media but this is incremental where we come from Entandikwa and join bonna bagagawale! 

There is already disbursement taking place in some areas by the Minister of State for Micro-Finance, he has already disbursed some amount of money to some areas. There are such groups and I would think that Cabinet has not helped His Excellency the President to at least make a good research. I have already heard that the sensitisation groups on this bonna bagagawale policy only sensitise people on how to pay the money – on which percentage is to be paid back but our people being poor as they are, need to be sensitised on how this money can be used. This money needs to be used purposefully and distributed evenly. But our people, the peasants have no such sensitisation programmes. I do not know whether the sensitisers are not trained or the programmers are poor? 

I can recall a sad incident after the death of late hon. Minister, Francis Ayume, the President after requesting for a Police report, which identified that the problem was lack of safety belt fastening, after identifying this problem a by-law was put in place immediately after making research. But when you are on the roads, on highways especially from the west, you can see people moving on top of lorries, and safety belts fastening is no more. Although on one side it promotes corruption, on the other people suffer at the hands of this by-law.

I brought this example to bring this awareness to Cabinet because when His Excellency the President was mentioning this policy he said he had contacted the Cabinet. I do not know how the Cabinet came to advise the President on this issue of transformation of a poor person into a rich person - in that process we need consultation, observation and good research.

Another issue I wanted to talk about is a road whose repair is always sub-standard. This is the road from Vila Maria through Bukomansimbi to Sembabule. We have a big problem there but whenever the products are ready, the agricultural products especially, we have a problem with that road, it is in most places impassable. So I pray that this issue of bonna bagagawale includes repairing roads so that we may access a good road - maybe have it tarmacked, and we get access roads from our constituency to the urban area where we can sell our products.
5.57
MS MABLE BAKEINE (NRM, Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): I want to thank the Rt. hon. Deputy Speaker for this opportunity to speak. Honourable members, I want to congratulate the people of Bugangaizi for having put confidence in me by mandating me to represent them at this level. (Applause). This confidence came up after a long period of working with them both at the grassroots and at the district level. I am a graduate of Makerere University and a project management specialist. I have been the chairperson of the farmers’ organisation for eight years. I have been a member of the East and Central African Research Network since 2003. I have been the chairperson of Busita sub-country for the last eight years. I was the vice-chairperson and subsequently chairperson of LC IV, Bugangaizi County for four years. I have been chairperson of the Movement executive committee of my sub-county for the last eight years. Presently I am the general secretary of NRM executive committee, Kibaale district.

Madam Speaker, the people of Bugangaizi sent me to convey their heartfelt congratulations to our beloved President for having successfully made it to this new term of office. (Applause)  They asked me also to bring their warm regards to you, Madam Speaker, and the honourable members of this august House. (Applause)

Bugangaizi community is multi-ethnic, multi- cultural and multi-religious but united in its efforts to develop. As you may be aware Bugangaizi County is endowed with good weather and good soils, which are able to support it and give it two harvests in a year. We are eternally grateful to God the Almighty, the creator of the universe for this endowment and may his name be praised.

HON. MEMBERS: Amen.

MRS BAKEINE: The people of Bugangaizi are very industrious; their main economic activities are crop production and livestock keeping. The main crops grown are beans, maize and cassava. The average holding per crop ranges from half an hectare to three hectares per household per crop.  

Madam Speaker, in his State of the Nation Address, His Excellency the President raised a number of issues. Permit me, to comment on a few of them as they relate to the people of Bugangaizi as well as the nation at large. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have two minutes left honourable member.

MRS BAKEINE: Two minutes, Oh! (Laughter) It is okay. You did not know me. I had to say this is my maiden speech. (Applause) In his State of the Nation Address His Excellency - and I want to comment on a few as they relate to the people of Bugangaizi and the nation at large. 

I want to start with the phenomenon of independent candidates. In his address the President stated, “Since the phenomenon of independent candidates under the new political dispensation in our country is new, we need to identify the challenges it poses and address them.” Though this appears a challenging issue, we think there are some advantages. The advantage is that when a popular candidate is prevented from standing on his party ticket, this window offers a remedy. 

However, there are two challenges. Uganda is coming from a long history of individual merit-based elections. In a multi-party democracy there are parties in the Opposition who present an alternative programme. By so doing they help to offer the electorate with an alternative choice. Since an independent candidate is here as an individual, the presence of so many via this window undermines the effort to promote the multi-party spirit. An independent candidate has no party platform, he has no party policy to sell and as a result many tend to resort to sectarianism. This results into avoidable ethnic conflicts. We need to balance the pros and cons and come up with a position that promotes harmony and nationalism, especially as we move towards the East African Federation.  

I would like to talk about bonna bagagawale. It has attracted a lot of debate. I think there is something very good in it. The people of Bugangaizi support, unreservedly, the intervention proposed by His Excellency the President. We think that in order for it to be effective there are a few strategies that could be incorporated. As I mentioned earlier, the people of Bugangaizi are very industrious. They grow a wide range of crops for domestic consumption and for the market. However, because of poor road infrastructure the total production is not as high as it should be. Because of lack of roads, in some areas the price for the farmers’ produce is so low at times that the people are not encouraged to produce to their full capacity.

As part of the bonna bagagawale initiative detailed in his election manifesto, it was proposed that the Government would make investments in the transport sector. These investments will cover upgrading and tarmacking of national roads, targeting the connection of each district headquarters to the capital. On the list of roads that appeared in the national budget for this programme, the road from Mubende, Kakumiro, Kibaale, which covers 52 kilometres, was not mentioned. We are concerned not only because of the breach of this promise in the manifesto but because this road also carries heavy traffic. When it rains, it becomes difficult to transport our produce. This affects the cost of transporting our produce and ultimately the price to the farmer.  

I hope I will get another opportunity to give more concerns from my constituency. I want to thank you for this time again.

6.08
MR ACHIA TERENCE (NRM, Bokora County, Moroto): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, I do salute all of you for having made it to the Eighth Parliament. Thank you very much for managing to make it. That was a very rigorous undertaking, which was not easy to achieve.

I also do appreciate the motion that the Parliament of Uganda recognises and thanks the President for heavily communicating the Government policies, which are not only for the Parliament of Uganda but also for the entire nation. I have three areas of emphasis to make: one, thanking the President of the state; two, national security, conflict and disaster management; and then thirdly, the Karamoja situation. 

Before I make these remarks, I have some piece of advice for this august House. It is important for us, Members of the Eighth Parliament, to understand ourselves as a family. We should have a vision for our Eighth Parliament so that at the end we should have achieved our goal of developing Uganda. It should not seem as if there is a debate just between the Opposition and the Government side. 

I would feel happy to hear from your side, Members of the Opposition, about the strengths that have been realised. You may mention the weak areas and you may want to give your ideas or constructive criticism. That will be very healthy. However, if you look at everything negatively, so that you have to criticize everything, then we will not be making a family. That is what I would advise as a friend of yours and a Member of the Eighth Parliament.

Coming to my remarks, surely it is always good to thank anybody who does something good for you. Anybody who gives something to you, little as it may be, it is credible always to reciprocate by thanking them. Our President unequivocally deserves to be thanked for the wonderful address on the state of the nation. His address clearly brought out government policies for the benefit of all citizens, development partners and friends of Uganda. Naturally, this motivates and therefore encourages him.   

On national security, conflict and disaster, we Ugandans should be able to look back and reflect on the past. This will give us an opportunity to analyse our country correctly and we shall be able to shape our destiny. The past helps us to get the future right. Let us not forget how messy our country was.

We should also know that Uganda has, so far, had eight Parliaments. This one is the Eighth Parliament.  The first Parliament, which was the one of 1962, had a Constitution that was not participated in or designed by all Ugandans. The 1967 one, that was the Republican Constitution, was the same. It went on for all the rest. I am now pleased to mention that under the Movement Government we have enjoyed Parliaments, which have been empowered by a Constitution designed by all Ugandans. If I had the time I would properly substantiate this point. It is therefore important for us to thank our system and to appreciate what we see as credit.  

Coming to the disarmament programme of Karamoja, Ugandans surely need to understand Karamoja properly. Karamoja has a lot of trouble and it requires special focus. I believe the disarmament programme is going on well in the region, but there were some few mistakes. Members of Parliament from Karamoja met the Minister of Defence, the CDF and also the Minister of State for Defence. We are very happy with the co-operation. We were able to tell them these mistakes, which we got from reports from the field. I am happy that at least there is a move to continue meeting and all these will be rectified.  

We know that these mistakes made by individuals are made not through the command of the Army as an institution but just by few characters who are so indisciplined. The most important point the Karimojong are making about the disarmament process is that they are willing to give in their guns but they request government, very seriously and very humbly, for protection of their lives and property while this is being done. This will give them confidence. Surely our government is also trying hard but where we have shortfalls or gaps we need them to put this right. 

The gun surely must go. The Karimojong are also tired of the gun. The only point is that we should be able to give them protection. There are some wrong characters within the Karamoja community who cause confusion even internally within Karamoja and they also go to the neighbours. I beg you to understand Karamoja properly. Do not put all of them in one basket and say that all Karimojong are rustlers. You need to differentiate. There are thieves in Karamoja who confuse everybody, so we need to isolate them. I also wish to tell you in this august House that the Karimojong are in a desperate position now. They are living in a state of hopelessness. Most of them are living destitute lives. About 500 women and children are roaming in the streets of Kampala, most of you have seen. This is a very bad situation that all of us Ugandans need to sympathize with. 

We should at least recommend for a Karamoja disaster and development forum, which should be able to address these points as soon as possible - the security situation, economic empowerment of Karamoja and the education programme for Karamoja. The Minister in charge of Karamoja I believe would be able to co-ordinate this helped by the Minister of Defence and other ministers. I would be very grateful if all these things are ironed out properly so that we see Karamoja becoming developed like the rest of Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

6.16
MS FLORENCE HASHAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I bring you all happiness and congratulations from the people of Kamwenge upon your landslide victory to the Eighth Parliament. 

I would also like to thank His Excellency the President of Uganda for being a visionary leader. I start by thanking him for coming up with a policy or programme on micro-finance. It is a pity that some of us who should be helping the people we represent put pressure so that the micro-finance policy takes off are not doing so. On 26 October 2005, IMF visitors came to Uganda and indeed they commended Uganda for the good financial institutions. We had a good balance of payment. It is absurd now to hear some of us saying that Uganda should not borrow money from outside. I believe no man lives as an island. We are all dependant on each other. I really thank His Excellency and the Government who addressed this issue in the State of the Nation Address.  

Many of us are saying this programme is not going to work. It depends on how you disseminate information down to the grassroots. I was in Kamwenge last week and I already taught part of the community how this micro-finance is going to assist them. I found groups already in place and I informed those farmers. I told them, “Even if you have nothing, go to the garden and get a hoe. By the time the appraisers come, they will find something and you will get the money.” It is not good for us to look to government programmes because we already have systems in place. There are those who we represent down at the grassroots who need help. It is our duty to push on and make sure that these programmes are in place.  

I will now go on to comment on the decline in the agriculture sector. Agriculture concerns everyone. It is a cross-cutting issue throughout the nation. I, therefore, urge the Minister of Agriculture, maybe hand in hand with the Minister for Disaster Preparedness, to find a solution to the drought that caused the decline in agriculture. This is according to the State of the Nation Address and the Budget. I urge the Government, if programmes are put in place, let us not lag behind or take time to implement them. 

An example is the zoning programme that was introduced in the local government. This zoning would have really helped curb down on the drought in the agriculture sector. I have a sub-county called Kahunge. It is meant to be a rice growing area but you find them growing maize and because it is a dry area, the soil or environment cannot assist the production process. Therefore, I urge the Government to look at the production sector and also put up a strategy to end the drought that caused the decline in agriculture. It is almost the highest contributing sector to the economy of this country. 

I also thank His Excellency the President of Uganda and his government for having thought of Kamwenge as one of the districts to get a water system in place. I really thank you. I believe immediately the budget is passed, the process is going to start. 

I also have a concern on health. Kamwenge is doing badly as far as health is concerned. I call upon the Minister concerned to intervene. We have even failed to get testing kits for people with HIV/AIDS. If you added us on the list for the health centres, it would be very good.

Madam Speaker, allow me share my concern about the road that was promised by His Excellency the President of Uganda, the road connecting Mbarara and Kamwenge to Fort Portal. He has talked about that road several times but it has not surfaced anywhere. Our people grow a lot of maize and they need capital. They need to transport it this way to get better market. Therefore, I urge the people concerned at least the next financial year - let the road be given to us.

Lastly, allow me express my concern on the education sector. Kamwenge is among the new districts that have been created. I was not happy when I read through the district budget on Friday. I found out that we were cut off from the School Facilitation Grant (SFG). Since the world has not come to an end, I wish we could also be put on the list of those districts, which qualify to get the school facilitation grant. With that, Madam Speaker, allow me to express those concerns and also remember me next time so that I catch your eye and stand up again. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will catch my eye but not in this debate again; another one.

6.23
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern Region): Madam Speaker, permit me to join hands with the rest of my honourable colleagues in thanking His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, Rtd. Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for the challenging State of the Nation Address that he delivered to this Parliament. I am thanking him because he delivered a very challenging position on security, with specific reference to the northern Uganda war and the gun-inspired conflict by the Karimojong cattle rustlers. 

Permit me to put it on record in this Parliament that whether NRM, FDC, UPC or Independent, as long as you are a leader and a Member of Parliament who hails from the North our agenda No. 1 is total peace in that region. That is what we stand for. That is our agenda and priority No. 1. We cannot talk about other things when peace is not yet realised in totality. That is what we stand for. 

As a leader I must be honest. Permit me to also put it on record that peace is gradually returning to the northern region. (Applause) At this point in time permit me to thank our brothers and sisters in the UPDF for their contribution. Permit me to commend the auxiliary forces, the Amuka. I was personally a member of the Amuka in Lango sub-region. I must commend myself. I must commend the Arrow Boys in Teso and the auxiliary forces like the Frontier Guard that was operating in the Acholi sub-region. They did a commendable job. 

My position is very clear, more needs to be done. A number of young people have suffered. A number of young people have been victims of abduction, they have been raped, maimed, infected with HIV/AIDS, mention it. My position is clear, as government we should do all it takes to ensure that peace is realised in the North. Madam Speaker, part of my constituency is the Karamoja sub-region. I equally represent the youth, whether they are warriors who come from Karamoja as a sub-region. I must also have a say on their behalf. I have been consulting them. They also voted me as their Member of Parliament. 

On the gun-inspired conflict by the Karimojong cattle rustlers, I personally support the disarmament programme that is ongoing -(Applause)- but I think more needs to be done in addressing the plight of the Karimojong cattle rustlers. I thank my honourable colleague and also observe that we should look at cattle rustlers on the other side, not just say that all Karimojong are rustlers. What we are saying is that in addition to the ongoing disarmament programme government should have a very comprehensive plan, what I call a master plan. After consulting the leadership of the youth in Karamoja, they told me government should have a master plan for Karamoja. This plan should go ahead and first of all identify the problems of the cattle rustlers. Is it water? 

As leaders who come from the neighbouring districts, we should be in a position to mark the problems in Karamoja and tell government. If it is water, let us construct dams such that these people do not cross over. As leaders who come from the neighbouring districts, we are saying that so long as the root cause of the problem of the Karimojong cattle rustlers is not solved, the Teso sub-region, Acholi sub-region and Lango sub-region and even Kapchorwa will continue to be affected by the Karimojong cattle rustlers. That is what we stand for, Madam Speaker.

I would like to conclude by borrowing a leaf from one great scholar who at one time said that the world that we live in is very complex. He went ahead and said that the world is not yearning for words but the world is yearning for positive actions. In the same way, I would like to say Northern Uganda is not yearning for words but Northern Uganda is yearning for continued, positive actions. With these recommendations and observations, I beg to support the motion. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.29
MR ROBERT KASHAIJA (NRM, Youth Representative, Western Region): Thank you, Madam Speaker, honourable ministers, members of the shadow cabinet, hon. First Lady, colleagues, Members of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate His Excellency the President upon his re-election as the President of the Republic of Uganda. 

I also have a few observations to make about the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. Security is No. 1. On page 12, paragraph 2 of the State of the Nation Address, the President regrets that there has been little co-operation for the last nine months from both the UN and the DRC government on the question of pursuing the LRA into Garamba National Park, Congo. He goes ahead to stress that if the DRC and the UN allow the LRA to come near the border of Uganda and Congo especially in the parts of Kpandroma and Ombokoro, he will come to this House to discuss with us what we should do. 

My question is, why should we allow Kony to re-organise himself for another attack? I cannot say that if there is a robber in my village, I will wait at my door to show him a lesson on the day he dares attack. I request this House to put in place a law, which is flexible enough to assist our President take unilateral decisions especially when faced with such a situation. I think the international community and the neighbouring states will even take us more seriously if we do not give any room to such unserious compromises. Though there are consequences for taking unilateral decisions, can we weigh them against decisions that will compromise the security of our country?  

Another point I want to comment on is health. On page 27 of the same address the President stresses that there has been an ongoing debate on the use of DDT to spray mosquitoes. He goes ahead to say that the experts have completed the environmental impact assessment on the use of the same. A few days ago I read a story in one of the local newspapers explaining a horrible experience where two students died and others were rushed to hospitals in Kabale District. The story goes ahead to say that this unfortunate event took place at Rushoroza Secondary School in Kabale District. My question is, if there has been a clear environmental impact assessment study about that insecticide, how shall we trust the use of the newly introduced insecticide called ICON? Is there any explanation?  

Lastly, this is also about politics and nationalism.  The President on page 8 stresses that even the opposition leaders nowadays appreciate the essence of the institute of leadership at Kyankwanzi. My proposal is that this institute be put above politics. There should be a law requiring all graduates to go for a one year service course at that institute before they obtain employment in both the private and public sectors. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.35
MS CHRISTINE BARO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I represent the mandate of the people of Arua District in the interests of FDC. I would like to put my voice across in regard to the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President.  

One, I will comment on the health sector. Madam Speaker, the President’s most loyal constituency in this country is the women. The women of this country have consistently and loyally voted for His Excellency the President, but when you come to the health centres, what you see does not reflect that kind of love and passion the women of this country have for His Excellency. I say this specifically with regard to maternal mortality rates and child mortality rates. 

In my district alone, child and maternal mortality rates are highly disturbing. Mothers of this nation have been classified into various groups. There are those who are unfortunate to suffer their labour pains in bushes and deliver under squalid conditions. There are those who are privileged to enjoy their labour pains on presidential jets, and there are those who are unfortunate to give birth in public offices. It is at this point in time that I would expect His Excellency the President to reflect on the health of his most loyal constituency, the women.  

Still regarding women, my colleagues in the NRM Party massively participated in campaigning for His Excellency the President but when I see the front bench I am highly disturbed. The front bench of the ruling party does not reflect the kind of support that the women gave His Excellency the President. I talk as a woman. My constituency is not only Arua, it cuts across the nation.   

Madam Speaker, I shadow the Ministry of Education.  I get increasingly disturbed with pronouncements such as the Universal Secondary Education programme. Much as I have not received a policy statement from my ministry, I would expect the unit cost of investment in this sub-sector to exceed the average minimum secondary school fees we pay. If the rumour that I am getting is true, which says it is less than Shs 20,000, then we are heading towards eroding the quality of education in this country. When I look at this House I realise that we are here because we had quality primary education, went through good secondary schools and to tertiary institutions that gave us the mandate of who we are today. I wonder whether that can be repeated in the next 20 years.

When it comes to UPE, Madam Speaker, I am interested yet sorry for the fact that we are giving our fellow teachers Shs 200,000 and we are applauding His Excellency for that. I want this House for once to exchange our salaries with them. Give what you are earning per month to a primary school teacher and let him or her give what they earn to you. You will see their concern and realise that it is very genuine. (Applause & Laughter) Otherwise, we are still running on raw -(Interjections)-  I beg to be protected. Yes, get the Shs 200,000 and give your salary to them and see whether you can manage your house even for one day.  

Security and internal displacement in Northern Uganda: I take the privilege to inform this House that in those IDP camps the people do not even have the basic minimum intake levels. We appreciate the fact that efforts have been going on to try to settle the problem. What bothers me is that there is less done with regard to social psychological reconstruction of the people. Much as we are talking about physical security, we are talking of 20 years of trauma. We need investment in that sub-sector so that these lives are not only secure but also psychological and socially stable. It is more difficult to reconstruct somebody socially and psychologically than physically. It is against this background that I find the President’s speech, particularly in regard to security in Northern Uganda, very wanting.

Lastly, investment in agriculture in this country is still too low. As much as we appreciate that this country is one of the fastest growing economies, our investment in the Great Lakes Region in agriculture is still unfortunately very low. We are talking about prosperity for all and micro-finance, tell me how you, a Member of Parliament, is borrowing around Shs 50 million at an interest rate of 16.5 percent and you are telling your counterpart down there, who you want to get loans of around Shs 200,000, to pay back at an interest rate of 20 percent? How helpful are you to that person? I read in the newspapers today that His Excellency the President and Gen. Saleh have disagreed on interest rates. It is in the papers. If that is true, how are we going to make sure that our people are helped as we pronounce prosperity for all? We need a way forward for this country. I thank you.

6.42
MS AGNES AKIROR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for granting me the opportunity to speak in this House. I would like to begin by congratulating you upon the successful retention of your seat. I also congratulate all honourable colleagues for having successfully made it to the Eighth Parliament. It was quite a tough war to fight.  

I would like to begin with an observation on education. I would like to add my voice to the many who have talked about the quality of UPE. We do not criticize UPE for nothing. Honourable members, you will agree with me that the foundation of education is very important. Universal Primary Education as for now is very poor quality. What do we really expect to reap in future from these kinds of students? The teacher to pupil ratio is not proportional and students are automatically promoted from P.1 to P.7. Whether you are the first or 100th out of 100, you have to go on up to P.7. Honestly, the quality of UPE should be improved. 

On Universal post-primary education, I think government should lay emphasis on the quality of education right from the onset so that it can benefit those it is intended to benefit.

Still on education, I believe government should consider putting in place an education loan scheme for the disadvantaged rural poor students. After the universal secondary education, what happens? Most of these students are poor and needy. What about the orphans, how will they go to higher institutions of learning with the kind of fees that is paid today? If this scheme is put in place, I believe human capital is a key factor and crucial in development. It will be the right step forward.

A lot has been said about the State House scholarships. The request of my people is that the scheme should be made public. The criteria for election of beneficiaries per region per year should be made public so that the scheme does not seem to be corrupt. In some regions some of these things actually cost the President votes. If you really love him, some of these things can be addressed. We cannot hide our heads in the sand any longer. Some regions feel they have been sidelined and yet they have very many disadvantaged students who would also benefit from this State House scholarship scheme. Maybe with time, for accountability and transparency, the scheme should be moved back to the Ministry of Education.  

Madam Speaker, a lot has been said about micro-finance but I would also want to contribute on it. The intended beneficiaries for this scheme are the disadvantaged rural poor who live below the poverty line. The interest rate, I believe, should be lowered to less than 10 percent. There should also be interest-free loans for those people in Northern and Eastern Uganda who have lived in camps for the last two decades. This would at least enable them to move slightly above the poverty line from absolute poverty to just being poor. I do not think they can be jump-started to get rich immediately, within five years. They can become just fairly poor.

The health of the rural folk who vote the President overwhelmingly is in a very sorry state. We have health centres but there are no drugs in them. If we want these people to be productive, more resources should be put towards their health. The time they spend mourning, taking care of the sick and on the sick bed would be used for productive activities.  

Madam Speaker, the President said that UPDF has the capacity to promptly deal with any terrorism. It is quite disheartening to see that this problem of cattle rustling, which the President referred to as a simple problem, has gone on for a very long time. Actually, this problem is chronic and it needs to be given the serious attention it deserves. 

At the same time, the plight of the Karimojong people should be addressed. Dams should be put in place. The Karimojong people should be encouraged and facilitated to start income generating activities so that they can also have food security. As of now, the situation in Karamoja is very pathetic. We all read the papers and you have heard that girls as young as 12 to 20 years are being exchanged in markets. Honestly, we should all come out very clearly and condemn this act. It should be stopped forthwith because this is slave trade and it borders on human trafficking in children. I think it is really very unfortunate that this is taking place in Uganda in the 21st Century.  

In his address the President stated that we shall not under-spend on security. My humble prayer is that the overspending on security will actually bring an end to the war in the North and it will also deal with the problem of cattle rustling in the East. Women and children have had their rights abused and violated because of that insecure environment. 

Still on security, I believe the efforts of the Arrow boys should be appreciated. They have tried their best to see that they try to secure our borders with the Karimojong. They helped us repulse the LRA, but their salaries are not promptly paid. The last seven months they have not been paid anything. If they could be paid promptly that could motivate them to act effectively.

In conclusion, it is my prayer that this overspending on security will bring a quick end to the war in the North. This will enable the children in those areas also for once to enjoy their rights, live in peace and in a secure environment. In line with this I would like to lay the children’s memorandum before you. I was presented this memorandum at Pope Paul Memorial on the 15th for policy makers and other lawmakers in this country –(Interruption)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Introduce the title so that it is in the Hansard.

MS AKIROR: To the lawmakers and other policy makers assembled here at Pope Paul Memorial Centre today 15th June, 2006. It is by the children of Uganda and their signatures are here. What they want considered are their rights, which they think are violated. They also talk about insecurity, discrimination and defilement. I think copies will be made for honourable members of this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They will be distributed to the Members. Thank you.

6.54
MS CAROLINE AMALI (Independent, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this chance to talk in this House. Since this is my maiden speech, I would like to congratulate you upon being re-elected to lead us in this House. Your female colleagues of this House are very proud. I want to thank this House for being so gender sensitive and giving us the leader you see seated there. 

I would like to congratulate my fellow honourable members of this House upon being re-elected. For those who are coming in for the first time, myself inclusive, I want to thank you. We know it was not easy so we have to also thank God for it.  

I want to relay my utmost gratitude to His Excellency the President for according Amolatar a district status. I bring this message from them. We thank him so much because Amolatar was in such a sorry state. It was like a forgotten part of this country. By giving it this status we hope and pray that we are going to work together with government to bring our people to the same level with other parts of this country.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, being a new district, I want to relay my request and appeal to you because there is nothing that is operational in that place. Most of the social services are non- existent. We appeal to the Government to consider us in its budget as time goes on in these five years. I have a few points to make on the State of the Nation Address. As a whole, I stand here to support the motion with nothing negative to say. 

We have a problem with the road. I want to inform this august House that to travel from here to Amolatar takes me the whole day. The road is in such a sorry state. The journey could take a shorter time than that but because of the road we take a long time. We really have a problem in developing that place. I would like to appeal to the Government to consider Lake Kyoga on the water transport programme so that it could be surveyed and possibly be given a ferry. I am one of those who would not mind having my mileage allowance cut because of the shortness of the distance. It would take me about four hours to cross through Lake Kyoga to Amolatar instead of going round via Lira or Soroti.  

My other point is about fishing. Amolatar District depends on fishing as one of its major economic activities. As you know, we do not have any methods for preserving fish in that area. As I said, there is no service available. We do not have electricity and the solar which is there is not efficient. The fishing there has a lot of problems. First of all, we do not have market for the fish. Secondly, on the lake the fishermen are being harassed by the PMU, which was created to protect the fishermen. 

When I was last in Amolatar people were asking me, “What has happened to our lake?” Everybody is asking why we are being canned in the lake. Maybe it is not PMU’s fault. Maybe we need to support them. Maybe they have some problems because they go on confiscating the fish and selling it out and using the money for their own benefit. The fishermen are not able to carry out their work efficiently and so it increases on our poverty levels. Something should be done to support the fishermen and also PMU, which is enforcing these rules.

My colleagues have talked about maternal health care. We do appreciate the fact that we have been given a district but we had only one hospital, a grade IV centre, in that place. So I would like to appeal through you, Madam Speaker, that health care services be expended to our only health centre. We do not have anything there. There is no ambulance, medical equipment or medicine. Sometimes when I go home my vehicle becomes an ambulance because you cannot do anything. You see a mother dying on the way, there is nothing you can do other than transport her to the hospital.  

Lastly, I would like to put my point across on micro-finance like everybody else who has talked about it. The people of Amolatar are so grateful. However, those people do not have anywhere to keep this money. We do not have any financial institutions in that place. Some of them who do business are being forced to keep their money in pots. As you know, investment goes hand in hand with savings. We have to get proper saving facilities for these people of Amolatar. I was reading about Post Bank encouraging village banking in most of these villages. It is my humble appeal that Post Bank considers this an SOS because we are really badly off. Even if the finances are given, we do not know how to save or utilise them in a way which would help the population of that place.

In conclusion, I would like to thank His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda. I appeal perhaps through the First Lady that he comes to our rescue to make that place grow up to the tune of these other places. I thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

7.02
MS SUSAN NAKAWUKI (FDC, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to first of all congratulate you upon retaining that Chair. I congratulate all the Members of the Eighth Parliament, especially those of the opposition and the ladies who stood for direct constituencies.

Madam Speaker, I thank God for the fact that at last our government realised that we had to change from the single party politics to multi-party dispensation -(Interjection)- okay, from the Movement System to the multi-party dispensation. However, I believe that there were assets being used by the Movement System and we do not know their whereabouts. I am sure there was a printery, which had been donated to the Movement System. I ought to know where such assets are. I believe they should not be dormant but you are supposed to use them even in this multi-party dispensation. I seek information about that.

I proceed to the issue of bonna bagagawale, “prosperity for all”, which was talked about by the President in the State of the Nation Address.  I am so glad that 20 years down the road, government now appreciates the fact that Ugandans are very poor. However, I am worried. Is it going to work out? I believe this is not the first attempt. We had the Entandikwa scheme before with Kisamba Mugerwa, but where is it now? It is nowhere. I believe bonna bagagawale is not an exception, simply because we have not learnt from the Entandikwa scheme. One of the things that failed the Entandikwa scheme was poor organisation. There was no civic education for the masses. The Government did not really prepare the people for what they were going to do. 

I believe there is nothing much we are going to do with this Entandikwa scheme without energy.  Yesterday I was at Cooper Complex, there was no electricity the whole day but in the evening around 5.00 p.m. it came back and stayed on for around 30 minutes. Everything came to a standstill; they could not do much. Here we are with this Entandikwa scheme. One thing the Government did not tell us is where the money is going to come from. They did not tell us how it is going to get to the people and through whom. Now we are going to find a great problem because we do not even know the procedure. This leaves many of us very worried.

I remember the rice growing scheme was put under the Vice-President’s Office. What is it going to do there? Does the Vice-President go through the whole country? How are the people going to get that rice from there? We have neighbouring constituencies that have the rice, but it is not in Busiro East simply because the procedure on how we are going to get that rice is not very clear. 

Madam Speaker, in order to help our people, the interest on that Entandikwa must be very friendly. Let government not look at this as a source of profits. If possible, it should be given to these people interest-free because we need to revive the people.  

Still on the State of the Nation Address, as a learned friend I will talk about the rule of the law. To start with, I will have to go to the current statutes and I will not rest until something is done. Many of these laws are unfair especially to the ladies. Following the case of FIDA and seven others Vs Uganda, a lot of unfairness and gaps in the Divorce Act were streamlined. Since then, however, government has never gone ahead to amend that Act. It is still the way it was and it is really unfair to the ladies. Something has to be done about it.  

Still on the rule of law, government itself is not respecting the rule of law. If there is no rule of law in the country, whatever good the Government is going to do will go uncounted. Last year our judiciary was really defiled. When people were released on bail from court, government went in and captured these people and took them back to prison. Now it is alleged that these people escaped. There are so many question marks. I do not believe that those people actually escaped from Makindye because of the security there. A commission of inquiry has to be set up to find out where those people are.  

Still in respect to the rule of law, the way government is dishing out land is inconsistent with the rule of law; for example, BIDCO was granted land on Bugala islands but when the environmental impact assessment was carried out, it was identified as not environmentally friendly. The Government still went ahead, did not respect the statutes regarding land and granted this land. He does not have any powers just to dish out land like that. I believe we should reconsider the rule of law. 

Another problem in my constituency is the way the rates for the markets are set. Those people who supported the opposition are really being tortured like hell. When they assess the rates, they set high rates for them so that they pay more than the rest. I believe this is against humanity and is unfair.

We have Universal Primary Education (UPE) and Universal Secondary Education (USE), but in my constituency I do not know where USE is going to apply because we do not have secondary schools. In one sub-county I do not have a single government school where USE will help our people. The two schools we have, Kings College Buddo and Trinity College Nabbingo, are not helping our locals. The fees in these schools are very high and there are technicalities of the grades. Our people cannot afford them. This is to the detriment of the population of Busiro East. 

When I was talking to the teachers in my constituency, they said that a salary of Shs 200,000 would have been okay if it were not taxed. They added Shs 50,000 but it is all going to go to PAYE. At the time they earned Shs 100,000, sugar was Shs 800 a kilo; today it is Shs 1,800. This happens now as if there is no increment. So they sent me to say that at least if PAYE is scrapped off, it will be a bit fair.

Lastly, I will comment on the issue of roads.  Madam Speaker, I have a problem. The peasants in Busiro East are dying day in and day out. Mityana road is very narrow and has sharp corners. Around seven miles from Kampala, at a corner in a place called Biira at least about 20 people have to die. This is simply because there is a sharp corner and the road is too narrow. Pedestrians are knocked down by motor vehicles day in and day out. The route that joins the two sub-counties has manholes so people cannot use it. Thank you very much.

7.12
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I want to congratulate you and all Members of the Eighth Parliament upon their election. I particularly want to congratulate His Excellency the President for being re-elected, for one reason. During the campaigns especially in Eastern Uganda, there was a lot of radio talk. Most of the parties that came to the East promised that if they went through, the first thing they would do was to find where to put the Karimojong. We were very worried. We even managed to collect the manifestos of the parties. If you read the manifestos of some parties, they were really very rough, targeting the Karimojong. We were very worried. That is why we are happy that my party went through and His Excellency the President got re-elected.  

Madam Speaker, I did not want to talk about this, but I want to talk about Karamoja and its problems.  As one of my colleagues said, I think Karamoja is one of the most misunderstood regions of this country. Between 1910 and 1921, Karamoja was put under military rule while the colonial government put the rest of Uganda under the Kakungulu administration, building schools. Because of one mistake the Karimojong were blamed for having sold the guns that were used by Chief Awishi of Acholi in Kitgum for resisting the British. When the investigation was done, they found out that the 1,200 guns that Chief Awishi had used to fight the British were sold to him by the Karimojong. They said, “These people are very dangerous, let us isolate them”, and Karamoja was actually sealed off deliberately. There is a lot of history to that and we are writing books to that effect.  

We were left out, there were no health services and no schools were built when other parts of Uganda were building schools. In 1938 the Comboni Missionaries came and that is when we saw the first primary school in Karamoja. So you can see, others had started to run 30 years ago and then you tell them, “You start now”. How will they catch up? That school remained the only one in a region, which is 24,000 square kilometres, one tenth of this country.  

Again this explains the attitude that the Karimojong have towards their neighbours and governments. In the 1940s the colonial government decided that in order to fundraise for money to pay for the war, every Ugandan should be taxed to pay one rupee. However, in Karamoja every adult male was told to pay one bull. They would drive those bulls up to Iriri, guarantee them, then take them to Soroti and sell them for four rupees. It happened like that and then Karamoja reacted. They were angry; why was this happening? This has defined some of the relations between Karamoja, the Government and their neighbours. It was impossible and it was not very well. So the symptoms, the problems we see today, are a reflection of some of the mistakes that were made in colonial times. 

I would want Members to know, if there was chance, that Karamoja has had problems. In the 1960s there was a commission of inquiry. The late hon. Bataringaya was asked, as Leader of the Opposition, to go to Karamoja in 1961 to find out what was going on because of these conflicts. He said, “I think the problem is that these people are lawless. The best thing for them is to ‘sedentarise’ them, lock them up and put them in small groups.” 

This led to enactment of a law, the Karamoja Act of 1963, which actually defined how Karamoja was handled very roughly militarily by the UPC Government. Sometimes I hear the UPC talking but the way they did it, they really made us animals. We were supposed to be a zoo. That is why sometimes I sit alone. In Karamoja there is a saying that when you find two Karimojong seated together, they are either from a raid or they are planning for a raid. It is sufficient to get two or three sitting together and arrest them. You know, anyone could use it maliciously to do anything.

Madam Speaker, on the attitude of Ugandans towards Karamoja, promoted by the media, a lot of what is said is mere sensationalism. Some people ask, “Are you really from Karamoja?” I say, “Yes, I am a Member of Parliament for Karamoja”. How many things are said negatively about Karamoja; for example, how many people know that there are more than ten tribes in Karamoja? There are the Pokot, Thuru, Ika, Teuso, Pore, Jie, Dodoth; there are so many. People have so many assumptions. We have different languages, different cultures and different problems. Some people are not armed, others are armed.  

On the issue of the way we handle problems of Karamoja, I think His Excellency, in the State of the Nation Address, is on the right track.  Members of Parliament from Karamoja even went to Rwakitura. We are for disarmament. Removing the gun in Karamoja is one of the solutions. We are on the right track, but it is not the only solution. A gun in Karamoja is like a mobile phone. If you lose it, because you need communication you will get another one. 

The solution is that Karamoja also needs to be protected. They need security of persons and property. The other time they gave the President 10,000 guns in one week. After that, because of the problems we have in the North, the soldiers went away and they were taxed from Kenya. Even the Kenyans are laughing now. They come and take cows. They are raiding. The solution is not just disarmament. We need to disarm, but we also need to protect them.  

Thirdly, we need to disarm, rehabilitate and re-settle them. Most parts of Karamoja bordering the neighbouring districts are very fertile. We need mental disarmament. We need to give these people alternative livelihoods. Some of them have been surviving on this gun, so if you remove it then what. Why am I here? It is because of education.  If you disarm the man and say, “I am going to take all your children to school”, you will break the cycle of violence. In my constituency now, if you go to a village you will find that out of 100 young boys, only 20 are going to school and 80 are starting the cycle formation to become warriors.

Madam Speaker, I think it is very important that the issue of Karamoja is not just thought of in terms of the guns. We have had disarmament of arrows, spears and other things, now we have guns. We need to disarm these people mentally, rehabilitate them, re-settle them and give them alternative livelihoods. My dear brothers, hon. Members of Parliament, why is it that some people in Uganda fear Karamoja? There is no part of this country that I have not been to. I was working with the United Nations and I supported the formation of PMA and NAADS. I have gone everywhere, actually even Buvuma Islands. I have been there. I have gone to every part of this country. I have never feared. I have gone to Kitgum. 

It is unfortunate that some people do not want to go and work in Karamoja. We are very disappointed and we feel so degraded. We would want to encourage everybody that Karamoja is determined to be part of this country. Karamoja is a believer in the Government because we have been saved from some of the bad governments of UPC, DP; those parties which made us suffer. We are very happy with NRM.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have been here since 2.20 p.m. I think we have worked long enough. Thirty-four members have contributed. We shall reconvene tomorrow. We shall start with this side. I have finished with the Opposition. 

As you leave I want to remind you to empty your pigeonholes so that we can put in the policy statements. They are quite big. 

Secondly, the Cabinet meeting for tomorrow has been cancelled. The Leader of Government Business requests the Ministers go to their Permanent Secretaries to discuss what has been transpiring here in preparation for the replies to the Members’ contributions. We adjourn to 2.00 O’clock tomorrow.  Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 7.20 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 5 July 2006 at 2.00 p.m.)


