



Wednesday, 8 July 2020

Parliament met at 2.36 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga Alitwala, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. There is a ruling I would like to make but my document is still upstairs. In the meantime, I will invite a few matters of national concern, starting with the Leader of the Opposition.

2.38
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. About four days ago, the media has been awash with information of a student of Makerere University, who was in third year, pursuing Veterinary Medicine and beaten at night and later died in the hospital.

It is an allegation but as leaders of this country, it has been reported that this student, Mr Emmanuel Tegu died after having being beaten by Local Defense Units (LDUs) We all know that if something happens now at night, we cannot even talk about the mob but LDUs.

These LDUs have been tempering a lot with the lives of Ugandans. The worst case is now a student. In fact, another individual was killed by an LDU in Oyam. We also heard that one was killed in Kasese.

Madam Speaker, these killings are too much. (Interjections) -They are now saying Agago and in many other places. Why? Are the LDUs ill-trained such that in case someone is not doing the right thing, they cannot apprehend them without taking life? Many lives are now being lost in the hands of LDUs, especially now that we are going for campaigns. 

We are scared when you give arms to people who are not well trained and cannot protect the lives of people. Can the Minister of Internal Affairs explain to us the death of this Makerere University student - (Interruption) – I will take the information.

MS ADEKE: Thank you very much, the Leader of the Opposition for giving way.  The student you are referring to is called Emmanuel Tegu. He was a third year student, pursuing a Bachelor of Veterinary Medicine and a resident of Livingston Hall.

The police has given a report about his death but it is marred with many inconsistencies and so, I would like to inform this House that the quest for justice is still on. Otherwise, what the police has done is not sufficient to satisfy everyone interested in the security of Ugandans. Thank you.

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you for the information. I would like to say that many people have died in Uganda and we have always demanded for reports of the deaths of Ugandans but it just remains on paper. Can we, therefore, demand for a serious report to be given to Parliament about the death of this student so that justice can prevail?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Internal Affairs is directed to come and explain to the country the circumstances surrounding the death of Emmanuel Tegu, a third year student. Otherwise, we have always imagined that the university is a safe place for our children to be but this has happened.
Secondly, I think it is time the Government explains to Ugandans what they have done to the LDUs who have beaten and killed many people. The reports are there. It seems that someone dies and it just ends there. People just say, the LDUs killed him and it ends there. We need answers. Why is it that no LDU has been prosecuted? What action has been taken against these LDUS and the other killers? We need an answer from the Government but first, let us start with Tegu. Minister of Internal Affairs, today is Wednesday, we want answers by Tuesday next week. Hon. Turyamuhweza.

2.44
MR FRED TUMUHEIRWE (FDC, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the Uganda-Kenya Dairy Industry empathy that has persisted for a long time and affected our industry.

Since the beginning of this year, the Kenyan Government blocked Ugandan milk from accessing the Kenyan market as a move in complete disregard of the East African Customs Union Protocol and the Common Market Protocol.

On 16 January 2020, the Ugandan Government, through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, wrote a protest note asking the Kenyan Government to stop all arbitrary means of tempering with the trade relations between our two countries.

The Kenyan Government has been using tactics to investigate our dairy industry using the Kenyan Revenue Authority and Kenya Diary Board to investigate Ugandan Diary companies although they have found no wrong doing on our companies.

Madam Speaker, even His Excellency the President had given an ultimatum of 15 days for the countries to handle the matter and come up with a long lasting solution to the looming uneasiness that was cropping up between Uganda and Kenya because of this empathy.

The Kenyan Government has restricted the number of traders getting permits by the Kenyan Diary board. Consequently, various factories in Uganda have been massively affected. Indeed, some of them are closing down; a case in point is Burunga Diary.

Just to remind our Parliament, the dairy industry is estimated to be feeding close to eight million Ugandans and the Kenyan Government action, especially during this pandemic has a diverse effect of the lives of our people.

Mr prayers are; we need a comprehensive update from the Government on how far they have gone. What is the current situation; because it is causing a lot of anxiety and our businesses are going done? Even revenue tax collection by Ugandan Government has gone down.

Can the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives come and brief the House on this situation that is affecting the majority of Ugandans? Thank you, Madam Speaker.


THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should come and advise the country about the implementation of the Common Market Protocol and in particular, to explain to the country the impact relating to the export of milk from Uganda to Kenya. We will get an answer by Thursday Next week.

2.47
MR DAVID LUKYAMUZI (Independent, Busujju County, Mityana):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to raise a matter of national importance concerning the unreleased report of the death of people in Lake Victoria. On 24 November 2018, a number of people perished on Lake Victoria. I am saying a number of people because for sure, up to now, there is nothing like a formal report of how many people died on that day.

Madam Speaker, my humble request is that you use your Office and instruct the Minister of Works and Transport to give us a formal report because many people perished. These people had families. And if it is true that this boat was licensed, let the Government come up and compensate for these people because it is claimed that the boat was faulty.

Secondly, the police did investigations but up to now, there is nothing that has been produced. It is my humble request that you prevail over them on this because I personally lost my father, Mr Yoweri Musumba. He was one of the entrepreneurs that was employing many people. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Is that the MV Templar accident?

MR KALWANGA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Was that under the Ministry of Works and Transport?

MR KALWANGA: Yes, it was under Ministry of Works and Transport, as well as police. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I recall that the matter was also raised on the Floor of this House and there was a request for the report. Can we ask the Minister of Works and Transport to give us an update urgently on this issue of the accident of the MV Templar? Since it has been a long time, can he come back to us on Tuesday afternoon? 

2.49
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In the last two days, Namayingo District has been hit by fear and panic. The District Health Officer (DHO) of Namayingo, Dr Patrick Magoola posted a message that the first COVID-19 victim has been got in Namayingo and that he is that patient. He is asking all his colleagues who have been near him to go for testing.
However, bad enough, where he is and where he is posting these messages - when I asked the RDC, he said that he had also seen those messages but he cannot pick the calls but he is only sending messages and that they do not know where he is. This is a very serious message and everybody is now living in fear and panic.

It is my humble appeal - after talking to the RDC who says that they cannot trace him, that the Government and other agencies should find out where the doctor is and if it is true that he has tested positive, why is he sending messages while hiding. Thank you, Madam Speaker.


THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I direct the Minister for Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance to establish the whereabouts of that person through the communication system and give us an update next week by Wednesday?


2.51
MS CAROLINE KAMUSIIME (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukiga):  Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the situation of health centres in Rukiga. I have mentioned this several times on this Floor of Parliament but the situation in Rukiga health centres is terrible.

When I raised this issue, the honourable minister went there and I am sure that the ministry is informed of what is going on. Immediately after her visit, I expected her to give us a second medical doctor.

The entire Rukiga District has one medical doctor. We do not have any ambulance and unlike other border districts, we were not given cars to help; yet, Rukiga is a porous border district.


Last week, I was there and so far, we have lost five mothers as they were giving birth. Imagine even something small like an inverter is lacking in our health centre IV; I wonder why they are not considering these new districts.  Sometime back, a Member said that new districts are being neglected and I agree with him. Why would they push more money to developed districts and forget the new ones? This is a serious issue.

I, kindly, ask you to -(Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, honourable colleague for giving way. Madam Speaker, I was in Rukiga last week and I was with hon. Kamusiime. (Laughter) These are going to -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we work together here, even in the constituencies.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, when we reached there with hon. Kamusiime, the information that we received was unbelievable. Rukiga District borders Rwanda and to move from the health centre that is near the border to Kabale where the hospital is, is like from Kampala to Kamuli.


We visited the maternity ward but the room had bicycles and motorcycles that are broken and covered in dirt. You could not separate the men’s ward from the women and children. They have one room; you cannot believe.  When we moved around, they said that if there is patient in critical condition, who need to be referred, they us a motorcycle. 


Madam Speaker, look at a situation where you have to use a motorcycle to move a critical patient to be taken to Kabale where the distance is more than 100 kilometres away. As the honourable colleague says, we need to put our effort together as Parliament and implore the minister - I see the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here. Please, come to the rescue of the people of Rukiga.

When I reached there, Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)


THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, sometime back, His Excellency the President directed that the motor vehicles, which had been brought to the national taskforce of COVID-19 should first support the border districts. I do not know why Rukiga District, which is a border district, has not yet been supported.

I hope the chairperson of the taskforce is listening and will be able to support the people of Rukiga.

2.56
Ms monicah amoding (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. 

It is now globally known that the COVID-19 pandemic will be around for some time although there are on-going efforts to find a vaccine. And it is estimated that the earliest the vaccine may be found is December this year or early next year.

Churches and religious bodies globally and particularly here in Uganda, play a very fundamental role in nurturing society in terms of spiritual nourishment. The Bible says that as the body needs daily food so does the spirit. Our spirits need spiritual nourishment on a daily basis.

I would like to inform you that sin has increased in our society and because of that many people that are dying - the Bible says that when one dies without this safety and spiritual comfort, you are likely to end up in eternal damnation.

Therefore, I rise on this important issue to say that the church and other religious bodies played a very important role in praying for Coronavirus out of this nation. No wonder, we are seeing very minimum devastation to our country arising out of coronavirus.

I would like to remind you that our motto is, “For God and our country.” This means that we must stand with these ideals at all costs – (Interruption)

The Speaker: Honourable members, you are taking a lot of our time. You are supposed to have two minutes but you are being so generous.

Ms kamateeka: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, we have watched television footage showing countries where the churches are going about their business normally but observing social distancing. Meetings take place even here in Uganda with social distancing the way we are here today. The churches could do the same.

Secondly, domestic violence has increased in homes because there is no spiritual guidance. Indeed, it is very important that we consider reopening churches and allowing the church ministers to visit homes. (Applause)

Ms amoding: Thank you, honourable member, for that information. We are going for an uncertain election. In view of that, we need prayers. The country needs prayers for to have a peaceful election –
The Speaker: Honourable member, can you make your prayers?

Ms amoding: My prayer is that the churches should be opened and allowed to operate using the minimum Standard Operating Procedures. They can have several services. They can even have 10 services or programmes during the day but allow people to go and intercede for their lives and the country that we love so much. Thank you. (Applause)

The Speaker: Honourable members, I would like to remind the Government that it is possible. On this year’s Martyrs Day, both the Catholics and Anglicans held their services in conformity with the Standard Operating Procedures successfully. Afterwards, the new Archbishop of Mbarara was installed successfully with social distancing being observed. 

I would like to also add my voice - because the church has spoken to me on this issue - to ask that the Government considers facilitating churches and mosques to conduct their services within the limitations of the set Standard Operating Procedures; it can be done.

I hope that the Prime Minister, who is here, will be able to come and update us on what is going on, on this matter. Can you come back to us? You always have Cabinet meetings on Mondays. Can you give us an answer on Wednesday, next week? 

3.01
The first deputy prime minister and deputy leader of government business (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I believe everybody is aware that Uganda has also been affected by COVID-19, which is nobody’s making – (Interjections) - yes, but that is also misleading. (Laughter)

Therefore, people who think that I am one of those who brought COVID-19 here qualify to be attended to by Butabika Hospital. (Laughter)

We, in Government, also regret this situation. That is why we have been careful on behalf of everybody to save lives. Up to now, we would say that no single Ugandan has died of COVID-19. If you cannot thank Government for this effort, I will do so. Then, you will decide whether to appreciate what Government has done or not.

This effort, which is unpopular to some of the people is what has stopped people from dying ever since this COVID-19 started. You do not see that side of it; the side that people have not died in Uganda yet. (Interjections) Indirectly of course, some people die but if one died of high blood pressure or diabetes, we cannot attribute that to the COVID-19 pandemic. 

If people are not patient enough but decide to just think that Government is taking advantage and harassing people, we are not. We are trying to see whether we can stop people from dying of COVID-19 and seeing how best we can do it. If this effort of ensuring that people do not die of COVID-19 is hurting some people, then we have no alternative.
 
We would rather see Ugandans not die of COVID-19 than see them suffer. I do not know whether I have answered the question. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Rt hon. Prime Minister, we have made an appeal, which has also been made by other people - all we are asking for is that you consider it again. Every week, people are appealing to us on this issue. Just go and consider it again and let us know. Thank you. 

Gen. (RTD) MOSES Ali: Okay, Madam Speaker. I will come back.

The Speaker: Honourable members, I had wanted to make a ruling. Remember that on 30 June 2020, after hon. Idah Nantaba raised concerns on the degradation of Kiwula Forest Reserve, she called upon Parliament to prevail on the Minister for Water and Environment to salvage part of the forest reserve that was not in dispute in court.

Accordingly, this House resolved that the Minister of State for Water and Environment exercises her mandate and protects the remaining part of the forest by ensuring that nobody carries out more degradation.

Later on, hon. Nantaba again raised the matter regarding the failure by the minister to take action on Parliament’s recommendation. Now, this is my ruling: under rule 217 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, a minister is required to submit to Parliament an action-taken report detailing what actions have been taken by the relevant ministry following the resolution or recommendation of Parliament or the committee.


In accordance with this rule, the Minister for Environment is directed to give an action report on this matter tomorrow, 9 July 2020, without fail. Let us go to item 3.


MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS APPROPRIATED FOR EMERGENCY REPAIRS OF ROADS AFFECTED BY FLOODS AND OTHER DISASTERS

3.06
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, on 30 June 2020, an urgent question was raised by hon. David Mutebi on the Government’s failure to devote resources to the rehabilitation of roads that were damaged by the recent heavy rains - which we still have - and other natural disasters in various parts of our country.

Consequently, the Speaker directed me to make an undertaking to this House regarding how soon the funds required for emergency intervention on roads in the country will be availed.

Madam Speaker, I am happy to report that Government released Shs 80.34 billion, which was shared as follows: Shs 58.6 billion to Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), Shs 10 billion to Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) and the balance of Shs 11.7 billion to the district urban and rural access roads through Uganda Road Fund.

In other words, we have complied with the directive from you, Madam Speaker and my prayer is that the sectors to which we released this money should be getting on the ground to repair these roads. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Any supplementary question, hon. Mutebi?

3.09
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Madam Speaker, we were very particular on the report that the minister presented and the funds disbursed did not take care of the roads that were seriously damaged.

We clearly indicated a requirement of Shs 97 billion to deal with those roads, which are not part of what the minister is presenting. We need clarity and seriousness on this matter because there is no serious activity, which can go on, when the state of the roads is that bad - (Interruption)

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, hon. Mutebi, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the issue of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development coming here to show that they have released funds when the funds are simply on paper is not new.

I remember that I raised an issue here where this Parliament appropriated money to buy testing kits. However, when Uganda Virus Research Institute came to Parliament, they said they had never received a single coin.

Honourable minister, I do not know whether your technical people just release money on paper but not on the ground. That is the information I wanted to give. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just arrived from Kasese and the country is aware that Kasese District was badly hit by floods and most of the roads were devastated. As I speak, there are no efforts to reverse the trend. Therefore, what the honourable minister is taking about is unclear.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the money for district roads, community access roads and urban roads for the last quarter of Financial Year 2019/2020 was not released to the districts. 

Therefore, the honourable minister needs to be clear because what is happening now is that districts, sub counties and urban councils are struggling because the money was not released. Where is that money?

MR DAVID MUTEBI: Madam Speaker, there is a particular schedule of roads - (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I chair the District Road Fund Committee of Serere District and last week, we had a meeting together with my colleagues; hon. Okabe, hon. Adoa and the district team.

The information we received from the Chief Administrative Officer and the District Engineer confirms what hon. Nzoghu is saying. Money for the fourth quarter has not reached the district. They are failing to do works on those roads because the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development did not release money in the fourth quarter. Unless the minister is telling us that he released money today, there is nothing on the ground. The roads are very bad and it is not only the district but UNRA as well.

There are two roads under UNRA in Kasilo; Serere-Kagwara and Serere-Bugondo. They have been cut off because of the rising water levels on Lake Kyoga, which have risen by about two metres.

Therefore, Kagwara, where the ferry is supposed to be built, has been cut off and Bugondo, where the former landing site for the ferry used to be, has also been cut off. UNRA says they did not have money for fuel for the last three weeks.

Therefore, when the minister comes here and says he released money to the Ministry of Works and Transport, that is hot air. Can the minister tell us when he released the money because we are suffering? My people are cut off and they need to be helped. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question was about funding for emergency roads and I think that is what the minister was addressing.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. According to the statement of the minister, which is actually half a page, the release of the funds was such that some money went to UNRA Shs 58 billion, some money went to KCCA and some money went to the districts.


I would like to talk about a unique road; the road linking Northern Busoga to Teso connecting Kaliro and Pallisa at Saka Bridge. That section belongs to the Ministry of Works and Transport. It does not fall under UNRA, it does not fall under the district and not under KCCA of course. It falls under the Ministry of Works and yet you never released money to the Ministry of Works to work on emergencies. This road is completely cut off. You cannot connect Northern Busoga with the other side of Teso unless you are using a boat. 

Therefore, how did you cater for such roads like the one at Saka, which is completely impassable? Many people have perished in that place. A vehicle carrying a bride and a groom and their entourage drowned there. You should have known that. A truck carrying merchandise also drowned at that same particular place and several other people have died in that place. 

Therefore, where will the money come from? Is it going to come from Kaliro or from my voters? Who is going to work on the emergency of that road? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.16
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Madam Speaker, as Parliament, we need to know who is fooling who on this matter. This morning, my Committee on Public Accounts (Local Governments) interfaced with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development over the same matter. Districts find it very difficult to complete work because of delays of release of funds. When we invited the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, especially the PS/ST, he sent us this morning the Commissioner in charge of Budget, who told the committee that all monies belonging to UNRA and all works of the country, were released in January. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is confirming the same statement. 

As a matter of procedure, we want to get this matter right, now and here; whether it is the Minister of Works and Transport delaying or keeping our money because we are told the last quarter monies were released in January. We are now in July, a new financial year but monies of last quarter, which was supposed to be received in February, up to date, is not yet received by the districts. Therefore, who is keeping our money? Who is fooling who and who is delaying the works of the district? It has to be cleared here and I wish the Minister of Transport and Works was here to clarify to the country. 

We would like to know who is telling the truth; is it Minister of Works and Transport or Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development holding the money? Thank you.


3.18
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I have two points:
    1. We release money every quarter by around 10th or 15th depending on the cash flow. 
    2.  We can delay to release money not because we do not want to do so but because we operate a cash policy, at times, there is no cash at the time that we would release. 

However, in this particular case, which I have just read, I would like to assure this House that this money has been released and is already in the systems of the spending agencies. (Interjections) Well, I can lay that before this Parliament tomorrow and I will not feel ashamed. The information I have is that this money was released on the 4th  because this was an emergency  but ordinarily, releases are made between 10th and 15th of the month. Tomorrow, whoever I will delegate to come and attend Parliament, will show you the evidence of when and at what time, which system and which account this money I have talked about was released to.

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. We will get the information tomorrow. Item 4.

PERSONAL STATEMENT ON THE ACCUSATION CONTAINED IN HON. IDAH NANTABA’S SUBMISSION ON THE FLOOR OF PARLIAMENT ON 24 WEDNESDAY, JUNE 2020

3.21
MR GEORGE KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Madam Speaker, I would like to first of all, thank you for the opportunity you have given me to give my personal statement. I was stunned and indeed, taken aback by the accusations labelled against me, hon. George Kumama by hon. Idah Nantaba, in the submission on the Floor of Parliament on 24th June 2020 on the issue of land grabbing in Kiula Forest Reserve, Galiraya Sub County, Bbaale County, Kayunga District.

Madam Speaker, there is no doubt that I am a qualified registered and certified land surveyor in East Africa, based in Uganda since 1980 and registered in 2001 by the Surveyors Registration Board of Uganda. I know the land laws, registration and practices governing land surveying in this country.

I also know the same about land administration, registration and practices, governing land allocations in this country.

The subject matter that surprised me in hon. Nantaba’s submission to the august House on 24 June 2020, alleging that hon. Kumama, the surveyor surveyed land for Mr Badru Ssemuga in Kirasa, which aided and was tantamount to grabbing land in in Kiwula Forest Reserve.

Hon. Nantaba is the Woman Member of Parliament, Kayunga District where I am but she could not have any courtesy of finding out why, how and what happened regarding that issue, where she knew I was involved as a surveyor under our firm. 

Madam Speaker, like all of us in this House know, land surveying is a privatised function in Uganda, which operates within the laws of this country. Before any surveyor goes to survey land for anyone, there are preliminary stages that must be undertaken and these include: 
    1. A person a surveyor surveys for land should have applied for the land to the District Land Board. 
    2. The land must have been inspected by the area land committee and inspection report submitted to the District Land Board for consideration to allocate it or not. 
    3. The District Land Board through their district surveyor issues an instruction to survey to the practicing surveyor, to proceed with surveying the said land if allocated. 
    4. It is only then that a surveyor can go ahead to survey land for anybody in this country. 
    5. In any case, if the allocatee is allocated land applied for, he/she should be issued with a customary offer and assessed the land dues to be paid to the District Land Board. 
    6. After surveying the land in question, a surveyor submits his survey report to the District Land Board for further survey processes. These processes include knowing whether the surveyor did what he was instructed to do or not. If not properly done or any encroachment is cited, the District Land Surveyor is informed of any anomaly or mistake in the survey for correction. Any silence by the District Land Board means that the survey that was carried out was correct and the District Land Board goes ahead to prepare land titles for the allocatee, with or without the surveyor’s knowledge.

In 2018, I remember Kayunga District Chief Administrative Officer wrote a letter to NFA when the District Land Board felt uncomfortable with the allocations they made in this area, requesting them to open the forest boundaries to ascertain the forest extent before they proceeded with the allocation and titling of the land in area but NFA turned a deaf ear. They found later that possibly, their land was encroached on and they decided to go to court.

In any case, the issue of land encroachment if any, in this area is to be handled by the District Land Board and NFA and now through court to save the allocatees unnecessary inconveniences and expenses but not through hon. Nantaba and Parliament. 

She wants to turn it into a political tool in order for voters to think that she is fighting land grabbers for their good. 

Madam speaker, it is unfortunate that hon. Nantaba is fighting a war which is not hers but rather a misunderstanding between NFA, the District Land Board and the allocatees, which is being handled by court.

Worse still, she is even dragging the local community into this misunderstanding who are not affected by this allocation, but also need the same land. She thinks that by dragging the local community into this matter, she will win their favour for votes, come 2021 elections when actually they are not affected. 

She is giving them false hope that the allocatees have grabbed their land and that she is fighting land grabbing when the issue is between National Forestry Authority (NFA), the District Land Board and the allocatees who are actually in court to solve this case. 

I do not see the essence of bringing this case to Parliament when hon. Nantaba knows very well that this case is in court. She even has the audacity to mention that I, hon. Kumama, a surveyor who surveyed the land on instructions of the District Land Board as an employee. 

For your information, Madam Speaker, all the titles prepared for the allocatees of this land were made when hon. Nantaba was a Minister of State for Lands and she did not bother to rescind and cancel them but instead allowed the developers to reach the heights they have attained as investors in Galiraya. 

It defeats ones understanding what hon. Nantaba is up to. If it is a campaign approach, then, let her try another one because this one will not work for her because she is just confusing the local community who are not beneficiaries of this land using her approach. 

Having said this, I plead with you and the entire august House that the allegations leveled against me in hon. Nantaba’s statement to the House were misplaced.

I, therefore, request you to disregard them because they are misleading, divisionary and are intended to fight political struggles in the district. 

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much for this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR KUMAMA: I lay on Table, a copy of this statement. Thank you. 

MS NANTABA: Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, take your seat. This is a personal explanation that is not open to debate. I had earlier ruled that I do not want this matter on the Floor because it is in court. 

MS NANTABA: Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: I allowed hon. Kumama because he had been named in this House. If you want to make a rebuttal, please, write a formal rebuttal and first bring it to my office so that I put it on the Order Paper. I will not allow this kind of smuggling.

MS NANTABA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT OF THE PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION ABROAD.

3.28
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi):  Madam Speaker, I beg to present the report of the 50th Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Africa Regional Conference, which was held on 30 August – 5 September 2019 in Zanzibar, Tanzania.

This report is presented pursuant to rule 33 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, which requires the leader of parliamentary delegation abroad to lay on Table a report to the House on the activities of the delegation. 

The Rt Hon. Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda, Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga led a delegation of Members and staff of Parliament to attend the 50th Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Africa Regional Conference which was held on 30th August – 5th September 2019 in Tanzania. 

The delegation included hon. Elijah Okupa, hon. Patrick Nsamba Oshabe, hon. Henry Kibalya, hon. Pamela Kamugo, hon. Komakech Lyandro, hon. Paula Turyahikayo, hon. Beatrice Rwakimari, hon. Brig. Flavia Byekwaso, hon. Nambooze Bakileke and hon. Jalia Bintu. 

The 50th Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Africa Regional Conference was hosted by the Speaker of the Zanzibar House of Representatives and CPA Zanzibar Branch President, hon. Zubeir Ali Maulid. 

It was attended by Speakers, Deputy Speakers, Members of Parliament and staff from the 18 CPA branches across the African continent from the four sub regions of the CPA Africa regions, namely, the Central Region, Central Africa, East Africa, Southern Africa and Western Africa. 

The conference was held under the theme: “e-Parliament – Seamless Platform for Facilitating Democracy” and it attracted delegates and observers. 

The objective of the regional conference was, one, to call for members of the commonwealth to invest in the promotion and use of ICT in local communities with initiatives like the e-Parliament to assist in promoting democracy. 

Secondly, to promote the use and application of ICT by developing e-Parliaments in all the African countries and uphold it as a vital step towards enhancing the three core functions of parliament, namely; legislation, representation as well as to monitor and oversee Government organs, which is commonly referred to as oversight. 

One of the aims and objectives of the CPA Africa Region is to promote the interests and perspectives of Africa into the Commonwealth and beyond. 

The second objective is to promote knowledge and education concerning the constitutional, legislative, economic, social and cultural systems of the member countries in the region and beyond. 

The third objective is to promote and maintain gender equality and emancipation of women. 

The fourth is to promote respect for human rights and freedoms and the fifth is to pursue the ideals of democracy and good governance. I will skip the methodology of participation. 

Madam Speaker and honorable members, the official opening ceremony which took place on Monday, 2 September 2019 was officiated by His Excellency Dr Ali Mohammed, the President of Zanzibar and the Chairman of the Revolutionary Council of Zanzibar, where he welcomed the delegates to Zanzibar and informed them that it was the first time that Zanzibar was hosting the CPA. On the theme, Dr Ali remarked that by embracing information – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Bintu, perhaps you should go to the recommendations.

MS BINTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The conference had many workshops, which I will not go through but they are in the report. 

Among these workshops, however, there was a specific one on acts of violence against African migrants in South Africa, which generated a heated debate. In the end, there was a resolution on Zenophobia. 

Among the resolutions, the conference recommended that at the time of considering the amendments of the Constitution, which were supposed to be amended, a member of Parliament from the National Assembly of Kenya, representing people with disabilities raised the matter regarding the inclusion of people with disabilities within the structures of the CPA. 

Madam Speaker, among the recommendations from the conference was that a network of people with disabilities be generated and incorporated in the CPA Africa Region. 

The Speaker of the Fourth CPA Youth Parliament, hon. Timothy Kadaga presented resolutions made by the youth in their meeting at the Fourth CPA Youth Parliament that was held in Uganda in 2018.

In conclusion, the Parliament of Uganda has continued to leverage the values and knowledge generated in delegates’ participation in meetings, ceremonies and conferences of the CPA Africa Region in our legislative representative and oversight functions.


The resolutions of the 50th Africa Regional Conference, if adopted and implemented by our Parliament and Government, respectively, will enable our Parliament root for increased usage of the Internet and electronic systems, which will bring on board new technologies and e-platforms in order to facilitate democracy and improve the functioning of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, the resolutions of the 50th Commonwealth Parliamentary Association are as follows:
    a. On the use of ICT in strengthening public involvement in the legislative process, African parliaments were encouraged to acquire ICT tools and acquire requisite technical skills on proper and effective utilisation of digital tools and gadgets to ensure maximum participation of constituents and citizens.

b. On enhancing ICT use in providing life-changing solutions in rural communities, parliaments and Governments were urged to facilitate telemedicine through remote consultation, diagnosis and treatment of rural patients in locations lacking qualified medical personnel and services.

    c. On the use of social media in enhancing parliamentarians’ constituency engagements:
i. African parliaments were encouraged to establish robust and interactive websites and to webcast and livestream the proceedings of parliaments and committees to enhance citizens’ participation;
ii. To periodically hold virtual town hall meetings and video conferencing in order to engage their constituents or citizens on a regular basis.

    d. On the role of ICT in facilitating democratic practices:
i. African parliaments and governments were urged to embrace e-governance as an effective tool of administration that is capable of cutting costs, increasing accessibility, promoting transparency, reducing corruption and fostering cross-fertilisation of ideas; and further;
ii. To encourage electoral bodies in Africa to adopt e-voting systems in terms of biometric registration of voters, electronic tallying, collation and broadcast of election results, thereby enhancing free, fair, transparent and credible elections.

e. On empowerment of women: strategies to enable women’s participation in decision-making, African parliaments, governments and political parties were urged to adopt quota systems and affirmative action policies for allocating seats to women in Parliament and Government to reflect gender parity and equity.

    f. On implementation of youth polices as a tool to combat migration:
i. African parliaments and governments were urged to adopt, ratify and implement international strategies and frameworks such as the Global Initiative on Decent Jobs for Youth, the Education 2030 Framework for Action as well as the Global Strategy for Women, Children and Adolescents’ Health (2016-2030;

ii. African parliaments and governments were urged to promote good governance initiatives and develop robust schemes and programmes that address such rising challenges as drug abuse, juvenile delinquency, unemployment, hunger and poverty, armed conflicts which serve as contributory factors for illegal and illicit migration.

iii. African parliaments and governments were advised to ensure the inclusion and full participation of the youth in decision-making processes of their various countries, and;

iv. To benchmark the success stories of Lesotho and Rwanda in tackling youth unemployment, skills building as well as mainstreaming youth matters in public policy. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report on the Table. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Othieno. 

MR OKOTH-OTHIENO: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Jalia Bintu for the report of that CPA conference and I am sure it is now going to form part of our record and the future generations can always refer to it. 

This country also hosted a very successful, colourful and amazing CPC conference. That conference had a landmark because our own Speaker was elected president of this conference. However, we have never had the opportunity to have the report of that conference presented in this Parliament so that the future generations can also refer to it and know that at one time, Madam Speaker, you were elected the president of this body. 

Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that much as this report has been presented, we also have the report of the 64th CPC presented, debated and adopted in the House so that we can appreciate the wonderful discussions that took place and the resolutions that were made during that meeting and the future generations can refer to it and know that you were once elected president of this body? For now, it is not part of our record and the future generations cannot refer to it. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Let me ask the chairperson of our branch to speak about that. 

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for raising that concern. I believe that by the time I was presenting the report – and I laid the legacy report on the Floor of the House here – my colleague was not in the House. The report of the 64th CPC was presented here and even the attendant reports of the different working groups were laid here. What is remaining is for those reports to be debated but they are on the record of Parliament. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Time will be given for us to debate them. I will schedule a week when we shall debate all the delegations’ reports. Thank you. 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON
THE EVICTIONS AND DISPLACEMENT OF THE PEOPLE OF APAA COMMUNITY

3.44
THE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE EVICTIONS AND DISPLACEMENT OF THE PEOPLE OF APAA COMMUNITY (Ms Agnes Ameede): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You will recall that I attempted to present this report before and, accordingly, I had laid on Table the committee report that was signed by members, the minutes, the verbatim recordings of the committee’s proceedings as well as the CD containing the 1958 Series Colonial Maps of Kitgum, Pakwach, Gulu and Acholi West. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to present to you the report of the Select Committee set up to inquire into the evictions and displacement of the people of Apaa Community. 

You will recall that on 23 January 2019, hon. Akello Lucy, Member of Parliament for Amuru District, raised a matter of urgent national importance, regarding the inhuman rampant evictions and torture that was occasioned on to the people of Apaa. The Member made reference to a group of men dressed in uniform that resembled the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) uniform and others in civilian clothes who had crossed the Nile with boats; caused havoc, tortured people, looted property and captured people as well. She further stated that the only health facility namely, Apaa Health Centre II, had been closed. 

You will further recall that the Speaker accordingly directed Government to make a statement on the matter and on 6 February 2019, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, hon. Kania Obiga, made a statement in response to the matter of urgent national importance so raised. 

The House was not satisfied with the minister's narrative on the state of Affairs in Apaa and accordingly resolved to constitute a select committee to inquire into the matters at hand. 

Subsequently, on Wednesday, 6 March 2019, this House appointed a Six-Member Select Committee to inquire into the evictions and displacement of the people of Apaa Community in Amuru District. The committee comprised the following Members;
    1. Hon. Ameede Agnes - Chairperson
    2. Hon. Muyanja Johnson Ssenyonga - Member
    3. Hon. Sizomu Gershom - Member
    4. Hon. Ssempala Kigozi Emmanuel - Member
    5. Hon. Rwabushaija Margaret – Member
    6. Hon. Jackson Kafuuzi Karugaba  -Member

The committee’s terms of reference were -
i. To investigate the current state of affairs relating to the land conflicts in the Apaa Community.

ii. To determine the root causes of the current conflicts and internal displacements of persons.

iii. To propose the way forward in finding a lasting solution to the said conflict for purposes of promoting harmonious co-existence of different ethnic groups.

iv. To report back to Parliament with recommendations within 45 days. 

Madam Speaker, on behalf of the committee, I apologise for the delay due to some logistical and structural problems. Nonetheless, we are glad that at last, we have the chance to present the report. 

The methodology is stated therein. I will not read it. I will briefly, in one page, touch on the background of the report so that it gives you the context of the report. Otherwise, I will not read the entire background. 

Between 1911 and 1913 the British Colonial Government evicted residents around the former East Madi Controlled Hunting Area and Kilak Controlled Hunting Area (KCHA) on grounds that the area had been infested with Tsetse flies. This was correlated by the colonial maps viewed by the committee while in London. 

The Game Preservation and Control Ordinance No. 14 of 1959 established a nature reserve in Kilak. In 1963, the Uganda Game Department amended the 1959 Statutory Instrument No. 17, under Legal Notice No. 364 of 1963 and gazetted Kilak as a hunting area for licensed gun holders. 

In 1964, the East Madi Controlled Hunting Area was established by Statutory Instruments No. 125 and 226-14 of 1964. Please refer to the annex. The Kilak Controlled Hunting Area and East Madi Controlled Hunting Area shared a boundary and human settlement was not prohibited. 

On 30 March 1972, Government issued a decree, through Statutory Instrument No.55 of 1972, revoking the hunting ground status of Kilak Controlled Hunting Area. 

In 2002, Parliament passed a resolution to gazette part of the East Madi Controlled Hunting Area, measuring 827 square kilometers, out of 1,702 square kilometers, as a wildlife reserve and degazetted the remaining portion that had been degraded and of no conservation value. The resolution was passed at a time when the community laying claim of Apaa had been displaced into Internally Displaced People's Camp (IDPs) in Pabbo due to the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) insurgency. 

In 2011, the southern part of the East Madi Controlled Hunting Area measuring 827 square kilometers, was duly gazzeted as East Madi Wildlife Reserve. 

Start of the conflict
Attempts by Parliament to solve the impasse
Those who were in the Ninth Parliament will recall that there was another committee set up - the Committee on Physical Infrastructure was set up to look into the issue of Apaa. Some of these issues are covered in the Terms of Reference (TOR) and so, I will not read that part. There was the Presidential team that was set up to look into the issue of Apaa. You can interest yourselves and read about it. I will now straight away proceed to Page 8. 

TOR. 1: Current state of affairs relating to the land conflict in Apaa
Apaa is predominately occupied by the Acholi ethnic group followed by the Madi. Whereas, Government places the number of households in the reserve at 374 -this was obtained from the Prime Minister’s report - the community in Apaa put the total population at 26,000 persons. The 2002 and 20l4 Population Census indicated that the number of persons or households were at 1,929 and 11,392 respectively. This was equivalent to 2,278 households based on the average household size of 5 persons in 2014. 

Both the Madi and Acholi communities in Apaa allege that the political leadership, notably, the area members of Parliament, the LCV Chairpersons and councillors from both Adjumani and Amuru districts have encouraged people to come and settle in Apaa, which allegations were denied by the respective political leaders during interaction with the committee. 

The committee noted that there was evidence of communities having settled in Apaa, with a community school called Apaa Primary School that has existed since the 1970s. There is a claim provided by witnesses that elections were held in the area in 1980 but this could not be verified by the Electoral Commission for lack of past records. 

There is evidence provided by the Electoral Commission of the existence of polling stations during the 2006, 2011 and 2016 general elections. There is also evidence of graduated tax tickets paid under Gulu District Administration and a health facility (Apaa Health Centre II) built in 2006 by the Amuru District Local Government and commissioned by the then Minister of Health.

As mentioned earlier, Apaa is predominantly occupied by the Acholi and some Madi. The committee interacted with both the Acholi and Madi communities at different intervals. The two communities had different versions on how the ownership of land in Apaa has evolved. The Acholi had their version and you can read that and the Madi also had their version.

The committee observation
The committee observed that the Acholi and the Madi communities have divergent narratives on the history and ownership of land in Apaa. The Acholi version connotes to the fact that the land has always been occupied by the Acholi clans exclusively. On the other hand the Madi Community claim the land was owned and occupied by mixed communities and many of the Acholi had only been encouraged by politicians from Acholi to come and settle on the land.

Nature of the conflict
The committee identified three dimensions to the conflict in Apaa. There was a conflict between Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) and the residents of Apaa; the border dispute between Amuru and Adjumani districts, and the tribal conflict in Zoka between the Acholi and the Madi over land.

The conflict between Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) and residents of Apaa
The conflict in Apaa within the reserve is between the residents who claim customary ownership of the land and UWA that has the mandate to manage all the wildlife reserves. It was on this basis that UWA moved in to evict the people who had settled in the wildlife reserve. The eviction was resisted leading to confrontation.

Border dispute between Amuru and Adjumani
The border dispute between Adjumani and Amuru and encroachment of the East Madi Wild Reserve started in 2007. This culminated into a meeting of Amuru and Adjumani districts leaders, UWA and other stakeholders.  Arising out of the meeting, a joint request to the Prime Minister by the Chairperson LCVs of Amuru and Adjumani was written on 20 November 2007 for an urgent intervention to reopen the border exercise carried out and the encroachment on the reserve. This request however, was not acted on immediately and the rise in tensions due to the unresolved border issue ensued.

The district leaders from the two districts conducted joint consultative meetings in Gulu on 22 January 2015, where a joint team was set up to sensitise the community on the planned boundary reopening. The sensitisation was carried out between 4 - 6 March 2015 in the areas of Zoka and Apaa Trading Center, with the objective of informing them about the planned border reopening and demarcation. 

In 2017, a border reopening exercise was undertaken by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and a declaration was made by the Minister of Local Government on 13 October 2017. The boundaries that were reopened are described as follows: colleagues, there is a boundary description which you can read. Due to the time, I will not read the border reopening.

It is worth noting that the representatives of the Acholi community did not participate in the exercise and rejected its outcome alleging that it was in contravention of the High Court Order in Miscellaneous Application No.004 of 20l2 that issued an injunction against the Uganda Wildlife Authority and the Attorney-General and their agents or servants from any eviction, destruction, confiscation or conversion and or interfering with the land rights, occupation and the uses of the land belonging to the applicants in the areas of Lakang, Pabbo and Apaa in Amuru District. Besides, they were skeptical about the series of the maps used suspecting them of having been altered.

Committee observations
The committee observed that there is a long stretch of land of 27 kilometres connecting the said sources of River Choro and River Cheri, which Government had declared as the border but this was disputed by the people of Amuru District who argued that the boundary was at River Zoka.

The committee noted lack of a satisfactory technical and scientific explanation about the sources of the rivers that were used to plot the coordinates by the officials of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, as described in the 1962 Constitution. Upon being probed about the sources of the river, they informed the committee that they were unable to arrive at the source of the river due to an inaccessible terrain characterised by the thick forest and swamp. 

Asked to determine the distance of the source of the said river and as to whether it would affect the placing of the coordinates and affect the boundary, the officer said this distance was marginal and could not have any significance on the alteration of the border. Due to the same reason, the committee was unable to go to the source of the rivers.
The conflict in Zoka
The committee notes that the conflict that has dominated the media is in the area called Zoka, located outside the Reserve. It is a tribal conflict between the Madi and the Acholi over land ownership. Zoka lies between River Gorobi and River Zoka and is the epicenter of the conflict. The committee established that the area is predominantly occupied by the Acholi community.

The Government declaration of the boundary between Amuru and Adjumani Districts in 2017 awakened the Madi feeling of ancestral land ownership. The Madi people felt a sense of unfairness for the people of Acholi ethnicity owning big chunks of land in their district, land which, in the Madi opinion, was obtained for free as opposed to the narrative that it was customarily owned by the Acholi.

The conflict is a spill over of the problems in Apaa, which is in the Reserve, and the degazetting of part of the East Madi in Zoka which was sparsely populated by the Acholi. When Government degazetted the land in 2002 there was no clear ownership.

During the committee interaction with the people in Zoka and the former DPC Adjumani, it was revealed that the Madi were mobilised by interested parties to take possession of the land. This involved burning of houses, destruction of property, looting and construction of new houses by the new occupants in the latter’s compounds. 

The attacks and counter attacks between the two communities resulted into deaths and body injuries. The committee visited five homes where evidence of burnt houses and destruction was visible. These lay alongside newly constructed iron-roofed structures. 

The committee was told by the affected community that the organised militias were backed by men in army uniform. The attacks, destruction and takeover of the homes was concurrent with the supply of iron sheets and food rations allegedly supplied by politicians from Adjumani District. 

The Acholi fled their homes as they had become unsafe and they were consequently forced into camps at Zoka C under the protection of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) and the Uganda Police Force (UPF). At the height of the attacks security restricted people’s movement including going to their gardens. As a result, people needed aid in form of shelter, food rations and healthcare services, which was not forthcoming. This aggravated their plight. They also reported that the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) only intervened marginally. 

The committee noted that most of the victims of the violence were Acholi and a few isolated cases of the Madi. The committee witnessed a number of houses that had been torched, houses with new iron sheets constructed and new occupants settled in. 

The committee, during its field visit on 10 April 2Ol9, had a big number of both the Madi and Acholi turn up for a meeting at Zoka C. A number of both the Acholi and Madi claimed that they had fled their respective homes for fear of their lives and were living in Internally Displaced Persons’ (IDP) camps at Zoka C. 

On probing the two communities on their co-existence, majority denied knowledge of the other though some acknowledged the presence of their neighbors. This proved to the committee the allegation that indeed some people who were not residents of the area were using the opportunity of the unrest to violently grab land. 

The new comers were also responsible for causing tension and unease based on tribalism. 

The committee visited both the Madi and Acholi IDP Camps located on either side of the road in Zoka Centre the following day. Despite the big number that had turned up for the meeting the previous day, the committee observed that there were no people in the alleged Madi IDP Camp. The temporary structures in which they had claimed to take refugee had no sign of human occupation, evidenced by the over grown grass and the absence of household items. This gave the impression that the camp had been abandoned. 

Observation
The committee observed that there was a systematic form of organised militia to cause insecurity or sow mayhem with the sole purpose of displacing people and to grab land.

Security situation
At the time of the field visit, the committee found out that the police and other security organs had established peace and stability in the community and contained the inter-tribal attacks and clashes although tensions were still evident. 

The committee was informed that inter-tribal clashes arose out of incitement by the political leaders from both Amuru and Adjumani districts who urged the people to protect their customary land. 

The committee was further told that the last clashes registered had been experienced in January 2017 and on 26 February 2019 in Zoka C, which lies outside the protected area. Arising from the clashes in January and February 2019, security was further beefed up to ensure that the conflict between the two communities is diffused. Additional deployment of more Field Force Units (FFU) of the UPDF and the police had been undertaken. 

The UPDF had deployed the 41st Infantry Battalion with about 70O soldiers. They were facilitated with motor cycles and patrol vehicles to respond to any emergencies.

Observation by the committee
The committee observed that the establishment of a police post at Zoka C had contributed to the enhancement of security in the area; addressed the discomfort and mistrust by the Acholi community, which had been apprehensive to report cases at Adjumani District Police Headquarters. 

The police post at Zoka C provided neutral ground in comparison to the Adjumani District Police Headquarters. It saved the residents the cost of moving long distances, restored trust, and reduced on the incidence of clashes. 

The Internally Displaced People’s (IDP) Camps
The committee noted that there were two IDP camps in Zoka C; one for the Acholi and the other for the Madi community. As mentioned earlier, the conflict between the two communities made the people to flee their homes and seek refuge in temporary camps under the protection of the UPDF and the UPF. 

The committee was informed that the attacks involved burning and destruction of houses resulting into body injuries and loss of property. 

Blocking of leaders from accessing Apaa
The committee noted that political leaders especially those representing the people of Apaa were being blocked by security from accessing the area. 

The District Security Committee informed the committee that the leaders were denied access to Apaa for reasons among others, the fear that they would incite the people. Besides, their security was not guaranteed given the high tensions and that the area in question was no longer under their jurisdiction. 

The committee observed that denying the elected leader's access to their constituents violated the rights of the people they represent. 

Closure of Apaa Health Centre II 
The committee visited the Health Centre and found out that it had been closed way back in 2017 when Apaa was declared to be in Adjumani District. Amuru District Local Government was stopped from operating the Health Centre and Adjumani District Local Government closed the facility on grounds that it was in a protected area. Despite this, the Ministry of Health continued sending the supplies for the facility to Amuru District. 

The committee established that despite a court injunction issued by the High Court in Miscellaneous application No.004 of 2012, against the Government, Adjumani Local Government did not honour the injunction and proceeded to close the health centre. 

The committee observed that since the evictions had been halted, the health centre should have remained operational to enable the people access health services, which are a basic right. 

Accordingly, below are the court cases on interaction with the Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA). The committee was informed that the case was still active. 

The committee observes the following:
Court cases had taken long without being disposed of. Thus, Justice delayed is Justice denied. The delay by Court to adjudicate the matter in a timely manner contributed to the escalation of the conflict. A timely a judgment would have probably provided a solution to the conflict. 

TOR. 2; Root Cause of the Conflict
Attempts by the Uganda Wildlife Authority to evict people
In 2002 Parliament approved the proposal to gazette East Madi Wildlife Reserve at a time when the people who claim ownership of part of Apaa land were in the Internally Displaced People (IDP) camps and was later gazetted in 2011. Subsequently, Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) attempted to evict the people from the Reserve and the exercise turned violent. 

Following the gazetting of Apaa as a Reserve, the inhabitants of part the land that had been gazetted put up claims that the land they occupied was not part of the Reserve. Government took a decision to re-open the boundaries to determine- sorry, there is something is not right here. 

Nonetheless, the re-opening of the boundaries indicated the following;
    1. Apaa is part of the East Madi Wildlife Reserve.
    2. The boundary between Amuru and Adjumani Districts is not at River Zoka as previously believed but rather about 10 kilometers from River Zoka towards Amuru District. 

The reopening of the boundary placed Apaa and Zoka in Adjumani District. These areas had previously been administered under Amuru District. This resulted into the assumption by the Madi community of outright ownership of the said land, which was occupied by the Acholi. The Madi forcefully moved to evict the Acholi leading to the ongoing conflict. 

Boundary between Adjumani and Amuru Districts
During the committee's interaction with stakeholders, there were perceptions among the Acholi that the process of determining the boundary could have been manipulated and that the wrong maps were used. 

The other reason for the conflict is economic interests. The committee was informed that there is timber lumbering and charcoal burning in the reserve and in Zoka Forest. The activities have made a number of people from different parts of the country to move to Apaa. This caused scramble for the land further fueling the conflict. 

Political interests as another cause of the conflict. The committee was informed that divergent political interests of political leaders from both Amuru and Adjumani Districts significantly contributed to the escalation of the conflict. 

The political leaders from Amuru District do not want Apaa to be part of Adjumani for fear of losing the votes from the Apaa people who are Acholi. On the other hand, the political leaders from Adjumani did not want the Acholi community relocated for fear that they will not favour them politically. 

The committee was further informed by the religious and cultural leaders of Adjumani that they were not allowed by their political leaders to meet their counterparts of Amuru thus, impeding their efforts to mediate in the conflict. 

Observations
The committee observed that failure by political and civic leaders to sensitise the people about harmonious coexistence has led to intolerance causing fear and uneasiness amongst the people. For example, the Madi minority in Zoka C feared to give more information or to identify themselves with former neighbours whose homes had been burnt. 

The Government did not fully engage the political, religious and cultural leaders in purposeful conflict resolution. 

The other cause of the conflict was ownership of land - sorry these issue overlap. The Madi community informed the committee during the field visit that the land was owned by the Madi clans, who were removed in 1911 by the colonial administration due to Tsetse fly outbreak. 

They further claimed that the Madi clans did not return to the said land because it had been turned into a protected area. They were of the view that a portion of the East Madi controlled hunting area that was degazetted should revert back to them as original owners. 

It was difficult for the Committee to confirm the claim of land ownership by the Madi since the land was vacated over 100 years ago and there were no individuals to attest or provide documentary evidence. 

Another reason is controversy following the consultative process for the gazettment of East Madi Wildlife Reserve by the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. 

The committee was informed that Gulu District Local Government the then parent district of Amuru, rejected the request from the ministry to gazette the land for wildlife conservation. They allege that upon their refusal, they sought the same from Adjumani District, which was accepted. 

However, the committee established that the consultations in both Gulu and Adjumani by the Ministry were on totally different proposals. Whereas the consultations in Adjumani were about gazetting part of East Madi Controlled Hunting Area, the ones in Gulu were about the request to gazette a 10 - kilometre width corridor on the western part of Albert Nile. The corridor was to
allow movement of animals between Murchison Falls and the proposed East Madi Wildlife Reserve. 

The consultations were first held in Adjumani on 26 June 1998 where upon Adjumani District authority recommended that an area measuring approximately 800 square kilometres lying south of River Zoka, through Baratuku to River Omee, be gazetted as a wildlife reserve. 

Consultation meetings in Gulu were held between UWA, the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, Gulu District Local Government and other stakeholders on 9 July 1998 and on 4 August 1998, l2 and 13 November 1998 and 5 March 1999. The consultations were in regard to the creation of Kilak and Aswa Lolim wildlife reserves. 

It is worth noting that the representatives from Amuru, Anaka and Purongo divisions rejected the creation of a wildlife reserve corridor within their localities for the following reasons;

i. Gulu District was already hosting Murchison Falls National Park.
ii. The land that seemed vacant had bona-fide occupants who were in the IDP camps. 
Both Kilak and Aswa Lolim Controlled Hunting Areas had already been degazetted to pave way for private ranches and there was no justifiable reason to change the status quo. 

Accordingly, UWA dropped the request for gazetting the 10km stretch in Kilak and Aswa Lolim. 

Observations 
The committee observed that whereas the ministry had good intentions for conservation, it was not accepted by Gulu District Local Government. On the other hand, Adjumani District embraced the proposal prior to verification of the boundary of the reserve. As a result, this led to a conclusion by the other party that the ministry together with Adjumani District Local Government had connived to grab Acholi land. 

The committee established that the creation of East Madi Wildlife Reserve was done in accordance with Section 17 (1) of the Uganda Wildlife Act, Cap 200 - you can read the law therein stated. The committee was informed that the Adjumani Local Government Council was consulted and passed a resolution to have part of East Madi become a wildlife reserve. 

However, the committee failed to access the resolutions from Adjumani District Local Government regarding that resolution because they were not forthcoming.

iv. In 2002, Parliament passed a resolution to gazette among others, East Madi Wildlife Reserve. In 2011, the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities published the declaration of East Madi Wildlife Reserve in the Uganda Gazette in accordance with section 17 of the Uganda Wildlife Act. The minister was bound to immediately implement the gazettement after the resolution had been passed but did not do so. The land in question was thus available for settlement. The ministry should take full responsibility of this gross omission. 

Due to lack of clarity of the boundary at the time, Apaa was believed to fall in the former Kilak controlled hunting area, in Amuru District. The reopening of the boundary showed otherwise, locating Apaa within the East Madi Wildlife Reserve, in Adjumani District. The conflict in Apaa within the reserve is between the people who claim ancestry of the land, and UWA, which through legislation, is mandated to manage all the wildlife reserves. UWA attempted to evict the people settled in Apaa but there was resistance. 

TOR. 3 - Emerging positions to resolve Apaa conflict
During the committee’s interaction with stakeholders, the following alternative positions on resolving the Apaa conflict were presented:
1. Degazetting 25 square kilometres of land in the game reserve for settlement. There was a proposal by His Excellency the President, to the Presidential Committee on Apaa to degazatte 25 square kilometres of land, in the reserve for settlement. Whereas the proposal had the advantage of keeping the community within their habitat and was cost effective, it was rejected by the Apaa community and Adjumani District Local Government. The Acholi group preferred having the whole reserve degazetted, while the West Nile group opposed the proposal of degazetting any part of the reserve. 

2. Earmarking a portion of land in Adjumani to resettle the Apaa residents, was another option. This proposal was initially supported by the leadership in Adjumani but faced with the constraints of unavailable land within Adjumani District or anywhere else for resettlement but this proposal was also rejected by the Apaa community. They did not prefer to be settled in any other place or in Adjumani. 

3. Paying a resettlement package to the residents. This proposal from the Presidential Committee on Apaa, where 374 families were earmarked for compensation with Shs 10 million, 10 bags of cement and 20 iron sheets was resisted by the community in Apaa. 

4. Compensation
The committee observed that there were settlements in Apaa prior to gazetting the area as evidenced by payment of graduated tax. Considering that there were settlements before 2011, the people ought to be protected in accordance with the law, since the occupancy over a certain period of time, entitles them to proprietary rights over the land as bonafide occupants. These ought to be protected under the law and if they have to be evicted, adequate compensation must be given in accordance with Article 26(2)(a) and (b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

Perspectives from the field study and benchmarking
The committee visited Lake Mburo National Park, travelled to London and also went on a benchmarking study in Kenya. At Lake Mburo National Park, the committee sought to establish a possibility of co-existence of the people and wildlife since it had had been highlighted by the residents of Apaa during the committee field visit (Please, see the report therein attached). 

The committee travelled to the British Library to retrieve the district boundary maps as at Independence. The maps were reviewed with the assistance of technical officers of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to establish the boundary between Acholi and Madi districts then, with particular interest in the following points, whose coordinates were captured during the committee field visit. (Those are in the Annex XV)

River Zoka that was believed to be the boundary point, the current border point as declared by the Ministry of Local Government, Apaa Market and River Golobi. The coordinates of these respective points were plotted on the maps and show the following:
1. That Apaa Trading Centre is 8 kilometres inside Adjumani along the Amuru-Adjumani Road, and
2. The disputed signpost indicating the border between Amuru and Adjumani is within the correct map reading.

The committee also interacted with Kenya Wildlife Services and Kenya Forest Services as well as private conservationists. The aim was to learn more on the best practices of sustainable conservation. 

Through these interactions, the committee learnt that sustainable conservation in this era is people-centred, where people live in a symbiotic relationship with the environment. The communities are educated and empowered to be part of the conservation. 

The committee was informed by the Kenya Forest Services officials that they had been engaging the surrounding communities of a forest reserve for the last 30 years with a purpose of making them partners to conservation besides creating a win-win situation. In the case of the Mau escapement, communities settled on the forest reserve and ownership of the reserve was claimed by two county administrations. Each county jostled to benefit from the proceeds of the forest reserve. 

They also stated that the importance of conservation was undermined by the politicians of the respective counties. When Government and the community failed to reach a consensus, Government stepped back and brought in a third party that is Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO). FAO was given the full mandate to sensitise, compensate and offer alternative livelihoods to the people. 

In the case of the Apaa conflict, UWA’s relations with the community fell short of best practices of sustainable conservation. UWA, through its interaction with the committee, did not provide sufficient evidence of consultations with the community and or scientific studies to render the area as of ecological importance. 

General observations
1) There was a resounding position amongst the Apaa community that the land in question belongs to the Acholi. This was based on historical factors, including the fact that Apaa was prior administered under Gulu and later Amuru District until 2017. Any attempt to alter this was viewed as a violation of their constitutional rights. 

2) The Acholi and Madi previously living in harmony had turned into enemies. Trust and tolerance that is key in co-existence was destroyed. The reopening of Adjumani District boundary which extends to the land inhabited by the Acholi, places them as a minority who are not sure of fair treatment. Thus their right to personal safety, ownership of land or access to Government services is not guaranteed and hence preferred being administered under Amuru District.

3) There was a strong agitation by the Apaa community to de-gazette the reserve for human settlement. 
4) Whereas Parliament passed the resolution to gazette East Madi Wildlife Reserve in 2002, the statutory instrument by the minister to gazette was published in 2011. The delay by the minister to publish the statutory instrument gazetting the reserve made the people returning from the IDP camps to settle on the said land without knowing that there was a Government proposal to gazette it as a wildlife reserve. 

Therefore, the people who settled on this land before 2011 cannot be treated as encroachers on the reserve. The delay by Government to take full charge of the East Madi Wildlife Reserve encouraged settlements on the land. 

5) The political leaders from both the districts of Adjumani and Amuru seem to have taken extreme positions perhaps to appease their constituents. Such positions have not facilitated constructive dialogue. 
6) There has not been a thorough approach by Government to resolve the conflict in Apaa. Despite Government setting up numerous committees to address the conflict, it has not been resolved. 

7) There is a grievance by the Madi that the Acholi own large chunks of land and that they should relinquish part of it to them. This has escalated the tribal tensions, further fuelling the conflict.

Way forward
In light of the committee interaction with stakeholders, field visits, benchmarking and review of literature, the committee has evaluated and considered the following options: 
    • To de-gazette the area where people are settled. This is cheaper as it offsets probable costs of compensation or relocation. In addition it is least likely to cause resistance since there would be no disruption of the community economic and social setting.
    • To compensate the people of Apaa that settled before 2011. This would be in line with the law on compulsory acquisition. The law recognises bona fide occupants of land. This entitles them to compensation. However, the mode of compensation should be varied according to the following categories unique to the conflict: 
    a) People who have proof that they have lived and customarily owned land in Apaa long before the LRA insurgency. 
    b) Those who settled as returnees from the IDP camps on the advice of Government. 
    c) The recent occupants who came as ambitious individuals to partake of free land in the wake of the conflict. 
    • Relocation to an alternative land. This would be feasible if land was readily available. However, during interaction with Government, the Office of the Prime Minister informed the committee that they were providing a resettlement package of 10 million shillings, 20 bags of cement and 20 iron sheets to each household to purchase land and resettle. The package was contested by the affected persons. 

The committee is of the view that a proper needs assessment guides the mode of resettlement. The best mode of resettlement would be for Government to acquire adequate land, put in place amenities such as houses, schools, health centre, electricity, water and roads to enable a conducive environment to people who for more than a decade were afflicted by the LRA insurgency.

    • Co-existence of the people and the wildlife. This would involve organising the community to become partners in conservation. This approach would entail short term and long term interventions notably empowering and educating the community on the importance and advantages of conservation. 

The road map to such conservation would involve finding alternative sources of livelihood or regulated community access to the natural resources in the reserve area. 

A strategic conservation assessment plan could be thus in place to cater for the environmental, social and economic impacts thereof. For instance, the people of Apaa would have been drawn into tree cultivation for commercial purposes, bee-keeping, eco-tourism or provide onsite cultural display and entertainment and employed as tour guides. 

This kind of intervention cannot be rushed and can only be viable if UWA puts in commiserate resources to the would be economic benefits accrued from tourism. 

Accordingly UWA should change the mode of sharing royalties with communities of the conservation area. Benefits from conservation/tourism should go direct to the immediate communities other than the local governments. If put in a form of projects to improve household incomes, the individuals would have a feel of direct benefits of conservation. With such direct benefit, the community would become ardent supporters of conservation.
Recommendations 
    1. Government should stay the plans to relocate or evict people from Apaa. The proposal of Government to the earlier committees to de-gazette 25 square kilometres should be reviewed to ensure adequate land to accommodate the community needs. 
    2. The area politicians should step back and avoid sensationalising the matter and encourage peaceful co-existence of the communities. 
    3. Due to the animosity that characterised the conflict, a peace and reconciliation committee be formed to foster community relations and facilitate the Acholi community to accept the new administration of Adjumani District Local Government.
    4. In respect to Zoka, Government should ensure that the people in the IDPs are resettled and further provide a framework for legal ownership of land in the area. 
    5. Government should at all times reopen boundaries before pronouncing administrative units to avoid future conflict. This is typical with Apaa which had been administered under Gulu and later Amuru District till 2017, when the boundary between Adjumani and Amuru districts was reopened. 
    6. The committee recommends that investigations be carried out to identify individuals that participated in the crimes and lawlessness during the inter-tribal clashes. 
    7. Government should investigate and apprehend individuals in security agencies who were alleged to be conniving and abetting illegal lumbering and charcoal burning, which is fuelling the social economic facets of the conflict in Apaa. 

Conclusion
In conclusion, I thank Parliament for facilitating the committee. I also thank the honourable members of the committee and the technical staff who made it possible for the report to be completed.

Madam Speaker, I beg to report and move that the report be adopted. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Ameede and members of the select committee, for that extensive report. Honourable members, this report was commissioned in March, 2019. In the intervening period, a number of things have happened. Therefore, before we debate, I would like to ask Government whether they have something to report so that when we debate, we take into account whatever has happened.

4.45
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I have been asked to read this statement by the Prime Minister to present the position of Government.

Madam Speaker, allow me to thank the select committee of Parliament for presenting their report on Apaa to Parliament. Indeed, as highlighted by the committee’s report, the issue of Apaa has been on the table for long and several attempts have been made to resolve this conflict but it has persisted.

Parliament and Cabinet have set up committees before to look into this issue. More recently, H.E the President also got involved and appointed a negotiation committee comprised of nine persons from Adjumani and nine persons from Amuru, under the chairmanship of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, to discuss and agree on one of the three options suggested by the President. Although the negotiation did not reach a consensus, Cabinet discussed their report and passed a resolution on the matter.

Implementation of this Cabinet resolution has not been effected, awaiting the presidential committee, led by the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, to further advise on the matter. This committee, chaired by the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, has not concluded its work. It would be important for this House to discuss all the recommendations by the various committees, including the one chaired by the Deputy Speaker and the Cabinet resolution together, to come up with a lasting solution to the conflict.

Madam Speaker, this report by the select committee appears to downplay the various engagements by Government to resolve the conflict. The key recommendations appear biased and not conclusive to address the conflict –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry for interfering with the First Deputy Prime Minister’s submission. Earlier on, we had been restrained to moving a procedural matter because we know some of the parties have conflict of interest. However, now that we did not reach that level but you did ask the Government – because this investigation has taken a year – to highlight the issues that could have been overtaken by events, is it in order for the First Deputy Prime Minister, Gen. Ali, to come up to demean the report of the committee of this House that we agreed to set up in order to try and solve the problem of the two areas by saying the committee’s report is “downplaying”? 

You did not ask him to rate the report but you asked him to pick those issues that could have happened. He has gone ahead to comment and in a way that borders on downplaying the role of this House. Is the First Deputy Prime Minister in order to rubbish the report of the committee the way he is putting it, other than commenting on the issues that Government has done?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, I do not think Parliament was competing with Government. A problem was brought to this House, we established a committee and they have brought their findings. Therefore, you cannot expect them to say” “By the way Government did this -” Please, tell us: what have you done to that issue so that we can debate this from a point of knowledge? Do not pass judgment on this committee. Just receive what they have told you and tell us what you have done on the land or resettlement. That is what we want to hear.

MS OKETAYOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. It is well known that the First Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Gen. Moses Ali, is a party to this conflict. Is it procedurally right for him to present the Government’s position on this issue? Basing on the fact that after giving good remarks that we have various committees and other committees have not yet concluded their work and he goes ahead to start criticising the committee’s report, would he really be the right person to present the Government’s position?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think it would be safer if we had a neutral person to present the Government’s position. I would like to invite the Second Deputy Prime Minister to come and present the Government’s position.

Honourable First Deputy Prime Minister, I think you are involved in this matter. There is a conflict of interest. So, I want another Prime Minister to come and present the Government’s position. 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising is premised on what my colleague, hon. Lowila, has talked about. The First Deputy Prime Minister had started it on a good note, when he talked about a pending committee report. I am aware that, that committee is chaired by the Deputy Speaker who has taken side on this issue of Apaa; that is on record.

Madam Speaker, if it is based on his position, as a Member of Parliament from Adjumani, I disassociate myself from that report. My proposal, therefore, is that we debate the report of the select committee. Otherwise, we do not agree with the position of the Deputy Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourbale members, His Excellency, the President called and informed me that the Government has taken some action on some of these areas. I was expecting the Prime Minister to tell us what the Government has done. 

In the circumstances – because even the Deputy Speaker has not reported and he is not here - I would like to request the Rt Hon. Ali Kirunda Kivejinja to come and report on that issue, on behalf of Cabinet since he is not a party. Accordingly, we have deferred this matter. The Rt Hon. Kivejinja will come and address us, on behalf of Government. 

Honourable members, let us now go back to the National Coffee Bill; let us deal with the coffee.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL COFFEE BILL, 2018
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had a very comprehensive report from the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Let us start with the hon. Baseke but for only three minutes. 

4.56
MR FRED BASEKE (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report on the National Coffee Bill.

Madam Speaker, I have a few areas of concern. One is at page 10, item 6.1, on the board of the authority. I would like to agree with the committee that we increase the number of farmers’ representatives to two. However, this representation should not be tied to the type of coffee as some stakeholders were suggesting. If you tie it to the type of coffee, what will happen tomorrow, if another variety is discovered through research? So, we should have two farmers’ representatives, but representation should not be tied to the coffee type because all this coffee is the same.

When you look at the focus of the coffee sector - we are looking at increasing value addition - we have the Coffee Research Institute that is responsible for conducting coffee research. Therefore, I do not see the value of National Agricultural Resources Organisation (NARO) on the board. If we already have the National Coffee Research Institute, why don’t we increase the number of representatives of coffee processors to two, instead of having NARO? Otherwise, NARO is under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, which is already represented on the board.

Again, when it comes for the coffee fund, I would like to agree with the committee’s position that 50 percent of the cess – cess is the levy on coffee exports - should go to coffee research. However, I do not agree with the committee’s recommendation that we should have a coffee fund. We have had a number of funds set up here but they are non-functional.

When you look at Article 93 of the Constitution, it has restrictions on financial – you should not introduce or amend where there is a charge on the Consolidated Fund. If you introduce a coffee fund, it means you are going to introduce another set of structure, which will lead to a charge on the Consolidated Fund. Therefore, if we increase the 50 per cent of cess to go to coffee research, which is being collected by Uganda Revenue Authority (URA), it will improve research since money is already being collected by URA. In fact, it is only 10 per cent of cess that goes to coffee research. I, therefore, do not agree with the committee recommendation that we have a coffee fund. Instead we should allow the 50 per cent of cess going to coffee research.

Madam Speaker, I would like to also strongly agree with the committee on the introduction of the auction system as an alternative method of selling coffee. Right now, many farmers are doing the donkey work and it is the middlemen who benefit from the coffee sector. Once we introduce the auction system, there will be competition for good quality coffee. You produce today but you get the same price - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Are you a farmer?

MR BASEKE: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one minute to conclude. 
MR BASEKE: Madam Speaker, the auction system will increase competition and prices will go up. That means that even these farmers who have not been looking after their coffee well, will improve its quality. Hence, the country will get more money and the economy will grow.

Madam Speaker, I also support the idea of having - currently, Government has been procuring coffee seedlings for distribution to farmers and this has been going on for long. What we need to do now is to put up money for rehabilitation and increase of productivity. 
Therefore, I concur with the committee recommendation that we should - the money we have been allocating for seedlings should go to rehabilitate and increase the productivity as well as buy inputs for farmers to increase coffee yields on their farms. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Wamakuyu and hon. Nambeshe. I have also seen hon. Karungi. 

MR IGNATIUS WAMAKUYU (NRM, Elgon County, Bulambuli): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the report and I agree with the issue of auction system. Otherwise, we have been having challenges in securing the market for our coffee and normally it is the middlemen who benefit.

On the issue of the board, I would like to agree with my brother, hon. Baseke’s proposal but at an appropriate time, I will move an amendment that the managing director be a full member of the board. This is so because in section 14, the secretary to the board takes minutes for the meetings. So, at some point in time, I will move that the managing director be a full member of the board since he or she represents management.

Similarly, on the same board, we have seen a representative from a local government. Madam Speaker, these are farmers’ issues and so, I do not agree with the proposal of having a representative from the local government. 

The Uganda Coffee Development Authority usually gives money to NARO. So, if we have a representative from NARO on the board, that will lead to conflict of interest. Therefore, at an appropriate time, I will also move that NARO and the local government should not be represented since this has to do with farmers. Otherwise, how will you select representatives from the entire country?

Madam Speaker, I would like to also propose that we increase the number of processors, as proposed my colleague hon. Baseke. I have seen in the Bill, there are 12 members of the board yet for good corporate governance,  a board should have at least odd numbers such as nine or 11. Therefore, we need to change that.

Regarding registration of farmers, at first we had an issue and some of the people we first consulted in the region looked at it from a political perspective. However, it is a good idea to have a data bank for farmers because it is easy to trace farmers and support them because many farmers need support in terms of fertilizers, pesticides and so on. I therefore agree to the issue of registration of farmers. 

I oppose establishment of the fund. Madam Chairperson, we passed the Public Finance and Management Act, 2015 and it gave supremacy of creation and operation of funds so they said, no more funds. Therefore, if we create a fund, how are we going to treat it? Are we not going to go against the law we passed? I therefore do not agree with that.

Regarding penalties for drying coffee on bare ground, I support that but in a situation where they say farmers are not supposed to move coffee to primary – (Member timed out.)

5.05
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues to thank the committee for the report. However, I take issue with where the committee expresses regret on why the Bill is so silent about farmer organisations like co-operatives. It leaves a lot to be desired if the committee could express regrets. 

Farmer organisations like co-operatives are very vital and play a leading role in mobilising, sensitising and registering farmers as their members. There would be no need for the authority to conduct registration of members when farmer co-operatives or organisations have lists of their members and all the farmers are known and can be mobilised.

The authority should go through these co-operatives to supervise the farmers. The role of supervision and registration would be done better by farmer co-operatives or organisations. There would be no need for the authority to do registration and de-registration of farmers.

Madam Speaker, Uganda is a capitalist economy and in a capitalist economy, production of goods and services are based on demand and supply. However, if you go through clause 54 of the recommendations and observations of the committee, they support penalising culprits - farmers. For instance, where it says, “A farmer who neglects his farm, on conviction, should be sentenced to two years or pay a minimum of 48 currency points (about Shs 960,000) or both.” That would be draconian.

In a capitalist economy, farmers must have economic rights and this would be offensive to Article 25(2) of the Supreme law of the land, the Constitution, which forbids forced labour. This would be reminiscent of what – (Member timed out.)


THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you allow a nuisance from your land to go to another person’s land, it is a tort. 

5.08
MS RUTH KATUSHABE (NRM, Bukomansimbi North County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the committee for the good report. However, I have some concerns. My first concern is on clause 44; the levy on coffee exports.  

When you increase levy on exports, that levy will go to the farmer. We are still struggling with quality and the farmers are struggling to get tarpaulins and to cement their compounds to get good quality. Therefore, when you increase the levy, it will automatically go down to the farmers. I therefore would like to propose that we stay the one percent. We should not increase it to two percent as proposed in the report.


Madam Speaker, I also still have a concern on - You have commented on clause 54 regarding neglect of the farm by the farmer. I do not support nuisance, like you have commented. However, there is a case where a farmer gets sick or he has a very big farm and as is cleaning one part of the garden, another part gets bushy. That farmer will be picked and imprisoned. 


Madam Speaker, look at a case where some officials are corrupt. They might use that very issue to go and pick or start intimidating our farmers saying, you have not cleaned your garden, if you do not give me this, I am going to take you to court.

Madam Speaker, I propose that we delete this part of the clause and first sensitise our farmers. We are here as Parliament. If there are people that are not complying with the law, we can amend and reinstate that clause. However, for the start, I propose that we delete it.

Madam Speaker, I also have an issue on deregistration of farmers. Whereas I agree with registration because we need to get – (Member timed out.)

5.11
MS SARAH WEKOMBA (Independent, Woman Representative, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would also like to thank the committee for the well done report. I support the committee but with some few recommendations and adjustments.

I am a coffee farmer and exporter. The committee talked about the inability of farmers to access funds from the bank. It is true that Government allocates funds to the banks but the banks do not give the right information to the farmers. When you go the bank, they will tell that you will need a bank statement that has run for almost a year, which farmers do not have. I would agree with the committee that yes, we are going to help farmers to see that they get some of these funds once they are accessed from the banks. 

I would also like to talk about the issue regarding auction. When farmers have harvested, at times the market is not there. Under auction, they have their co-operative societies or unions where they register and they always fail to get market on time. When they get the market, the buyers, under the auction system, will offer a good price and that is where the farmers can benefit from.

There is a challenge that the committee noted about the auction system where the buyer takes long to pay the farmers. Under this, I would suggest that there should be a fine that is also included to see that farmers can benefit from the long time they have waited before they are paid.

On the issue of cess, right now, it is the exporter who pays one per cent of this. The committee recommended two per cent, which is going to be shared between the farmer and the exporter. Still, it has to be the farmer to pay.

I suggest that if at all this law is assented to then I would agree that the farmer maybe pays the one per cent. However, in this scenario where Government brings in the inputs like fertilisers or seedlings but the farmers do not access them on time, I do not know how Government is going to commit itself that the – (Interjection) – the farmer can still pay this money.

Lastly, I would also like the committee to look at the regional offices for the extension workers where farmers can take their complaints. I would request that under this office, farmers do cup tasting. 

Mostly the youth and women or even the elderly do not know what takes place under cup tasting. This is where we find the aroma, flavour, acidity and the body of the coffee. That is where the prices are determined. Once the taste is good, we will be able to get the good prices.

I would request that Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) arranges a department for this to be done for our generation to also know what takes place when they call it cup tasting. I would like to submit. Thank you. 

5.16
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we know, our industrialisation strategy as Uganda is premised on agriculture. 

Coffee is the number one agricultural export earner for this country at 10.5 per cent followed by fish at 9.5 per cent. This sector cannot be left unregulated. Therefore, I agree with the committee recommendations. I thank the committee members for the proposals made.

If we are to compete favourably on the global scene, we need to have our coffee regulated. Consumers of agricultural goods on the international scale, for instance, for the coffee, they want to trace it right from the garden to the cup. Therefore, Uganda needs to follow the International Coffee Organisation’s minimum standards on coffee. I think this is a good trend we are taking as a country and we should uphold the sector.

If we followed the recommendations and put this law in place, it would enable us achieve the goal of the third national development plan. The goal is to increase average household income and improve on the quality of Ugandans.

For those who are in the coffee sector, if the law was upheld and we improved on the quality, it would automatically translate into improvement in our incomes and the quality of life.

I would like to talk about Strategic Development Goal (SDG) number five. The committee wrote about the gender equality. Women farmers in this country, in the coffee sector in particular, we live and work in substandard environment, which are not favourable. 

Even the representation, when we talk about the board, it is my prayer that women are represented because we do most of the work. About 50 to 70 per cent of the work in this sector is done by women. 

I thank the committee for looking into the SDGs. It is my prayer that women are considered. We would like to see women thrive sustainably in the coffee sector in this country.

Lastly, about domestic consumption, it is good to sensitise and encourage Ugandans to consume this coffee. The committee gave examples of countries where the consumption of coffee is high. It is my dream that we shall see domestic consumption of coffee increase from 260,000 bags to 296 – (Member timed out)

5.19
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for the comprehensive report. They have nearly covered most of the things, which are very necessary for increasing the production of coffee.

I am glad that now we have included on-farm supervision to ensure that quality coffee is grown. It is very important that we start from opening the land, planting until you harvest and sell.

For this, we need extension workers. Currently, we have a regional extension worker who services over 12 districts. He cannot give close supervision or even help the farmer.

Therefore, I recommend that we need to have extension farmers of coffee specifically at sub-county level so that they can be very close to the farmer. Otherwise, that one alone cannot help.

Coffee is grown widely in Uganda including Northern Uganda. However, the biggest challenge for Northern Uganda is the dry long spell for three months from November up to February. Coffee, which is planted at the age below a year all dry up. Even the mature ones either never produce or they dry up.

Therefore, it is very important to have irrigation for coffee farmers without which, it cannot work.

They have said that they should arrest people who abandon their coffee. I think I will be the one to be arrested. For three years, I planted coffee but it dried up so I abandoned it. It is because of lack of water and extension workers who can help the farmers. 

Unless we have all the extension workers and you provide all the requirements like the inputs in form of loans, then the coffee farmer will not benefit.

On the issue of gender, I am happy that we are represented on the board but when it comes to the farm, you will find that all the farms are owned by – (Member timed out.) 


THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.


MS BABA DIRI: My conclusion is that women work very hard in coffee farms but when it comes to harvesting, you find that men are the ones selling and using the money. 

Therefore, I think it is necessary to put the clause that when coffee is being sold, the woman should also be included in budgeting for the money. She should be given something because quite often, we work and do not get anything. Thank you.


5.23
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good work done on the coffee Bill. Having appreciated their work, I have some observations.

The first one is about the registration of farmers. Since time immemorial, we have been having farmers. So, we need to maybe coin it and say that the existing farmers are presumed to have been registered, because there are cooperatives in place. 

I also want to commend Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) for trying to register farmers. When we talk of farmers’ registration, it is not a new event. It has been in existence.

I would like to comment on the definition of a farmer. They are defining a farmer as a commercial one. Hon. Baba Diri and other Members have recommended that coffee should be consumed. However, my mother can pound coffee and take it; how do we include that in the definition that is being presented? I think we need to define a coffee a farmer as one who grows coffee, not necessarily for export because it can be for local consumption.


Madam Speaker, in the constitution of the board, it is a good practice, which was even in the 1994 coffee law, to recognise the Executive Director as a full member of the board. I would recommend that the Executive Director becomes a member of the board, but not an ex officio member because there is already a secretary of the board in place. Therefore, if the committee could concede, we can take the Executive Director as a full-time member of the board so that he represents the issues of management.
Madam Speaker, on the increasing of CESS, we need to be clear. Who is going to incur this tax? Is it the farmer or the exporter? If we say it is the exporter, it is going to be taken to the farmer. I need clarification on this before we impose a tax on the farmers, yet we are promoting coffee production.

Madam Speaker, on auctioning, I would like to commend the committee- (Member timed out.)

5.26
MR EMMANUEL KALULE SSENGO (NRM, Gomba East County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I am also a coffee farmer. However, I am a bit uncomfortable with the definition they have given of a farmer. Who is a farmer? They do not tell us whether a farmer should be having one or two acres. They also say that even if a farmer is planning to plant coffee, he will be regarded as a farmer. I would have preferred them coming out clearly by saying that a farmer is one who has so many trees of coffee.

Madam Speaker, on quality, I think this Bill tries to downplay the efforts of cooperatives. When we had cooperatives, coffee was of high quality because the cooperatives were very organised. They had a database of their farmers and they used to give them ways of improving on their coffee. However, this Bill is not paying enough attention to the cooperatives.

Another thing that I would have wanted is to request Government to remove politics from cooperatives. If cooperatives were not based on politics, then they would be able to do a good job. I remember the case of Bugisu Cooperative Union which was rocked by politics and then they could not do their work properly. I think if we leave cooperatives to do their work properly without politics, we shall be able to improve the quality of our coffee.

Madam Speaker, I also want to talk about the issue of low consumption of coffee in this country. It is a mistake for a country to grow a certain crop and then they do not consume it. I think we have to work hard and remove the feelings people have about coffee. There is a feeling that when you take coffee, your blood pressure goes up. I do not know whether this is medically true. They also say that when you take coffee, you will not be able to sleep at night; I wonder whether this is true. 

I think UCDA should take trouble to impress it upon our people that coffee does not stop people from sleeping and that it is healthy to take it. I think if we do that, then we shall be able to improve the prices of our coffee because it is very dangerous for us to grow coffee when we do not take it and then we expect other people to take it.

Madam Speaker, I am also against the idea of increasing the CESS - (Member timed out.) 

5.29
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I welcome this Bill and I support the report made by the committee. 

When we look at our population, which is estimated to be 45 million, we cannot be governed by a law which was made when the population was about 13 million. At the moment, we need more foreign exchange from coffee, which is one of our most viable foreign exchange earners. As the population grows, importation increases here in Uganda. Therefore, we need to make more money and with this Bill, which seeks to improve the value and quality of coffee, I do commend the report of the committee and welcome the Bill.

However, Madam Speaker, according to the Bill, we are supposed to have extension workers in addition to the ones which the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is managing at the moment. I see a problem there because even these extension workers are not well facilitated at the moment. Therefore, I would propose that we facilitate the available extension workers; give them more information and education about coffee so that they can ensure the quality of our coffee.

Secondly, on the issue of soil testing, if the UCDA tests soils, that means even the sugar, tea and other authorities will prepare to go and test soil. Therefore, I would propose that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries takes up that mandate of testing all the soil such that we get to know where we can grow coffee well and other crops, so that we get one department doing that job. Otherwise, we shall find a problem where we are employing so many people doing less work but being paid more. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.32
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I speak with a lot of passion on the issue of coffee because in the bushes of Kiboga, I was born, raised and educated on coffee. I am a coffee grower myself and I have been promoting the presidential initiative of getting people to grow at least four acres of coffee.

I thank the committee for such a well-researched report; it addresses a specific gap in addition to offering regulation of on-farm and the entire coffee value chain. It reflects evidence of good practice and provides well thought-out incentives for coffee growers.

Madam Speaker, the committee report mentions that Uganda is the eighth largest coffee grower but it does not mention that it is also the eighth largest exporter of coffee. There is also something else that is very important: coffee is the third most consumed commodity, competing with tea and water and competing on the market with other products like crude oil. So, as we wait to get our crude oil, there is an opportunity here of concentrating on coffee to see how best we can maximise its potential. 

I welcome the idea of the coffee fund, especially for funding coffee research and assisting farmers with access to credit facilities. There may be challenges around it but I do not think there is any legal impediment with it, because we also introduced it in the National Environment Bill.

I welcome the idea of a national coffee institute to research on coffee development. However, this morning, and since this Bill was presented, I have received several calls concerning clause 54. There is a lot of worry about people being arrested for failing to comply. 

Madam Speaker, as we process this Bill, we need to think very carefully. What are we trying to do? Are we trying to get people to grow coffee or trying to repel them from growing coffee? Inadvertently, we may end up repelling people from growing the four acres of coffee that we have been promoting as a presidential initiative.

We also need to think carefully about the issues that may lead to problems of compliance, problems of good plantation materials, access to pesticides, problems of death, old age, sickness – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, conclude, coffee man.

MR KIWANUKA: We need to think about the problems of drying materials, which the farmers may not have; ability to construct good storage facilities; and access to good markets. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, there is one other key point that comes out across strongly. Are we setting up the Uganda Coffee Development Authority as a development agency or as a regulatory agency? The two are diametrically opposite each other. You cannot have somebody arresting people for non-compliance, prosecuting them but at the same time providing that shoulder for the farmers to lean on and trust them to help develop them. As we process this Bill, we have to be careful how the two are separated. 

I think what the report is missing is support for institutions like unions, so that they can support the farmers, probably through extension workers. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.36
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am a coffee farmer and the people of Kassanda are coffee growers because it is our main cash crop. 

I intended to move amendments on clause 14 but hon. Mudimi has indicated that he will move similar amendments. I have already informed the chairperson about that.

My major comment is on the board, which comprises 12 people. I think these are too many. The board must be lean because it relies on the taxpayers’ money. 

I support the registration of farmers but some of the conditions for registration in clause 26(b) are deterrent. In this country, we have only about two Government laboratories that can do soil testing yet we are requiring a farmer to ensure that their land is evaluated. That is unachievable, especially by small scale farmers. So, I intend to move an amendment to ensure that that red tape is not included as it will fail farmers in the process of registration.

As farmers, we realise that there are critical issues that are missing out in this Bill. There are matters to do with pests and disease control, farm productivity and post-harvest handling, and matters to do with coffee processing and value chain. These are very critical issues to the farmers and we need to know what the Bill is saying about them. Therefore, I intend to move an amendment to redraft clause 51 so that as we talk about research, we must focus on these critical areas because farmers need answers. 

Madam Speaker, there are pests that affect coffee. Coffee growers have tried using all types of herbicides on the market but the pests are still there. So, we need a research process to give us answers and in clause 51, I think – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, if there are those who want to move amendments, please publish them early enough and share them with the chair and the minister so that we do not have arguments on the Floor.

5.40
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for presenting this report. 

Hon. Nsamba insinuated that I am a specialist in sugarcane growing, but my father is a serious coffee grower; so, I am equally a very serious coffee grower. Where I come from, the best and only crop that people know is coffee. Even those who have been disappointed with growing sugarcane are going back to coffee growing.

Madam Speaker, Government has been experimenting here and there, waiting for gold and oil, among others, but our everything is in coffee. We only need to have coffee growing streamlined. We need to focus on coffee and have the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development fund coffee growing; that will give everybody in this country happiness.


Madam Speaker, it is only coffee that can be seen in Busoga, Mbale, western, northern Uganda and everywhere. Therefore, we need to refocus our priorities and see that coffee is given the due attention it requires. 


I would like to concur with the part of the report that mentions SDG 4 and quality education. Some of us are what we are because of coffee. If our fathers were not growing coffee, we would not be here, because we do not have some of those things like cows.
 

On SDG 1, which talks about home income, it is only through growing coffee that my father or my relative will be able to realise some income; after selling their coffee, they will be able to buy salt and soap. So, we need to do something to improve on coffee growing.

Madam Speaker, I agree with the report on the creation of a coffee fund. It is only after establishing the coffee fund in Uganda Development Bank or wherever it is required that we can see specialised money – some fund that must be put there other than the ED saying that he has no money. We do not want the ED to say things like, “I would do this but because I have no funds, I cannot help you” or “we would go to this place but because of lack of funds, we cannot.” We need to see money specifically put aside to see coffee grow. 

Madam Speaker, I equally concur with having the extension workers in place – (Member timed out.)


THE SPEAKER: Members, we are almost into the curfew time.

5.43
MS NOELINE BASEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the comprehensive report they have provided us in regard to this Bill. 


I am very passionate about coffee because I am a coffee farmer. I have grown up and been educated through coffee. It is very timely that we have this Bill to regulate the coffee subsector. 

I would like to appreciate the sector-specific extension services. As my colleagues have said, the extension services we have been having at regional level have been ineffective, when you look at the survival rate of the plants that we have been distributing to farmers. In 2018, there was a survey we conducted in Kibaale District and the survival rate was 30 per cent. This means the extension services are very timely. I would like to support the Bill. 


The other aspect that I would like to appreciate that has come out clearly in the report is the issue of the registration of farmers. When this Bill was introduced, there was a lot of fear, at least in my place, about registration. Farmers were hesitant and they thought this was a way for them to be taxed. All sorts of issues were brought up. However, the report has brought out a very clear explanation on why farmers have to be registered - issues of traceability, which is okay. 


Madam Speaker, it would be good if this registration was tagged to cooperatives in the communities, so that the farmers are able to support one another to boost production. 


Lastly, there is an area where I am not comfortable. The report proposes introduction of community contribution to all inputs to get a sense of ownership on the part of the farmers. Whereas that is good, when we introduce a kind of cost sharing, some farmers are likely to miss out on some of the inputs - those who cannot afford to pay for fertilizers. If the seedlings have to be paid for, it can become a challenge. 


I would like to propose that at least we have those items that farmers can contribute on but also have the ongoing support – for example, we have been providing seedlings to the farmers – which will be very important. With the sector-specific extension services, the farmers will take care and they will own this because we can now reach a level whereby supply is demand driven and we do not have to supply seedlings to farmers who are not – (Member timed out.)

5.46
MS PROSSY MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and the chairperson for the good work and the good recommendations. 

The intention of this Bill is very good. I am one of the people who grows coffee. In my region, we have over 200 acres of coffee and this Bill should have come yesterday. We need to register our farmers as this is the only way Government will be able to identify who these farmers are and where they are located and find a way to support them. We need to move away from the informal sector. This is the time to go formal. 

The committee talked about penalties. I would like to add my voice to this. If there is any violation of the law in terms of this Bill, there should be some penalties for the people who do not follow the law. 

We are aware that Uganda earns a lot from coffee and it is the main cash crop for this country. We do not have to compromise on quality. We need to put up standards that will enable us to earn more from this coffee, right from the gardens to harvesting and export time. We need to compete with other places, which produce coffee by producing quality coffee. 

I also request, if possible, for UCDA to come and avail us with the opportunity to brief us on this issue of our vision of 20 million bags - in future - if this Bill is passed. I beg to submit. Thank you, Madam Speaker.


5.49
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Namisindwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this Bill. 

I would like to talk about coffee. Coffee is a very important asset for our country. We, in Bugisu, grow Arabica coffee and it is the basis for everything that has brought us up to here. I was educated using coffee money.
 

I happened to go out of the country and I realised that people out there call coffee “black gold”. We moved around and I realised that a small cup of coffee is around Shs 35,000 yet at home, I cannot buy it at Shs 1,000. It is around Shs 500. 


I remember when we were young, there was a magendo business in 1976 where we took coffee to Kenya and it was used, indirectly, to oust the government of Idi Amin Dada in Uganda. As such, people are scared that when they get certificates, the Government will know how many trees of coffee they have and they will be charged. They were very afraid. 


However, when we educated them, they now know that when you have got such and such a number of coffee trees, if you get a certificate, you can then use that certificate to borrow money. They will know that you are a man who has got about 500 stems of coffee and this can work like a mortgage. When you go to the bank, they will know that you are a rich man who has got coffee. They can lend you money knowing that you will pay. If you are naked, with no certificate, you cannot take your children to the bank and mortgage them but you can mortgage your coffee trees. (Laughter)


I would like to thank the committee for this coffee Bill because it is very important. Even if you go out of the country and they know that you are a man with 1000 coffee trees, they will respect you. The certificate will work like a land title for a piece of land that one owns. 


Our coffee is very important and once you train our people to grow coffee – we still have stems of coffee, which our grandparents grew and they are still growing now – (Member timed out.)

5.52
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work well done. Buganda, as a region, has two serious concerns. Farmers here are not mentioned; whether they are small scale or large scale farmers.


When it comes to the penalties where a farmer is supposed to declare loss of interest to UCDA, that would be a problem. How can a small farmer from my rural area look for UCDA to declare loss of interest in order to avoid a penalty? Secondly, are the penalties hidden behind so that our farmers lose interest in coffee? 

The Katikkiro of Buganda has been at the forefront in mobilising Buganda. Recently, we were given, by this Parliament, over a million seedlings and it is on record that we have been enforcing coffee growing, but the issue of penalties should be looked into. The issue of penalties would not have been a problem if the cooperative societies, which used to help the farmers, were still in existence. Now, we are talking of a coffee fund which is going to disappear unknowingly. The coffee funds should go directly to the cooperative societies, which can address the concerns of the farmers.

The cooperative unions used to motivate farmers through incentives but now we are talking of coffee quality when many of our people in the villages are not supported. They suffer alone and they are not given simple loans with low interest. Really, what can be done?

The committee should look into the issue of penalties and the fund to cater for bringing back cooperative societies, which farmers used to go to and get money. Sugarcane growers, for example, now go to factories and they can get money in advance and when the time for selling comes, the loans are covered. Many of our people are not large-scale farmers. They should be considered to avoid these penalties. Thank you.

5.55
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek your indulgence; allow me a few more minutes so that I can give you the real issues of coffee. 

Coffee came to Uganda through the colonial masters. When it was being grown, they told the growers that if they drink coffee, their hearts will over pump. (Laughter) The purpose was to make them grow but not drink, fearing that their hearts would over pump, so that the white people would take the coffee for themselves.


Madam Speaker, I would like to make a correction on the assumption that when you take coffee you cannot sleep. No, in fact, in reality, coffee can make you sleep faster -(Interjection) – You are from a seminary but I am a grower and I am telling you. (Laughter) Coffee is very good in the morning, good after meals and whatever time. On that point, I would agree with the Bill that we should really promote consumption of our coffee as it is being done in Ethiopia.
 
However, there are issues which we must deal with in the law. First, as we speak, there are farmers who are growing coffee. If you say you are going to register them, it loses meaning. In short, what should be done is to update and maybe give those existing farmers numbers or something like that. To say you are going to register, it means UCDA, which does not even have capacity to register, may decide to just say “I have registered you” or “I have not registered you”. There must be a clause to deal with the current farmers. 

To come and say that you need to inspect the soil – that is why during the colonial times, they did the zoning of this country and said that certain places were good for arabica coffee, others for Robusta coffee, cotton, tea, etcetera. 

I would like to state that coffee is the second most traded commodity after oil and because it is the second most traded commodity –(Member timed out.)


THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude.


MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Since it is the second most traded commodity, it has its own politics and its politics cannot be cured by using the law. The law you are going to make can easily curtail the coffee producers. 

Let me elaborate. You want to establish a coffee fund but you have not talked about the stabilisation fund which was introduced between 1993 and 2003. We collected money saying that it was going to come back to help the coffee sector; what happened to that money? Basically, that money should be under UCDA and if UCDA could not explain where that money went, then we as Parliament should be here to appropriate money to develop the coffee sector as we do for other sectors in the country.

Two, you are going to charge two per cent; that is a tax! Nobody should lie to you that the exporter will pay. This tax is taken directly to the farmer. Therefore, nobody should come here saying the tax will be paid by the exporter. I heard somebody saying here that he is an exporter and they are the ones who will pay. No, it is passed on to the farmer. The exporter needs his money and he can maybe only pay corporation tax. If you are going to establish this tax, you are in short saying you are taxing the farmer.

You recall during the sugar Bill recently, when the farmers came here saying if you put one per cent withholding tax, you are going to kill them. It is the same law. The law you made for the sugar should be the same law for coffee, cotton and other crops.

Madam Speaker, it is true that the country developed on coffee. We should promote it but we should be careful. That is why we are coming in to make those amendments. The UCDA staff are the biggest culprits and in this law I do not see them being talked about. They run the business of providing coffee seedlings and they are the ones who sell bags for export. They are in the business of trade and no penalty has been instituted for them.
 
I will give an example. We are exporters of coffee. In Bugisu Cooperative Union, they have directed that we should buy from a specific company and then we go and they give us a certificate for export. One time, I asked which company that was. When we investigated, we found out that it is a company where the UCDA staff are directing exporters. Some exporters said, “Nandala-Mafabi, if you go beyond that, they will cancel your licence.” I said, “Let me try.” After that, they gave up on me. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, in this law, we should put stringent sanctions on UCDA. It is like the National Audit Act, where we put sanctions for the auditors. We should do the same for coffee because, as I said, it is the second most traded commodity after oil.

Madam Speaker, UCDA should really be thinking about cooperatives. They have no capacity to register everybody in Uganda. The only authorities that can register farmers are the cooperatives because the cooperatives are based there. If you say that the extension officers will be the ones to register, you are going to bring in corruption that you have never seen. 

Madam Speaker, if you are promoting cooperatives –


THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.


MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am going to conclude. To be able to promote cooperatives, we must find a way to deal with farmers who are already existing. Adulteration of coffee is the biggest problem in this country. Uganda Coffee Development Authority watches coffee coming from Paidha called “Arabica Coffee of Paidha”, but it is mixed with the Bugisu arabica coffee and sold as “Arabica Coffee Bugisu”, since Arabica Coffee Bugisu has a high price. They get robusta coffee and mix it with arabica coffee and then sell it as arabica coffee.

Madam Speaker, there must be serious sanctions on the movement of coffee from regions. I do not see in the law where they say that bulking should be done in the respective regions. The reason is that if it is coming from Paidha and going for exportation, it should leave straight from Paidha. If it is being taken for grinding, there must be factory to grind it at Paidha and it is brought knowing that it is Paidha coffee. Failure to do that, we are going to have a huge problem with adulteration of coffee.

Finally, we are talking about the managing director, but we have not talked about the deputy managing director. The board appoints the managing director but how can the managing director become a full board member? These are things that we must think through. 

I am, therefore, going to move amendments on the issues of governance, adulteration, CESS tax and the coffee fund. The coffee fund should not be in UCDA. It should be a fund created in Bank of Uganda or any other bank but not managed by the UCDA. There are examples to this. If all the seedlings, which have been distributed in this country were all planted, even here where I am standing, we would be having seedlings but because – (Member timed out.)


THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I allowed hon. Nandala-Mafabi to speak a bit longer because he is the chairperson of Bugisu Cooperative Union and he has been a long-time farmer. We have had some debate on this matter. I have seen a number of Members who wanted to contribute. We shall give you the opportunity during the committee stage. Those who have amendments, please, publish them this evening. Discuss them with the chairperson of the committee and the minister so that we do not have arguments on the Floor. I put the question that the National Coffee Bill be read for a second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.04 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 9 July 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)


