Tuesday, 2 July 2002

(Parliament met 2.25 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, it is my pleasure to welcome you back from the two-weeks’ adjournment. I want to thank the honourable members who stayed here to complete special assignments we gave them namely, the Committee on UCB and the other one on violence during elections. I hope they have been able to complete the assignments, and in due course, they will be able to present their reports.

Honourable Members, it is my pleasure again to welcome hon. Kasole who underwent a major operation at Mulago.  He is here with us - (Applause).  At the same time, I want to congratulate hon. Kezimbira Miyingo for having won a court battle.  He is with us here - (Applause). But on a sad note, I want to announce that our fellow hon. Member Elioda Tumwesigye lost a mother on 27th.  Sorry about that!  In due course, we shall stand and observe a minute’s silence.

Honourable Members, we are starting a very busy period which is not only controlled by our Rules of Procedure, but which will also be controlled by a major Act, namely, the Budget Act.  We have now to do things according to the schedule as set out in the Act.  One of those requirements in the Act is that ministries should by now have sent their policy statements so that Committees can scrutinise them.  

I want to take this opportunity to thank the following ministries which have so far complied with the law, namely: Ministries of Agriculture, Energy, Education, President’s Office, Justice, Local Government, Finance, Works, Housing & Communications, Public Service, Gender, Prime Minister’s Office and Health.  So, if there are any other ministries, which have not done so, please, you are advised to do so. As far as Parliament is concerned, by the end of August, the Sessional Committees are required to have presented their reports on the estimates. So, we have to work very hard to comply with the Act, which we ourselves enacted during the 6th Parliament.  

It is necessary that we have the Committees because most of our work is done in the Committees.  I have received a list of people who have registered for various Committees, but I regret to say that there are some honourable members who have so far not done so. I want to give them an opportunity to register for any of the Committees because if you do not do so, the people you represent will know that you are not on any Committee, and it will not be possible for you to go to them and say we work in the Committees and so forth. 

There are some Committees that have few Members. Some are only 13 and so forth.  So, I have decided that I give you another opportunity to register for a Committee of your choice, or even, you can swift from those over subscribed Committees to another Committee.  But in case you do so and you cross, please sign against the crossing because we have detected some crossings which are dubious in the sense that we do not know whether the crossing was by the person concerned or another person who might not have wanted that person to be on that particular Committee.  So, we are going to post this list back on the notice board, and maybe on Thursday, we will be able to constitute the Committees. Then you can have your leadership, which is by choosing your chairperson and vice chairperson. I appeal to you please, register.  It is only the ministers that are not supposed to be on the Committees, but each Member is supposed to have one Committee on which to serve.

We have new Standing Committees and you know according to our rules, for those who are interested to be on those Committees, forms will be available in the Clerk’s office so that you can go and get necessary support before we constitute the same.  

In view of the sad news, I ask you to stand for a moment’s silence.

(Members stood to observe a moment of silence.)

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, you have just said that in view of the fact that some Members of Parliament have not registered for the Sessional committees, that you are giving them a chance.  What I do not fully understand is, is the office of the Clerk going to put up fresh forms for people to fill again or these forms are going to be put up, those which have already been filled and not completed and then people add on their names?

THE SPEKAER: I think the details really, that is for the Clerk to work out on what he can do.  I am not supposed to do his work, but we have these lists. He can put it there and then you add your name or you cross your name to another one.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to use this opportunity to express concern over the current wave of gun murders in and around Kampala. I am a Member of Parliament representing Rubaga South, and when I talk about Kampala, I believe you all know the equivalent of what I am talking about. 

Last week, one distinguished son of Uganda, a distinguished businessman by the name of Semwezi Kaggwa living in Busega was brutally murdered in cold blood at 9.00 a.m. in the morning, when he was going to work. It was such a shocking scenario that many of us started doubting whether we are safe whenever we move. 

As if that was not enough, several people in my constituency, namely; one Mrs Sempa, Katende Dick a famous dramatist from the Ebonies and Mrs Sonko were also brutally murdered in those circumstances.  And the gunmen use very sophisticated weapons - AK47s. 

As I have already said, so many things are happening. In the same area, there is an influx of Sudanese refugees occupying every rental house. My people are getting displaced because they cannot afford the rent; only these people are capable of doing so. 

I would like the Government to state to us whether Uganda is a dumping ground for everyone to come and occupy any area without limitations. These refugees are supposed to stay in camps! 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, you and I must be in danger because what happened in Busega is a replica of what we are reading about in Beirut and Palestine.  You wake up in the morning only to be gunned down.  Are we safe? Are we secure? What is Government telling us, before we proceed? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Sorry about that.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, Government is equally concerned. We have instituted a committee, and the Minister of Internal Affairs, together with our colleagues are working on the matter. A detailed report is actually being compiled, and I believe within this week or next week, we are going to present to you a detailed report on the current wave of murders in Kampala and other towns in Uganda. We are equally concerned, and we want to give our condolences to the families of the bereaved.

MR NOBERT MAO: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Now that we are talking about this wave of violence, I would like to also ask for a response concerning the situation in northern Uganda, especially in the three districts of Gulu, Kitgum and Pader. 

Of course, we have been receiving press reports mainly, and we have been reading about these murders. Some of us have been talking to the victims, and we would like to inform this Parliament that the situation is extremely unacceptable. Ugandans everywhere expect to be defended by the army. Ugandans everywhere expect the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces to defend their lives and property.  

Right now, the ordinary people in the three districts are not free to move, the camps are unsafe, the Kony rebels are roaming around freely in spite of “Operation Iron Fist”. We were given assurances, we feel disappointed. 

When these committees are constituted, we have consulted and we intend to ask the House to send the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to the affected areas and come back to this House with a report. We expect our Government to be serious! We do not want a circus.  

Our people want to be free to move, our people want peace, and I think this House should express its concern. After consultations, we expect the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to come and brief the House because I think what is in the newspapers is an understatement. If there is anybody on the Front Bench who wants to take this on, I would be very relieved to hear a similar response to the one given about the wave of banditry in Kampala.  

DR STEVEN MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is a concern of every citizen in this country about the way it has become easy for people to own guns, especially where failure of the control of guns has occurred and it has led to unwanted murders.  

I lived through a period in this country when the guns were strictly controlled. Those who purchased guns had to have licenses before they bought guns, and they were known. But nowadays you see people walking on the streets with arms and you do not know where they have come from! I am told even in the barracks the control of arms is not as strict as it was in our days, the good old days -(Laughter). In our days, every company had what they called an armoury –(Interruption).

MR WAMBI: Hon. Mallinga is talking about a very serious matter, and I believe honourable Members would like to clearly understand him so that if an issue is brought up, they may give him the support. May we know or be clarified as to what you mean by “during our times”. Which times were these, and where were these? Aren’t you still within your times? Thank you.

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I will clarify this way:  I used to be an army officer from 1969 to 1972, and my contemporaries are here. The honourable member from Vura was my contemporary, one of the Prime Ministers, hon. Moses Ali, was my contemporary. Maybe you would like to know that at that time I was of a higher rank than hon. Moses Ali - (Laughter). But to come back to the serious matter I was addressing -(Interruption)-  

MRS ZZIWA: I thank Dr Mallinga for giving way, and I wanted to give him information because I remember very vividly, in 1971, in my village in Mpererwe, the headmaster of Budo Senior Secondary School then, a certain Mr Mukasa, was gunned down and he was buried. I wanted to bring out the fact that even in his time people were being gunned down.  Thank you.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I am very grateful to the honourable Member for Kampala for the information. I think she has lived in this city for a long time so as to know that the rate at which the people are being gunned down now is much more than what was happening then. This was an incident that happened, and everybody in the country knew that the headmaster of Budo had been assassinated, but now it is so wanton; it is a daily occurrence!  

I will go back to address the issue of security and control of arms I was talking about the control of arms in the barracks. In my days, every company had an armoury where you store arms The sergeant of that company made a report to the adjutant in the morning about the arms, which were in his keeping and how many had been taken out. He repeated the same thing in the afternoon, and they appeared in what they called local orders. But now you see soldiers going to their homes on leave with arms. This is leading to a lot of problems  

There are security organizations in this country, and we have read in the papers that some of them have lent out arms to robbers and nothing has been done about it! We really do not know which security organizations are entitled to hold the arms.  I have just gone through a by-election. I was shocked to see that my opponent had access to Kakooza Mutale’s office, and his men came to my constituency with arms. Who is entitled to keep arms in this country? 

I think it is the responsibility of those in Government to set a procedure to control arms - who owns arms and which security organization should have arms - so that we go almost to the colonial period when whoever was entitled to carry an arm was known. At present, we do not know.  

How do these arms get to robbers?  An AK-47, which the honourable Member described as a sophisticated arm, is the simplest arm that can be operated. It was meant to be operated by the most un-intelligent people, and it is being done. People are dying almost daily in this country due to arms, which are out of control!  We should not resort to solving our problems using arms There is a lot of room for negotiation, and even when negotiation is exhausted, let us negotiate again.  

I get scared when some of us say that there is a problem in such and such an area and the solution is to send soldiers, before we even have negotiated to solve that problem. 

Ending my contribution, I beg those in authority and Parliament to take responsibility - as it is part of the Government - to see that the ownership of arms in the country is controlled, and to hunt down those who have acquired arms illegally, so that the public in this country is not endangered by wanton ownership of arms Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I do not think this should generate debate. It was communication from the Chair, and the point was made. Tomorrow we shall start a general debate when we are dealing with the state of the nation address by the President. There will be a general debate, and all these issues will be raised. This will be followed by a general debate on the Budget. Again, you will be able to raise the general issues that you are raising now.  

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification on the communication from the Chair. You recall that when we went for recess, a number of outstanding questions had been put to members of the Front Bench on Question Time. We postponed the course of the debate for the Budget.  We are back again, I do not see any item or any possibility of these questions being answered, and yet some of them are getting outdated. What is the situation? Are we going to have the first opportunity to discuss them?

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Member for raising this point. I just forgot it. I should have mentioned it. You remember when Parliament was prorogued, the pending questions were saved and I have got a list of these questions.  There are 27 questions, but I see that one of them has been overtaken by events. It was about elections of the youth. 

The business committee will be meeting this week. It should decide on how to handle this business.  Definitely, we are going to give time to the ministers to answer all the questions. They will be answered in due course, and I have also seen your question there. It will be answered.

MR AWORI: This is again arising from your communication from the Chair on the issue of the national address by His Excellency the President.  In the past it has come directly to the plenary for debate. Why isn’t it treated like any other address, which must go first of all to the relevant committee for digestion, and then it comes back to us for the general debate?

THE SPEAKER: Well, the practice we have been following is that we have dealt with it that way. And I think it is an acceptable practice, so that is how we are going to continue. But we can revisit this issue and change our rules so that we can send it to the committee and then it comes back to us.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to ask the Prime Minister whether there is any reporting system in the Government of Uganda about issues that arise right from LC 1 up to the LC 5. If so, then it appears that in my constituency nothing is being reported about the rampant cattle theft.  Fuso lorries arrive at night and people’s cattle are being loaded and secretly taken away. If this is being reported to the Prime Minister’s Office, then I am comfortable that there is a reporting system.  

I do not think the Gombolola Internal Security Officers are doing any work today! At least in my constituency, I am not seeing it being done. I see my security decaying and it is mainly caused by, maybe, the lack of action of the Gombolola Internal Security Officers in my constituency. 

What worries me, if I look for a report on PMA anywhere, I find nothing.  If I look for reports on Animal Industry somewhere, I find nothing!  I do not think there is a reporting system in this country established by the law currently being practised.  I thank you for giving me the five minutes.

MAJ KATIRIMA: Mr Speaker, I want to seek clarification on procedures that will be adopted to constitute the new Standing Committees you have alluded to in your communication.  These are new Committees, which are going to be formed when we already have other Standing Committees fully constituted.  

On the one hand, it would appear that it is only those Members who are not Members of the other Standing Committees who may qualify to serve on these new Committees. But these Members may not have an interest, and other Members who are already on these Standing Committees may also develop an interest in the new Standing Committees. Are we not going to start a situation where all these Committees will break down and we may need to re-elect all the Standing Committees afresh?  I would want to be guided on how this procedure will be handled Sir.

THE SPEAKER:  I do not see any problem.  If you are on a Standing committee now and you want to join another Standing Committee, the best you can do is to resign from that Standing Committee and seek support to stand on another Standing Committee, and then the House would consider you and see whether you should be there. I think this -(Mr Lukyamuzi rose_)- what is it honourable member?

MR LUKYAMUZI:  Sorry, Mr Speaker. You will agree with me that the response given to the issues I raised by the hon. Minister in charge of Parliamentary Affairs, the answer he gave was very light. I assume that the statement in anticipation should cover the issue of refugees rampantly invading Kampala.  We need to know in terms of –(Interruption)-

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable Member, the issue of refugees was raised in your - I think they are going to respond to that, and you know that now in our rules, a statement by a Minister attracts debate.  Certainly we shall debate this statement.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING)(Mr Isaac Musumba):  Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a bill entitled, “The Foreign Exchange Bill, 2002” be read the first time.

THE SPEAKER: The bill stands committed to the appropriate Committee of the House.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING)(Mr Isaac Musumba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the bill entitled, “The Financial Institutions Bill, 2002” be read the first Time.

THE SPEAKER: The bill stands committed to the appropriate Committee of the House.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENVIRONMENT (Dr Kezimbira Miyingo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, let me thank you for congratulating me, and I thank honourable members also for congratulating me, and thank you for the prayers that you offered me.

Mr Speaker, I have one statement that contains two items, and I will be very brief because I have circulated the statements to honourable members already.  

Today we are already hosting an African Ministerial Conference on the Environment. The technical session of this meeting is already sitting in Kampala.

This organisation in short is called AMCEN, and it is an organisation that has been around since 1985. It is meant to bring together the Ministers of Environment and the technical people so that they can be able to deliberate on issues of environment that concern Africa. In so doing, and through the Secretariat, then it is possible to link up the Governments so that harmonisation can be done on issues of environment, some of which cut across Africa.  

The organisation is also meant to be a forum through which consensus is reached, especially when we participate in global matters that require solidarity. As you are aware, Africa is not very strong when it comes to international negotiations and sometimes we can only be able to put up our position which can be listened to if we move together as Africa, and this organisation is meant to help us negotiate on issues of environment with the international community, especially the developed countries who are far more powerful than we are in Africa. 

The organisation certainly also helps in negotiations by providing funding to delegations in some of the negotiations where countries are unable to take delegates to these negotiations.

One of the biggest disadvantages that Africa meets when it comes to international negotiations is our small delegations, sometimes composed of one person per country. And when you go, you find the developed countries come up with 20, 30 people to come on issues to be discussed, and meetings go on for long, maybe coming up to midnight, sometimes even beyond. And one delegate definitely does tire out, and in many Committees you find that you have nobody negotiating. So, the organisation will help to make sure that at least we are represented in the negotiations that take place internationally.  

The organisation also links up with other organisations within Africa and beyond maybe for support for African Governments and projects that can be done in different African countries.

Today, Mr Speaker, we have NEPAD, which is a new emerging approach to Africa trying to get support from the international community, the New Partnership for African Development. And within the NEPAD formulation, we have an environment component, which is being spearheaded in its preparation by the African Ministerial Conference on the Environment, and this meeting is on in Kampala. 

This particular component is going to be consolidated by our technical people and Ministers when they begin to meet later this week. 

AMCEN is also looking at the new emerging issues in Africa, like the African Union, and how environment can also be part of the African Union by having an organisation or having an agency that is responsible for environmental protection within Africa. 

AMCEN is also meeting in Kampala today and will be considering issues of the second topic, which I am going to discuss. It is the issue of the World Summit on Sustainable Development. We would like to consolidate our African position, which is going to be presented when we meet in Johannesburg in August.

Mr Speaker, Uganda is having an advantage by having this meeting here in Kampala. In the past we have been one of the leading countries in the negotiations on, say, climate change, issues of forestry, and issues of the wetlands. In fact Uganda’s wetland management and policy formulation is the best in the world. So, our bringing together the Ministers of Environment here in Uganda will further project our name, both in Africa and internationally, well. 

We also think that by hosting this meeting we are now going to have even better access to organisations and to countries for assistance within the field of environment. Uganda is becoming the President of AMCEN and, therefore, when we go to Johannesburg, we will be the ones leading the voices of Africa at this Summit on issues that concern Africa.

In Kampala, His Excellency the President is going to launch the first African Environment Outlook, which is a compilation of the situation of environment in Africa and how this should be handled in the future. This particular publication is going to help African countries re-think some of their policies, and the attention that they give to the environment. So it will be a great honour for this particular book, which is coming out for the first time, to be launched here in Kampala by His Excellency the President. 

As I said before, the technical segment of the meeting is already here. They are in their second day of deliberations. The Ministers begin to arrive tomorrow. We have confirmation of 38 Ministers coming and we have so far 50 delegations, out of 52, that are participating here in Kampala.

Mr Speaker and honourable Members, you are all invited to the opening ceremony, which is going to be on July 4, 2002 at the International Conference Centre. You should come and beef up Uganda’s reception of the Ministers that are coming from our sister countries. That is issue number one.

Issue number two is what concerns the World Summit on Sustainable Development, which is taking place in Johannesburg, South Africa, beginning August 24 to September 4, 2002. 

Honourable Members will be aware that in 1992 the first conference that focused extensively on environment and human development took place in Rio de Janeiro in Brazil, and was overwhelmingly attended by many Heads of State. His Excellency President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni led our delegation, and a number of issues were agreed on. A number of conventions were agreed on about environment and development, and these were compiled in what is called Agenda 21. 

Agenda 21 became the Bible of implementation of environmental issues and concerns at that particular time. Five years later, we had Rio Plus Five, which was again held in Rio de Janeiro, to reconsider what had so far been accomplished since 1992. 

Concern at that time was raised that not much had been achieved and many of the conventions that had been drawn up, like the Convention on Climate Change and the Convention on Biological Diversity, had not been fulfilled. And many countries had not ratified these agreements. Again there was drumming up of adherence to what had been agreed and asking countries to implement the same.  

In the year 2000, however, when the United Nations General Assembly met to consider what had happened, concern was raised that implementation had not reached a level that was anticipated. So, through Resolution 55/199, the General Assembly recommended that another Summit be held ten years after Rio. This was to once again bring all leaders together and recommit them to ensuring that the environment is managed properly. 

Mr Speaker, for that matter, we shall be in Johannesburg at the time I have already mentioned, that is August 24 to September 4, 2002. We will all converge in Johannesburg to reconsider what has gone on. 

The process of reconsidering Agenda 21 has been a participatory process, which began with countries themselves coming up with evaluation of their own performance. Uganda also went through this process by evaluating what has been done about Agenda 21. 

The country papers were then considered at regional level and were consolidated into single papers. Then the single papers from regions were taken to New York and three preparatory meetings were held in New York to further consolidate the papers to come out with one single paper for the entire world. 

This paper was discussed in Indonesia last month and another paper came out, which is now called the Chairman’s Paper. It contains what the world has agreed on as that which should be implemented during the next ten years. There are still some areas of disagreement between, especially the developed countries and developing countries, and some of those areas I have mentioned on page four. One of them is means of implementation of programmes. 

Programmes have been put into the paper as programmes that should be supported in order to have the environment managed properly. But our brothers and sisters from the developed countries are not ready to commit funds for the implementation of some of these. Their argument is that there are still some programmes, which although they agree should be there, need funds. 

And according to us in the developing countries, we say that the developed countries have precipitated some of the above problems When we, for example, talk about climate change, which is giving us the droughts and the floods, we say that if it were not for the gases that are coming out of the industries of developed countries, we would not have the extreme weather conditions that we are having now. And we are arguing that although we get support from these developed countries in terms of donations and aid, if we do not stop the vicious cycle of draughts and floods, this money is of little value to us. Because money is given for planting crops, but the crops are washed away by a flood or they all dry up because the weather has changed so much. This is all happening due to the industries that are in the developed countries. 

So we are urging them to first of all ratify the Kyoto Protocol so that they implement the limits on the gases that they are supposed to emit. We are also saying, “support us.” For example, we need help on the Convention for Combating Desertification. The desert is eating into Africa and yet we have no means of stopping it or deterring it from extending. Year after year, the desert is extending farther south! So, these are the arguments that we have to negotiate over.  

There is also the access to markets that developed countries have not been giving us. And when these markets are opened up, there are still many stringent conditions, which we cannot be able to overcome.  

Then the issue of subsidies is also making it impossible for us to penetrate these markets. Even if you are given leeway to export, because of the subsidies that are given to their farmers, our products are not competitive. 

We note of course the positive attitude that has been displayed by some of the countries like America through AGOA, and the European Union. But we are still calling for more in these negotiations so that we can access markets even in those countries that have not yet considered putting in place affirmative action for us.

Then the implementation of the World Trade Organization Agreement and the Doho Agreement is also one of the issues that we are still fighting for.

Uganda has made some considerable progress in ensuring sustainable development, but the state of the Uganda environment still has a long way to go. We still have to fight, but as you know, poverty is one of the biggest enemies of the environment. People who are poor, people who cannot be able to access rural electrification and so on are definitely impinging on the environment. This is especially so in terms of deforestation. And then of course as I have mentioned, there are other aggravating issues, which are not of our own making but are due to what is happening abroad, but which we must be part of.

So I would like to inform honourable Members that Rio Plus Ten is taking place in Johannesburg between August 24 and September 4, 2002. His Excellency the President will lead Uganda’s delegation, and it is going to be composed in a multi-sectoral way because, as you know, there are many issues that have got to be considered. Mr Speaker, these are the messages that I have got to give from my Ministry. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister.  According to our rules, such a statement would attract debate if any. I see only two Members interested. Therefore, hon. Aggrey Awori and hon. Lukyamuzi will contribute and then we end the issue here.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is really a procedural question. I was just wondering how to treat the Minister’s statements. Should we ask elucidatory comments or should we send them to the relevant Committee to be handled as such? Because some of the points he has raised are very controversial. 

I do not particularly believe some of the things he said. He said that Uganda supports a, b, c, d, yet when I see the government in collaboration with the City Council, polluting Lake Victoria, then I wonder. When after that you tell me, “We are supporting 1,2,3” I do not understand! Should we really express our concern now?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, express your concern.

MR AWORI: Good. Mr Speaker, there are three items that we are worried about in terms of a sustainable environmental situation.

One; you have not brought to this House a bill to prohibit the importation of aerosols, which we know contribute to the greenhouse effect.

Two; you have done nothing about refrigerators that have got gases, which cause the same effect on the environment.

Three; about the disposal of the environmentally hazardous materials like the old batteries of the cars, you have done nothing.

We have heard even the head of state expressing concern about the kaveera, but you are still importing them. Their disposal is not even known.  You are inviting people to Kampala to talk about these things, so discuss this.

Then last but not least, Mr Minister, there is a serious question of our water. The water we are drinking now from Lake Victoria is not safe. The level of pollution and the level of chemicals that we are using now to make sure the water is safe, are directly proportional to the amount of effluents we are now emptying into Lake Victoria, and you are doing nothing about it!

The other day we spent US $16 million for the channels and the drainage of the city. And we know very well that the effluents from the city are emptied into the swamp for filtration so that the swamp can do some filtration of the water. This is so that good water ends up in the lake. Instead we have now cleared the wetlands and dirty water goes directly into the lake.  

Mr Speaker, when we host a conference of that nature on environment and we are the number one abusers of the environment, what kind of contradiction is this? Are we being cynical or we are just hosting the conference for the sake of it?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am expressing concern about the report presented by the Minister in charge of the Environment. First and foremost, the Minister has been very articulate about the contribution of the continent of Africa in the International Conference on Sustainable Development in South Africa.  

Now that Uganda is hosting the African Conference on the Environment, as the people’s representatives - and here I am talking specifically about the Parliament of Uganda where I am now - we need to know what government has done to ensure that we too are seen to be participating or contributing to this. Otherwise, we are looking on as spectators in a program of our formation! 

When you go to South Africa, you will be speaking on behalf of the people of Uganda and on behalf of the Parliament of Uganda. What a shame if you speak beyond what we are able to recognize!

Secondly, my question goes specifically to the Minister. With reference to page two of the report, the Minister says Uganda has been leading Africa in many of the international negotiations, in the environment et cetera.  I believe he is also talking about qualitative leadership in terms of the environment.  How does the Minister see Uganda to be leading when we are on record to have been seen openly destroying existing forest areas, namely Namanve, Butamira, in contravention of Agenda 21, Articles 40 and 11?  It would be a total contradiction of what we have ably promised the international community to do when someone audits us.  In fact I do not know what Uganda is going to say in Johannesburg.  I am very worried with the standards of environmental protection you have shown us today!  

Finally, Mr Speaker, the issue in regard to Lake Victoria is very important.  Uganda is known to be the main custodian, the main police person of the waters of lake Victoria. We are the main beneficiaries of these waters and yet we have been seen to be the main violators of charters that are engineered to protect the water catchments in that resource.  I speak about the present wanton importation of batteries from China, which the Uganda Government has openly accepted to come in.  They do not last; they are toxic, they are dangerous but no one is doing anything save for collecting tax!  You may collect tax at the expense of people and you will stand to regret in years to come.  50 years after the Second World War, people in Japan and Vietnam continue producing children with deformities, which are associated to 2-5T a sister chemical to 2-5D.   What a shame!

In regard to the same, Mr Speaker – I am going to wind up – look at the bogus industrialists who are attracted from China and India to come here and masquerade as experts! They have no capacity to treat effluents from their industries, and because of that, even the Ugandan Government is just looking instead of endeavouring to protect the available wetlands between Bugolobi and Luzira and the lake. They are only praising industrialists.  The water catchments quality from time to time becomes worse and worse, and we are only after taxes.  Can you eat the taxes when your people have died?  What are you going to do?

Finally, Mr Speaker, I am going to challenge the Uganda Government.  When you go to countries like Brazil where you went in 1992, you commit Ugandans to a certain convention of an environmental nature on behalf of the people of Uganda and the Uganda Parliament, which is the main assembly line for articulating the values and the problems of our people.  Why don’t you involve Parliament before you commit yourselves at random?  How shall we explain a situation, which you have messed up internationally when we are the people known to be the spokespersons of the people of Uganda?  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MRS JANAT NAMUYANGU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  My main concern is about tree planting.  I do not know how serious we are regarding tree planting in this country?  When I look at the softwood plantations that were planted some time back, they have all been cut, and it seems we do not have any plans to do re-planting.  I wonder how we can boast of protecting the environment when actually as I talk now we can hardly get seeds to plant the softwoods, the pines, the Cyprus! Equally, when you look at the Muvule trees from eastern Uganda, they are all gone!  Go to Budongo now, all the Mahogany trees are being cut.  So I would like to know from the Minister, what strategy does Government have regarding tree planting in this country in line with environmental protection?  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, can you reply?

DR KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I want to thank the honourable members for the intervention.  I will begin with hon. Awori.  

Mr Speaker I am not aware that aerosol contains greenhouse gases.  I have looked at this because hon. Awori did raise this issue last time and I went and contacted my technical people and this was not so.  In addition, I would like to say that it is not possible to at once eliminate all the greenhouse gases even where you have almost negligible amount.  We are talking about people who are polluting the globe at a level that is killing us.  

Africa together produces or emits only three percent of the total international emission. Are you not going to totally suffocate when the developed countries do not want to adhere to the Kyoto Protocol? They say their economy is going to be hit!  They do not want to stop the massive production that they are doing with massive emission.  Now, if you are going also to even curtail the smallest emission that is here before those people also contribute, you are going just to ruin yourself!  We are saying, let them calm down. Is it the three percent that we produce now that is baffling the entire atmosphere?  So, why don’t they also begin reducing drastically before hon. Awori blames the Government of Uganda to stop even insecticides that are killing mosquitoes so that mosquitoes stop biting people? (Interruption).

MR AWORI:  I would like to inform the hon. Minister that even in Luganda, they say, “Kamu kamu - it adds up.

DR KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO: I have informed hon. Awori that the total kamu kamu is just three percent compared to the 97, so we are still moving well.  The same applies to the refrigerators. It is the power of the people to purchase that forces the importation of these fridges.  But we have regulations and laws that we have put in place, which could be able to cut off the importation of these fridges.  But again, it is the impact. We are trying to manage the fridges that have been brought in to make sure that they do not open them up. And we want to find a way of disposing - we are putting conditions to those who are importing them so that disposal is guided.  

The same thing applies to batteries:  The Minister of trade and Industry should be able - and we have written to them that we should have batteries which are long lasting, batteries of quality, and I am sure that they are adhering to make sure that we get better batteries which can last long and do not have a short life time, which need to be disposed of at a short time. We have much that is imported in to the country without the adequate period of use.

Now the level of pollution of Lake Victoria: Many people talk about pollution of Lake Victoria, especially from the industries, but are unaware of what NEMA has done.  NEMA has conditions that require these factories to have effluent treatment.  I know you knew that factories used to emit effluence without treatment but you need to visit them again and see what NEMA has done and the conditions that have been put down to prevent the pollution of the Lake.  I agree that the destruction of wetlands is a disadvantage to the filtration of the waters, the storm waters and the effluent that comes from the different areas but we are trying to control it.  

A few months ago, we gazetted Nakivubo wetland to make sure that nobody touches it, but you know that we have had governments before that regularized and made legal the occupation of wetlands, and we are just fighting that law which was put in place. The Government drew a principle, and we are trying to fight it to save whatever little wetland is here. I have been appealing to honourable Members in different areas to help us to protect wetlands and Members are aware of what we have done to them. I am in a fight with honourable Members over wetlands- (Mr Lukyamuzi rose_)

MR LUKYAMUZI:  I wanted to give information on wetlands  

DR KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO:  Mr Speaker, I was not referring to him for wetlands.  I was moving to your questions.  Are you occupying a wetland?  

MR LUKYAMUZI:  I would like to give information to the hon. Minister in charge of the Environment in regard to the wetland factor in Kampala.  Is it not a shame to the whole government department that Prisons is one of the depleters to the existing wetlands around Bugolobi?  What are you doing about that?

DR KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO: Mr Speaker, my Wetland division together with NEMA has no discrimination whether you are Government, parastatal or individual. We offer the same guidelines and if Prisons is encroaching on a wetland, I am sure my people have already moved to curb them.  I have visited one area where they were trying to go into it and my people were directed to stop them from encroaching on a wetland.  We have no preference for anybody as far as wetlands are concerned. 

Now, Parliament has not been left out of the preparation for the World Summit On Sustainable Development or AMCEN, except that Parliament has been on recess. But through the different ministries and different organisations, there has been an international consultation. And I know that honourable Members of Parliament, especially hon. Lukyamuzi, you can not say that you have been left out because you belong to a global environmental organization, which I am sure is participating in this, and really we wanted to be informed. 

I informed you even before about this, and I am informing you now. It is not too late to be able to participate with us. We still have a country statement that is going to be presented by His Excellency the President.  The only problem, hon. Lukyamuzi, is that the statements that you would like to include in the Johannesburg summit are not the statements worth the Johannesburg summit.  We are not going to go and demonstrate about Butamiira in Johannesburg.  We want constructive issues but you want us to include that in the summit statement! No we cannot, hon. Lukyamuzi.  So, if you have ideas that you would like us to include and are constructive, we are willing to take them on board.

The issue of industrialists being called bogus, I do not want to be one of those who share in this because I think we are trying to attract industries in order to develop our people.  I am sure, hon. Lukyamuzi who represents Kampala, you know the plight of people as far as employment is concerned.  You know the plight of this country as far as commodities are concerned.  I am sure you will be the first person to promote that and support it.  So, really do not be counter-productive to your people.

Mr Speaker, then I will turn to the last one.  Really, we are concerned about tree planting and my Ministry and Government is trying to marshal resources; we are trying to look for resources. Even when you see us do these international negotiations, we are attracting - for example, we have under the fixation of these greenhouse gases.  We are trying to attract money that can help us to be able to put up the plantations that are getting depleted, and it is not true that we do not have seeds.  We have a project in Namanve, the Namanve Tree Seed Project. And, honourable Member from Pallisa, you should go and access those seeds and purchase them. We have very good quality seeds in Namanve. 

Mr Speaker, I want to thank you very much for this opportunity you have given me, and invite the honourable Members to participate in the African Ministerial Conference on Environment on the 4 July 2002, and then for those who can be able, to go to Johannesburg and participate in the World Summit on Sustainable Development.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay.  Thank you very much.

MR HENRY BASALIZA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I am sorry to have asked this question at this material time, but I am seeking clarification.  Hon. Aggrey Awori raised a question on polyethylene papers and polyethylene bags. I was expecting a statement from the hon. Minister about those polyethylene bags, which are a danger to our environment now because everywhere you find people carrying polyethylene bags.  Is there any policy about polyethylene bags from the Ministry of Environment?  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I just missed out an answer to this one, but Government is working out this.  We are already in Cabinet but we had to do further consultation. Maybe by now we would have already come out with measures to begin controlling the polyethylene bags that are coming out.  But we have had to do a further consultation in order to be very clear in what we are doing.  So, I want to inform honourable Members that Government is already working on this. We have already formulated the way. We would like to go in phases to control the damage that is being caused by the polyethylene papers but we are doing just a little more consultation and I will be back to inform you further.  

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Mr Speaker, under the Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture Act, when the Minister of Finance signs a statutory instrument that affects the scheduling of companies, he must lay that statutory instrument before this House.  I therefore beg to lay on the Table, the Public Enterprises Reform and Divesture Amendment of the First Schedule of Instrument No. 26 of 2002.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, can you tell them the details?

MR MUSUMBA: This is a Statutory Instrument that seeks, Mr Speaker, to amend the First Schedule of the Public Enterprises Reform and Divesture Statute by inserting in class 2, the National Medical Stores, the Uganda Seed Limited and Mandela National Stadium.  Putting these in class 2 means that Government will keep up to 50 percent but may divest up to 50 or 49 percent.   So the Instrument is here.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The other paper has not been laid today it will be laid tomorrow.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Wambuzi did ask a question and I think it is only fair that I should give him an answer instead of waiting and giving him a written answer. I do not want questions to pile up, and I have made a pledge that the 27 outstanding questions, we are ready to handle them.  It is this House, which may lack the time to have us answer them.  Even if you want us to answer them for a whole day until midnight, we are ready.

Now, with regard to the question posed, is there a reporting system, especially when there are wrong doers as reported?  The honourable Member will know that you have an LC system: We have a Secretary for Defence; you have also a Secretary for Information.  Essentially, the LC system takes charge of what happens at the village and at other levels.  

I am speaking with a great deal of authority because at Makerere I was a Chairman of LC 1- (Laughter). We used to monitor our village assiduously.  Indeed, there was a time when thugs were invading us, but there within our system we laid a trap and eventually we got the son of a professor who was a thug.  So I invited the professor to explain why he had not reported his son.  He said, you know, my son was born out of wedlock and you know I cannot do much. I told him, I am not impressed.  We threw that son out of our village! So we took very hash measures.  We were also busy monitoring the system.  Whenever people were attacked, we had whistles, we would respond, we would also communicate with security organs and the system was intact.  

The point I am making is that the systems are in place from LC 1, LC 11, LC 111, et cetera, but the quality of leadership matters.  If you have poor leaders - you do not even meet whereas we used to meet regularly and we would report to the village and take additional measures to secure our place, but if the quality of leadership is poor and the quality of follow-up is poor, then the system cannot work. 

Additionally, I want to state that the matter he referred to can be reported to the Police straight away.  I want also to add that even Members of Parliament are vectors of information.  If there is a problem, there is a whole Minister of Local Government.  But I am also available 24 hours.  I thank you.

CONSITUTION OF SESSIONAL COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as I explained at the beginning, we are giving an opportunity to those people who have not signed for any of the Sessional Committee to do so. Therefore, we shall deal with this particular item on Thursday when you have exercised this opportunity to sign yourself for a particular Committee.  

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker for this opportunity.  My question may be procedural or purely administrative. On the question of the names submitted for the various committees, I learnt that in the first submission there was some bit of rigging, and those forms were withdrawn. Some of us had signed on the first lot of papers that were rigged but we did not have the time to sign for the second one.  Are we going to be disqualified on the account of rigging by other Members?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I have not investigated that.  But what I have said is that if you want to change from one Committee and you want to cross your name from that list of that particular Committee, please sign against that crossing so that I will be sure that the crossing was done by you and not by any other person.  This is what is going to happen.  Please, do not cross somebody else’s name.   He should do it himself rather than you doing it for him.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, with humility, I want to divert you.  You talked about Thursday but the Minister has already stated here that His Excellency the President of Uganda is officially opening the African Ministerial Conference on the Environment and Parliament has been officially invited.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, that is true, but I think this is in the morning. According to the program which I saw, the ceremony is supposed to end at 11.00 in the morning or mid-day.  So in the afternoon, you will be here.

I think we have come to the end of today’s business.  The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. and I think we shall start with the general debate.

(Parliament rose at 3.50 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 3 July 2002 at 2.00 p.m.)

