Tuesday, 8 July 2003
Parliament met at 2.18 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to first of all introduce our visitors who are in the stranger’s gallery. These are our children, students of Premier High School Ntinda, Kampala. They are history students. You are most welcome to Parliament.  

Honourable members, I think we have to adjust the Order Paper. The oath cannot be taken because the new member has not arrived yet, but we should proceed with the other work.

MR MIKE SEBALU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to react to a matter that was discussed in this House on Thursday, the ratification of the Pan African Parliament. It was grossly misrepresented in the New Vision of yesterday on page 5, in a story entitled, “Uganda not a member of AU”.  

For the record, I would like to state that what was presented in this House was to do with the ratification of the Pan African Parliament, and it had nothing to do with Uganda’s membership to AU. Definitely, it is common knowledge that Uganda is a signatory to the Constitutive Act and, therefore, is a member of AU. But what was raised in this House, what you properly explained and I did present to the House, was our position as far as the Pan African Parliament is concerned. That Parliament is an organ of AU. So, what was put in the papers to the effect that Uganda is not a member of AU was a misrepresentation of what took place in the House. I want the record to be put straight on that matter. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, thank you very much. What you have said is correct, I saw it and I told the Senior Public Relations Officer to correct it. I do not know whether the person who reported was here or was merely informed, but what you have stated is the position. 

MR KALULE SSENGO: Mr Speaker, there was also a misrepresentation on FM radios that Members of Parliament had asked for Shs 6 million as increment in their salaries. I was in that meeting and this is not what the member stated. He was only trying to equate what was US $3,000 in the 1960s, to its equivalent today. He said the equivalent of US $3,000 at that time, is Shs 6 million now. But he was not talking of an increment in members’ salaries. However, the press went out and said that we had asked for this increment. On FM radio stations they kept on referring to Members of Parliament as being unrealistic. 

So, Mr Speaker, I request that our Public Relations Officer takes up this matter to clear the air. We never asked for an increment of Shs 6 million. Someone was only making a comparison. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Where was it? Was it in the House or in a caucus meeting? 

MR KALULE SSENGO: It was in a caucus meeting. Someone was only trying to equate, and now they have made it a public debate. Every time they go to the radio -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Was the caucus meeting open or it is you members who were there that started distorting things? I do not know.

MR KALULE SSENGO: Someone raised it informally, and now they are making it –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, we shall take it up.

MR KALULE SSENGO:  Thank you very much.

CAPT. STEVEN BASALIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am raising two issues, which have appeared in today’s New Vision and have tended to undermine the institution of Parliament. I request that I read them because they are brief items One is about a cop, and it is on page 5:  

“Cop irked – Mbale. The district Police boss, Steven Musoke, has attacked MPs for urging the Government to hire mercenaries to fight rebels of the Lord’s Resistance Army.  

Musoke recently told a security meeting that there was no cause for alarm because the Government was in full control of the situation in the North and the rest of Uganda.”  

Mr Speaker, this man is a police officer and he has no authority to talk about Members of Parliament. In any case, he should follow the chain of commander. If he wanted to talk, he should have gone through his RPC, the IGP and then to the Ministry of Internal Affairs. So, I leave this to the Inspector General of Police. I think that is not in order. That is indiscipline. The Ministry of Internal Affairs should take action. 

Another issue is about the LC V chairman of Masindi. I would like to read it verbatim also. It is on the same page:

“No to MPs – Masindi. The district council has criticised the Parliamentary Commission over its recommendation to introduce a 15-year pension scheme for MPs who leave their seats. The district chairman, John Majara, led the attack on Friday, saying it was improper.”  

Mr Speaker, this issue was discussed here and it is still being discussed. I wonder how a chairman of LC V could go to the council and talk about it. He should concentrate on corruption, good management and utilization of funds. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we proceed?

MR MUTULUUZA: Mr Speaker, I want to add on what hon. Kalule Ssengo has been saying. I have been following articles written by Kabushenga, I do not know in which capacity, but Kabushenga seems to be against the whole institution of Parliament. I think our PRO should talk to that man. It seems he either failed to come to Parliament and he is undermining the institution or he is disgruntled - I do not know why - or he wants to be appointed minister maybe. I am not really clear about the motive of that gentleman.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I suggest that we leave this matter and we find a way of handling it, rather than letting this debate degenerate.  

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FINANCE BILL, 2003
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled “The Finance Bill, 2003” be read the first time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament for consideration, and they shall report to the House.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE, FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Maj. Tom Butime): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Uganda is a state party to the treaty establishing –(Interruption)

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, as far as I know, in accordance with our Rules of Procedure, a ministerial statement is a very important aspect of our discussions. We are entitled to have received copies of such a statement so that we can interact with it on behalf of the people we represent. So, in terms of procedure, is it correct for him to proceed when we do not have access to that paper?

THE SPEAKER: What we should do is let him read it. If it should be necessary to postpone the debate so that you get a copy first, we shall do it.
MAJ. BUTIME: Thank you, Sir. Uganda is a state party to the Treaty establishing the African Economic Community signed in Abuja, Nigeria on 3 June 1991, and establishing various institutions, including the Pan African Parliament. 
Following the Sirte Declaration adopted at the 4th Extraordinary Session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government held in Libya on 9 September 1999, establishing the African Union and calling for speedy establishment of the Pan African Parliament by the year 2000, negotiations on the protocol were commenced.  
The protocol was adopted on 2 March 2001 at Sirte, Libya, and opened for signature. Uganda signed this protocol on 10 July 2001. 
Uganda has carried out all the necessary internal consultations, especially between the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Speaker of Parliament. The Speaker has reviewed the protocol and is of the view that Uganda should become a party to this Pan African Parliament.  
Mr Speaker, when established, the Pan African Parliament will provide a common platform for African people and their grassroots organisations to be more involved in discussions and decision-making on the problems facing the continent and to ensure their effective participation in economic development and integration of the continent.  
Other objectives will include promotion and consolidation of democratic principles, institutions and cultures, and ensure good governance as well as promote the principles of human rights, peace, security and stability. Government views the institution of Pan African Parliament as very important and it is hoped that this week the Government will approve that Uganda becomes a party by ratifying the protocol to the Treaty Establishing the African Economic Community Relating to the Pan African Parliament. 
There is no doubt that Uganda will sign the protocol before the end of the Africa Union Summit in Maputo on 12th July. The treaty, Mr Speaker, comes into force as soon as there is a simple majority of member states signing. The gathering in Maputo should marshal enough signatures to bring it into force. I thank you.
THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable minister, you should have given out copies. Even now that you have read the statement, we would like to have copies of our own, for our records.  
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, I have got two issues to raise and I was looking forward to seeing the Minister in charge of Foreign Affairs, to get some basic information from him. 
The President of one of the most powerful nations in the world, His Excellency, George Bush, is about to visit Uganda. It is said that he will land here on Friday. To us, as Parliament, who represent the people, we assume that that great guest –(Interruption)
THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the item on the Order Paper for which debate should follow is about the ratification of the protocol for establishment of the Pan African Parliament; it is not on any other issue. It is a general debate on the statement, which the Minister has made concerning the ratification of the Protocol.
MR LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged for that advice, although my contention still remains.
THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Lukyamuzi, you have other avenues and time to do that. For the time being let us dispose of the issue of the Pan African Parliament.
MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What procedure is Government intending to apply before the ratification of such an important treaty is carried out? They need to ensure that the people we represent also access the contents of such a protocol. We have committed many mistakes in the past, with reference to how the East African Community –(Interruption)
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, the Sixth Parliament passed a law on ratification and it depends on the type of protocol being talked about. There are some that are the concern of Parliament, but there are others that are the concern of the Executive. Actually, you participated in the passing of that law.
MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I have no intention of debating your comments.
THE SPEAKER: No, I am just informing you. It is not a question of debate.
MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, much obliged. But I beg you to let me put my challenge forward. The honourable minister has articulated the trend we are going to use to ratify that treaty, which will formalize the Constitution of the Pan African Parliament. Mr Speaker, as far as I am concerned and as far as the people I represent namely, Lubaga South, are concerned, we feel the grassroots population should have access to the contents of that Protocol. 
On behalf of the people I represent, I feel the grassroots population should have access to the contents of that protocol. I am seeking to know, on behalf of the people I represent, from the Minister, what approach is he going to use to enable my people know before you commit them to the Constitution of that Assembly?

MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister for his brief statement on this important organ, but I have two serious concerns. 

One, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and indeed our Government have tended to ignore this Parliament in the foreign policy formulation. This is why at times we find ourselves, as Members of Parliament, ignorant of what is taking place. So, now the Minister has come here to inform us that a decision was taken in 2000 and in 2001, the Government signed this protocol and now in 2003, we are being hurried by the Minister to start debate on an issue that started in 2000! We have not seen this protocol; we have not had access to it. Even the ministerial statement he has presented to this Parliament is not distributed. I find it extremely strange.  

Mr Speaker, in my opinion this is a very important step as we talk of unity of Africa, particularly as it addresses important issues concerning the principles of democracy in Africa, and human rights. However, I request that the Minister of Foreign Affairs should regularly come and brief this Parliament on matters that concern foreign policy. I also request that all documents relating to the African Unity, particularly this protocol, be presented to us. We should analyse them before we have a fully-fledged debate on this issue. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro County East, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, first of all I would like to thank the Minister for having given the assurance that Uganda will be ratifying the protocol and, as procedure demands, have it deposited so that when the Maputo Summit takes place, Uganda is one such member that enjoins others in this process of forming the Pan African Parliament. 

The number of states required to take effect is a small one. My plea is that Uganda should be among the founding members of the Pan African Parliament, because it is an essential part of our vision as a country. We have always cherished the Pan African principles and it would be reneging on our principles if we did not constitute ourselves as part of the founding group of this cause. 

But like hon. Jack Sabiiti has said, I find it a little intriguing and interesting that a country believes in a certain philosophy or principle and the actions do not reflect that. Because for an idea that came into being in 1999 to be debated in 2003, you know at the periphery - fire brigading. I think in future the Minister of Foreign Affairs should undertake to scrutinise all outstanding obligations of this country in terms of treaties and protocols so that they can be handled timely. 

It was quite embarrassing for some of us when we attended a meeting concerning this Pan African Parliament and Uganda was listed among those that at the time were appearing to be defaulting. It did not really go down well. We had to take a position that this would be done before the Maputo meeting, and you can count on us. So, Mr Speaker, -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, PRIMARY HEALTHCARE (Dr Alex Kamugisha): The information I want to give to the member is that when this discussion on THE establishment of the Pan African Parliament and the African Union started, notice of invitations were extended to all member states. In fact, specific invitations were sent to various Parliaments throughout the continent. I must say that at that time, many member states attended with their Speakers and Members of Parliament. 

Uganda, unfortunately, was one of the few members who were not attending those many meetings, which were convened by the then O.A.U. I want to bear testimony because at that time I was the presiding Ambassador. The reasons for not attending were many, but I think facilitation was one of the problems So, the information I have is that this Parliament was not left out but perhaps we were invited to participate, but at that crucial time we were not able to do so. That is the information I wanted to pass on. I thank you.

MR SEBALU: Thank you very much, honourable colleague for that information. However, I do not think that information really helps me much on this subject. There was a similar meeting where the Parliaments were invited in Cape Town, it is on record that the Speaker of Parliament was present and even in this very recent meeting, it was clearly recorded that the Speaker was present. The commitment on his part and the arm of government he presides over was clearly stated in the last meeting. 

This is one of the protocols, as per the law put in place in the Sixth Parliament, which is supposed to be handled by the Executive arm of Government, which is not Parliament. So, when we say that Government has not played its part in ratifying this protocol, I think Mr Minister you find your information wanting in this respect. It is Government that is supposed to effect the ratification. Even the Minister has just stated that the ratification process is going to be undertaken by Cabinet. Approval is going to be made so that by the Maputo Summit, Uganda is fully in good books as far as those procedural matters are concerned. 

So, it still goes to say we are not criticizing Government. We are only imploring that we look at outstanding protocols and treaties so that if there is need for our Government to put right the procedures, they are put right in good time. That way, when some members go for these conferences they will not appear desperate when they are blacklisted as some of the people who are frustrating the cause of African integration. That is all we are saying. 

Mr Speaker, I thought that that intervention should be made. However, I would like to thank the Minister for assuring us that the procedure is being followed. By the Maputo Summit, Uganda will be in good position to ratify the protocol and we shall set off as founding members of the Pan African Parliament. Thank you.

MR PETER MUTULUUZA (Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to add a little to what hon. Sabiiti and hon. Sebalu have talked about. In this Parliament we have committees, which are responsible for certain ministries. I think it could have been procedurally correct, before this kind of statement is made, to have consulted the Sessional Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs, so that we harmonize our stand. These ministries come to us when they want us to pass their budget. I think it is in order for us to – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as far as we are concerned, we cannot do much about the contents of this protocol. The protocol has to be ratified and then if it is necessary to amend it, it is not the Parliaments of Africa that will do the amendment. The amendment will have to be done by the Pan African Parliament, to which we shall send five Members of Parliament.  

What is required now is that we ratify it. The number of countries that have to make the ratification should be enough, and the Pan African Parliament should start. If there is any weakness you may see in the protocol, the members we shall choose from here will go and participate in the proceedings of the Pan African Parliament and try to amend it. So, what is now required is mere ratification, not changing it because there is no single Parliament of Africa that has demanded it to be changed. We have to take it with all its weaknesses and strengths, and then when the forum itself is created, that is when we shall deal with amending or improving it.  

For the time being, ratification is not for Parliament. This is not the type of protocol that has to be ratified by Parliament. It is a protocol that is the concern of the Executive. But as I have heard from hon. Sabiiti and hon. Sebalu; what they are saying is that it has taken very long for Uganda to take action. I think that is something which we will need the Executive to answer.

MR ALEX NDEEZI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to ask the Minister of Foreign Affairs only one question. It is my conviction and submission that this project we call African Union is a project for our citizens, the wanainchi. I also understand that as of now if you go deep in the village, many of our people do not know what you are talking about when you say, “African Union”. They do not know the mission, the objective and how this African Union is going to benefit them. 

May I ask the Minister to tell me what measures are going to be put in place to ensure that our people are adequately sensitised to internalise the mission and vision of the African Union? Thank you.

MR REAGAN OKUMU (Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the Minister for this statement. I only want to emphasise one point, that it is very easy to tell the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to come here, brief us, take action and make us part and parcel of this African struggle.  But as a member of the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee, we have always had big problems, especially with the Ministry of Finance. 

Sometimes our financial obligations do not always conform to what the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is doing. And in this matter, I urge the Ministry of Finance not to again embarrass Ugandans because sometimes you go for these conferences abroad and you are repeatedly reminded that you have not contributed your membership fee yet. I think this will weaken the struggle of foreign affairs.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you now answer some of the points raised by honourable members?

THE MINISTER OF STATE, FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Maj. Tom Butime): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As you have already explained, it is not Parliament that is going to ratify this protocol. So, the purpose of the statement was to bring Parliament up-to-date with the process. And I think as a good minister I had to do that so that the honourable members are conversant with what is going to take place.

Secondly, I did not want to involve the Office of the Speaker in this statement. That is because the Speaker in the Chair today, although he was Deputy Speaker in 1999/2001, the matter was really for the Speaker of Parliament during 1999/2001. But we have another Speaker today, and I must thank him for having taken this matter very seriously. Consultations have been going on between the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and his office to make sure that this Parliament does quickly move towards the finalization of the protocol on the Pan African Parliament. He has been very concerned and that is why part of this statement is insisting that Parliament must be brought up-to-date with what is happening.  I would like to thank him for that.  

As a good diplomat, I cannot criticize the Speaker of Parliament of 1999/2001, and therefore I will not wish to involve the Office of the Speaker in this particular matter. It delayed because the Legal Department in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs cannot bring documents if they are not properly studied and properly researched. They have a lot of work and that is why some of the protocols like the one on terrorism, this one and others, have got to be carefully studied so that when they are eventually ratified, they do not have things that are not properly handled.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, concerning Lubaga South constituency, we cannot go and address a public rally at the grounds there and then start reading –(Laughter)- the protocol for the constituents at the mayuni place. (Laughter). What the people of Lubaga South did was to elect a man called hon. Ken Lukyamuzi to come here and represent their interests, although they reserve the right to change their mind next time if the honourable member does not present it. But I will not go into that because hon. Lukyamuzi is a very good friend. I do not like to get involved in this, and I always wish him success at every election.

Finally, as I have already said, this protocol will quickly be handled by the Government. As hon. Sebalu has suggested, before the 12th it will have been deposited. I thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I understand the new member has come, so we should carry out the oath function.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

  Mr Asupasa Isiko Wilson Mpongo.

THE SPEAKER: It appears that this other side is always disadvantaged, because every new member goes to this side –(Laughter). However, hon. Mpongo, on behalf of the Parliament of Uganda, I welcome you to this Parliament. 

You have come to replace the late Basoga Nsadhu. The late Basoga Nsadhu was a very diligent Member of Parliament. He was a man of the people and worked hard for his constituency, and I believe that you are going to do the same. Now that elections have been concluded, consider yourself a representative of the entire population of the loved county of Busiki. (Applause). 

You have come to the national Parliament. Although you are representing your constituency of Busiki, you will be dealing with matters not of only Busiki, Busoga or Eastern Uganda, but you are going to deal with national and international issues. You have come among friends, work with them and they will welcome you. (Applause).

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

(i) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2002/2003.

(ii) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSAL FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2003/2004 ESTIMATE OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.

(Debate continued.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Odur, it is your turn to make your contribution.

MR ANANG-ODUR LAKANA (Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to debate the Budget Speech. I would like to thank the President for his State of the Nation Address, the Minister of Finance for the Budget Speech, and the chairperson and the committee for the commendable job they have done on this subject.

Mr Speaker, the State of the Nation Address is a catalogue of the NRM achievements since 1986. On paper it gives a very impressive picture, and this is to some extent reflected in the Budget Speech of the Minister. We are told that since 1986, the GDP has grown and doubled from US $3.6 billion to US $6.2 billion. We are also told that poverty has declined from 55 percent to 35 percent; inflation has remained as low as 5.6 percent; 600 kilometers of road have been tarmacked; and over 26,000 new classrooms have been constructed. I do not wish to give a critique of these figures because other members before me have done a very good job, especially hon. Guma Gumisiriza, hon. Jack Sabiiti and Dr Okulo Epak.  

But, Sir, I want to note the following. These figures do not match the realities among the majority of Ugandans who are wallowing in poverty. This budget ignores the agricultural sector, which employs over 82 percent of the population, and only pays lip service to PMA, which in my opinion are used only to solicit funds from international communities for other purposes.  

Mr Speaker, I know that this budget is designed to meet the IMF and World Bank conditionalities, and an unjustified ambition to transit from the third world to the first world in the fashion of the South East, Asian Tiger nations. Therefore, the budget survives mainly on the monetary fiscal policies to direct the economy, foreign investment and later the AGOA and export market.  

According to my understanding, this is a poor understanding of the dynamics of the third world economy. You cannot rely on monetary and fiscal policies to direct an economy that is partially monetary and dominated by the subsistence sector. This is because such an economy does not respond to the monetary and fiscal policies. This should actually be rudimentary knowledge of economics.

Mr Speaker, the state must, therefore, take an active role in the commanding parts the economy. I think there is need for Government to re-design these private sector-led development policies. It is necessary for this Government to take an active part in the investment, in power sector banking, in basic utilities like water transport and other important sectors of the economy in our society. You cannot transit from the third world to the first world, Asian Tiger fashion, when you are bed-ridden with corruption and lack of discipline in the budget. 

Corruption is the unofficial profession of some favoured, well-connected personalities in high government positions, and budget indiscipline is the order of the day. Resource wastage and misappropriation is also the order of the day. And is in our case to talk of a transit from third world to first world, in my opinion, is deceit if not ignorance.

I want to comment on the fact that we have been told that this economy has been growing, and its relevance to our people. In my view it is only two percent, in fact less than two percent of the population have benefited from this so-called growth. That is why you find that it is only in Kampala and a few other urban areas that some houses and a few industries are being put up, but the rest of the country is in poverty.  

According to figures I have gathered from the Uganda Poverty Status Report 2003, there is a very serious imbalance in regional development in this country. There exist wide economic inequalities between the Northern region, Eastern region, and the rest of the country. Many families in the East and North have been in poverty since 1992. Ninety-one percent of the poor live in the North and in the East. The human development index is least in the East and in the North, with Kotido District being the least developed on this list.  

I want to request that this Government considers this. In my opinion this type of development where only 600 kilometres of road have been tarmacked since 1986; only 90 kilometres, that is 15 percent, were tarmacked in the North; is not good. Out of 773 secondary schools grant-aided by the Government, only 143, that is 19 percent, are in the North, and 238, that is 32.5 percent, are in the West. This is a dangerous situation under which we cannot develop the country. My appeal to Government is that this should be corrected immediately so that we can be able to build a united country, happy with itself and proud of being what we are. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR ANTHONY YIGA (Kalungu County West, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I comment on the Budget Speech, I would like to draw to your attention that I happen to be the Chairperson for the Sessional Committee of Public Service and Local Government. As I talk now, I have not received the policy statements from the Ministry of Local Government, the Local Government Finance Commission and the Public Service Commission. Yet as you know, it is a requirement under the Budget Act that we should have got these policy statements by 30th June.  Could you please impress upon the Leader of Government Business so that he can take charge and have these errant departments comply accordingly?

I would like to thank the Minister for the Budget Speech, and also the Budget Committee for their report. When you look at the budget theme, which is “increased production for increased exports and eradication of absolute poverty”, this is a beautiful idea and very rosy indeed. But I wonder whether the budget does contain adequate provisions to enable the peasant farmers increase production so that in turn we get more to export.  

Uganda is an agricultural country and as such, more efforts should be directed towards the development of agriculture in this country. The Government’s efforts under NAADS and PMA are not stimulating agriculture enough in that a lot of resources are spent on seminars and workshops and lip service given to the provision of inputs. The farmers need to be empowered to be able to acquire improved seeds, fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides.  Seminars alone will not enable farmers to increase production. So, the Ministry concerned should look at this.  

But then, Mr Speaker, yesterday it was revealed by the Vice Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture that this actual sector does not have an investment plan. I think that is why they do not stimulate agriculture. I also noted that in the PMA arrangement there is a credit component, which has not been activated. That is why we have seminars yet farmers are not empowered to put this knowledge into practice. By the way, that credit could empower them to buy those improved seeds, fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides. Could this component be activated so that the PMA can be made more relevant to our economy -(Dr Kisamba Mugerwa rose_)- but you will have to respond. Okay.

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): I may not have all the time I need to answer all the issues, but I thank the honourable member for giving way. We shall have to dwell on the PMA more and more, so that we really internalise it.

Much as PMA is called a plan, actually it is a principle on how to approach agriculture, which principle was mutually agreed upon and thereafter we had to make sub-sector investment plans. This is what is going on and the investment plans have at least been approved at the technical level. Once they are in place, these will enable us to pursue those areas, to bargain for more funds for the sector. 

Meanwhile two areas, which fall under the Ministry of Agriculture, that is research and agricultural advisory services, have been pursued. That is why we wanted more money but you can see, those who have been following, that there was difficulty in fitting in some of these funds into the medium-term expenditure framework. I appreciate the sympathy but I wish to assure Members of Parliament that investment plans for each sub-sector have been worked out.

MR YIGA: Mr Minister, thank you for your clarification, but could you please expedite on those investment plans so that we can share them? Perhaps we shall be in position to back you and support your increased call for more money.

Mr Speaker, I welcome Government efforts to reduce expenditure on public administration. However, I have noted that the Government is creating more regulatory authorities. We have the Electricity Regulatory Agency, Uganda Communications Commission, NEMA, National Forest Authority, Uganda Coffee Development Authority, Road Agency and others. All these will require an increase in expenditure. Much as it is good to regulate the activities in the economy, it would be prudent for us to rationalise the number of these regulatory agencies. We may be able to trim the Ministries and others but then create room for spending more in these regulatory agencies. Let us rationalise them so that we have few, which are well facilitated and can do good work for us.

On rural electrification, I note that a lot of emphasis is put on construction of new schemes and distribution lines. There are areas in this country, and my constituency in particular, which have been bypassed by electricity lines for the last 40 years. And people have been looking at those wires, wondering why they have not been assisted to tap that electricity. So, I urge the Ministry concerned to assist such places, where those wires have been passing for the last 40 years, with transformers, so that they are able to tap electricity. 

Otherwise, dwelling on constructing of new schemes will not assist much. The idea should be to increase the number of Ugandans accessing electricity. If we have areas where electricity lines are passing -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Do you want information from the Minister in charge?

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ENERGY (Mr David Migereko): Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform my brother that this problem of lines over-flying our areas and trading centres, which are in need of electricity and are not served, has come to the attention of Government. We are trying to come up with a solution to that, such that when we are giving out concessions for the distribution business, the concessionaire will be under obligation to provide transformers to all those trading centres, which are enroute the lines you are talking about. 

The concessionaire will also be under obligation to connect at least 20,000 consumers annually. I think that once these negotiations have been concluded and the concessions undertaken, we should be in a position to find a lasting solution to the problem, which you have rightly raised. I thank you.

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, basing on the pace at which we are moving with our privatisation and the revelation that the concessionaire will only be able to connect 20,000 consumers per year, I do not know when my people will be able to access electricity.

I would like to urge the Minister to expedite the process so that the concession is given before the end of this year. Otherwise, we are delaying a lot. The voters have been excited by the promises of the Government of rural electrification, yet there is very little on the ground. We are not moving ahead. Could we move so that people can tap this electricity?  

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Government for the policy of promoting partnership between private and public health service deliverers. Whereas resources have been extended to NGO health service providers to compliment Government efforts in health service delivery, I find there is a problem still. I have noted that despite the support given, charges in many of these NGO health facilities have remained high. Taking my constituency as an example, the people are complaining. My constituency is heavily served by NGO health facilities, and the Government spends a lot of money annually to subsidise their operations, but the charges are still very high.

I have also noted that the Government does not monitor the funds they are sending to these NGO facilities. Could the Government take it as a point so that they monitor and also study more why charges are not going down? You are giving them support, you are equipping their theatres, you are giving them money for drugs and other kinds of recurrent expenditure, but charges are still high! Carry out a study and find out why the charges are not going down. That is when you will be able to make a meaningful intervention in this area.

On water and sanitation –(Interjection) (Dr Kamugisha rose_) but, Mr Speaker, you will give me more time because the Ministers are really –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The question of giving you more time does not arise because you have overrun your time.

MR YIGA: Okay, honourable minister, you will get time to –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But you can get the information if it can assist you.

MR YIGA: Okay.

THE MINISTER STATE FOR HEALTH, PRIMARY HEALTHCARE (Dr Alex Kamugisha): I thank you, Mr Speaker. The member has raised a very interesting issue of partnership between Government and NGOs in the health sector. This concern has been going on for quite some time, leading the Ministry to come up with a policy on how Government will relate to the private sector and the NGOs.

Under this policy, we are going to make sure that we clearly monitor and harmonise the assistance we give them, so that it benefits the rural, poor population. In that process we shall make sure that the population is not overcharged, because Government took a stand to abolish cost sharing. We would also like other people, particularly those whom we support, to charge reasonable amounts of money. So, the concerns are already being catered for under this policy and the studies to come. I thank you.

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, on water and sanitation, it is regrettable to note that in contrast with the national coverage of water, the national safe water coverage is only 57 percent. I wonder which districts have hit the national target because I know very many districts have not reached this target. But we have been assured that it is 57 percent. 

Taking the example of my district Masaka, the water coverage there is 38 percent, yet this district is near Kampala. It is about 80 kilometers away from Kampala. I wonder what is happening in Gulu, Lira, Nebbi and those areas where the Minister cannot easily go. But in Masaka the problem is really pathetic. We, therefore, call upon the Government to try its best so that they assist Masaka to improve on safe water coverage from 38 percent to close to 50 percent. Then we shall be comfortable and we shall not complain.  

I would also like to inform the Ministry concerned that much as we are getting money for spring protection, shallow wells and what have you, that will not assist us to improve on the water coverage. There are areas where we need valley tanks and community tanks, and areas where we need small water systems, in the up-growing urban areas. I urge the Ministry to assist Masaka in this area, so that we can also be proud of this Government.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, WATER (Mrs Maria Mutagamba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I thank the member for yielding the Floor. I want to inform him on behalf of Masaka that we are quite aware that Masaka is slightly below the national average. I, however, want to assure him that in this current financial year, Masaka has been given special consideration. 

The JICA programme is to cover Masaka, Mukono and Mpigi. On top of that, I think we have about four water supply projects that we have already signed contracts for. We are also putting valley tanks in place. Masaka is covered with a number of valley tanks that are going to be constructed this financial year. So, I believe by the end of this financial year, we should be able to raise the water coverage in Masaka by more than four percent if not six. Thank you.

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to wind up with two issues. I note in the budget that the local revenue component is supposed to be 40 percent and that last financial year Uganda Revenue Authority met its target. I got this information two months before the end of the financial year. What I urge the Ministry of Finance to do is to re-assess the capacity of this country in as far as collecting this local revenue is concerned. Because we may find also that we could be under-assessing, so that we are able to collect enough and be able to boost the local revenue component of our budget. 

Mr Speaker, last year the budget was cut by 23 percent –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I thought you were winding up.

MR YIGA: I am winding up, Sir - to cater for increased expenditure in defence. Mr Speaker, not all the money was spent on defence. For example, we had procurements by other Government organs. We bought vehicles for the Prime Minister, and other departments also benefited. 

Also, in the Defence Ministry, funds were not spent prudently. Some of the money was spent on luxuries, like the press reported the luxurious purchases of vehicles in the Ministry of Defence. The Army Commander bought a vehicle worth Shs 400 million, at the expense of improving the welfare of soldiers. I wonder how many soldiers would have benefited from this money if it were spent on the purchase of uniforms and boots? Yet on the floor we have been hearing pleas by members that the Government should improve on the welfare of the soldiers. This welfare includes uniforms, boots and others. 

Mr Speaker, could the professed discipline in spending be actualized? –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to end at that. Thank you for your attention.

DR STEPHEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before I start, I would like to refer the honourable members to table 6 in the Budget Speech, which enumerates how the money has been distributed. 

The Defence Ministry gets close to Shs 134 billion, and Finance, and Planning and Economic Development close to Shs 10 billion. Now, look at this: Agriculture, Shs 2 billion, I would like to emphasise that. Education gets about Shs 7 billion, and Health, about Shs 4 billion. I think that is enough to cause anybody to go into depression because to me the most important aspect of this nation is agriculture. Eighty percent of our population lives in rural areas and depend on agriculture for subsistence and earning some cash. But when you go through the rural areas, you do not feel the presence of agriculture; there is just none. 

There is no mechanisation of agriculture, as we are still using hoes, which was the case in the 1930s. There is no use of fertilizers, as it has been pointed out, either. About 40 years ago there was a Minister from Toro called John Babiiha. He introduced this country to being independent in milk production, and there was even over production of milk in some areas. But when you go to the East and the North, the dips that hon. Babiiha introduced are now non-existent. And there is no plan, not a single plan, to rehabilitate those dips. Instead –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Mrs Mary Mugyenyi): Thank you, honourable member. Mr Speaker, may I inform the member that the Ministry of Agriculture has a plan to rehabilitate the dips? As a matter of fact, if the ADB loan was not delayed by Parliament, starting next financial year - I think the Committee on Economy must be informed - and under the ADB loan –(Interruption) 

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I respect my honourable colleague in charge of Animal Industry. But is she in order to imply that this august House, at any stage, has withheld consent for a loan that she is referring to? Could she specify the date when it was presented and this House did not have a quorum, refused to consent to it or walked out on her?

THE SPEAKER: The member is saying that they have never withheld consent. Could you give us –(Interruption)

MRS MUGYENYI: Mr Speaker, I think the word I used was “delayed”, and the Committee on National Economy, from the reliable reports I have, has at least not facilitated the proceeding of the acquisition of this loan, or at least the implementation of the loan. That is what I meant. I was referring to the Committee on National Economy. 

But if I can be allowed to go back to the point and inform the honourable member, the process –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I think the matter the Minister is raising is very serious. The public will get the impression that this Parliament is frustrating the efforts of Government to get the necessary funds for Government programmes. I think that in fairness to this House, the Minister should inform the House the day the loan was tabled and the day it was actually referred to the committee. Then Parliament will appreciate that indeed the committee delayed in considering this loan for approval. This is a very serious matter.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if you do not have correct facts, the intention might have been good, but since you do not have the facts –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I want to give on that particular loan is that it was not actually delayed by the committee as such. However, it is true that when the loan request was presented to the committee, some issues were raised that needed clarification. We are in the process of interfacing with the committee to iron out some of those issues. But of course during the interface, delay was occasioned.  

So, it is true that there has been delay, but I do not think my colleague is saying that the committee deliberately delayed this. It is true that determining whether the loan should be approved or not has delayed, because there are some issues we have to sort out with the committee.

THE SPEAKER: Well, it could be that there were certain loans that were brought when Parliament was ending its session and therefore could not deal with them. But I understand that a number of them have actually been listed to be dealt with between now and mid next month. It could not have been the intention of the House to delay it. The chairperson of the committee concerned should to tell us.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Nandala Mafabi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is very unfortunate that allegations are being made against Parliament that they are delaying to pass loans. I want to first give you the scenario of how loans are presented to Parliament.  

What the Minister of Finance does is wait until there are a few days remaining to a certain deadline, and then he brings a loan request to Parliament. Then he starts saying, “If you do not do it by next week, the loan request will not be approved, or we shall lose the loan”, which is very unfair to Parliament. 

Normally, when loan requests have been made, the committee makes requests for more information to be provided. At times the information delays to come, at other times the information comes in piecemeal. After the information has come, the scrutiny of the loan is done. You have seen so many complaints that loans are being passed in Parliament without detailed analysis, which has been the problem. 

But I want to assure you, Mr Speaker, and the Minister concerned that there is no intention whatsoever by the committee to delay any loan, which they have found is necessary for this country. We are doing everything possible to make sure that loan requests are analyzed. Of course, you know very well some of them come in, yet they are not necessarily needed at the time. There are those which come that are needed quickly. But I request the Ministers or may I also ask them, to bring the information quickly and also to submit the loan requests early enough to avoid problems  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think the record has been corrected. The position is that there has never been an intentional delay of these loans.

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am talking about the position of the policy statement from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. On page 42 of the policy statement, and I imagine what the Minister of State is referring to, is a project called Livestock Productivity Improvement Development Project. In this book - let me read the sentence: 

“The Livestock Productivity Improvement Development Project, which was meant to start in 2003/2004 shall be put on halt until 2004/2005 as no Government of Uganda funds have been provided for it.”  

That means that even if the Committee on National Economy approved the loan request, Government is not ready to provide funds. Mr Speaker, in addition –(Interruption)

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Sir. I thank my honourable colleague for the information. I think this has revealed how animal husbandry, and agriculture in general, have been neglected in this country either deliberately in the Eastern region, or there is incompetence at a certain level. (Laughter).

MRS MUGYENYI: Mr speaker, while I take the clarification from the Minister in charge of Finance and from the honourable members, the point should still be made that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is making an attempt to put in place the infrastructure for dipping animals against ticks. The plan is there, the funds have been sought and once this loan is put into operation, the dip tanks will be rehabilitated and others constructed. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): I just want to inform the honourable member that the statement read by the honourable member is from our policy statement, which I signed. It is true that no funds from the Government of Uganda have been allocated, but that does not prevent a project from starting once it is approved.

Not every counterpart funding is required at the beginning of the project. So, once the project is approved and signed, it can start.

MR MAFABI: Mr Speaker, what is the Minister talking about? Even if you look at the DCA, it says that the Government of Uganda must first make ready its counterpart funding before they can give theirs.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and my honourable colleague. If you want the ministers to appreciate your concern for agriculture, ask them to show you one paragraph in the Budget Speech where livestock is mentioned. (Laughter).

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much for that information. As the hon. Member of Parliament has pointed out, there is not even a word regarding livestock in this country in the budget. I am of a pastoral ancestry, and I love cows like anyone else does. But in the Eastern region there is a deliberate effort to destroy all the cattle.  

As I speak now, there is an outbreak of tick-borne diseases in Karamoja and in my area. On average I lose ten cattle a year to tick-borne diseases. There is not a single dip in the whole of Butebo County, and there are only three dips in the whole of the district of Pallisa. At the moment in Upe or Pokot, there is a severe outbreak of tick-borne diseases and there is no concern about this. The milk coolers, which had been bought for the area, including Pallisa, were removed and taken to the Western region -(Laughter)

THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof Tarsis Kabwegyere): Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the honourable member holding the Floor on whether he expects Government to provide dips for farmers? There was a scheme in the past where public dips were put up but because of lack of commitment, they were abandoned. The honourable member is saying he loses ten animals in a year. I do not know whether he wants Government to go and put a dip on his farm. 

I think the member should ask for certain things, which Government can afford to do. If you are going to have a dip for every farmer in the name of an honourable member, then there is a problem. I must admit there is a problem if we expect certain facilities to be provided by Government when in fact the farmers can provide for themselves. There is a difference between that and the case of Karamoja where you have people moving all the time. You may need mobile dips, but that is also impossible.

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I think I have allowed enough people to give me information, but I would like to point out one thing. The hon. Minister of Local Government was at Makerere the same time as I was. I am surprised that he misunderstands everything I say. (Laughter). In those days when you went to Makerere, you had to be good and you sought the truth and you understood the truth. When the honourable minister says I am looking for a dip for my farm, I am not. I want a communal dip in my area. Dips do not move. If there were dips in Karamoja, the Karimojong would not wander with their cows. In the Western region there are dips. (Mrs Mugyenyi rose_)  Mr Speaker, I would like to proceed.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, the statement being made by the member on the Floor is a very serious statement. The public could get away with the wrong information if the Minister who is struggling to give the information is not given an opportunity to explain the situation. I wonder whether my colleague could allow the Minister to clear the air about how dips were uprooted from his area and taken to the West -(Laughter)

DR MALLINGA: I am going to allow the honourable minister to make a statement, but I would like to clarify one thing. Dips were not transported from the Eastern region; I meant coolers. The Minister at that time came from your area and she was called hon. Sekitoleko. So, I will allow the honourable minister to give me information.

MRS MUGYENYI: I thank the honourable member. Mr Speaker, I actually appreciate the point being made in favour of livestock by the honourable member. However, I am disappointed by the “tribalisation” of the issue. I thought you were making a good point, but I do not have a dip in my area. There are no dips in this country. The policy of Government at that time was to provide not only dip tanks but also other inputs. There was a tractor scheme in the 60s and all that.  

The policy of Government today is different. It has been more to do with working with the private sector, creating an environment and putting the right policies in place so that private players can be able to play their part. Now we are reviewing this policy, knowing that it has not worked. This is why we are putting in place another project to put these dip tanks in place. But honourable member, is it really true that dip tanks and coolers were uprooted from the Northern and Eastern regions and taken to the Western region? I think you should set the record correct.

Secondly, recently I was in Karamoja - to give you the facts as they are - and I found more dip tanks in Karamoja than I have seen in the Western region. The reason is that the people in the West are spraying the animals from inside their fenced farms, while in Karamoja people still need communal dipping facilities, which we are planning to offer under the Farming In Tsetse Controlled Areas (FITCA) programme. In the Eastern region, the Ministry of Agriculture is actually providing facilities for spraying animals on a communal basis, under the FITCA programme. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR MALLINGA: If there were communal spraying in the Eastern region, then I come from Siam, because I have not seen any communal spraying in that area, and there are no dips. 

If the Minister wants to prove that coolers were removed from the Eastern region and taken to the West by hon. Sekitoleko, she needs to survey members from the Eastern region and find the facts.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are saying hon. Sekitoleko removed coolers from the Eastern region and took them to the Western region? Is it not funny?  

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for hon. Mallinga, a Member of Parliament for Butebo, to accuse a person who is not in position to defend herself? Is he really in order?

THE SPEAKER: No, he is talking about the Government, but the strange thing is that he says hon. Sekitoleko removed the coolers from Eastern Uganda and took them to the West. Unless she had a good policy reason, otherwise –(Interruption) 

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The hon. Sekitoleko was then following Government instructions and she carried that out. 

I will move away from animal husbandry and talk about health. In this book on page 19, the honourable minister states: “Health indicators of infants and maternal mortality have remained low.” Infant mortality in this country - that is the number of infant deaths per 1,000 live births - is in the range of 80 to 110. Let me give you an example. In the Scandinavian countries, the figure is 5, but we are at 80. Do you call that low?  

Another surprising thing that has happened for the first time in this country since 1948, is that when the statistics of maternal mortality and infant mortality were stated, they showed a rise in infant mortality. This reflects on the neglect of the health care system in the country. Go to Mulago Hospital. If you want an operation you are instructed to bring in IV fluids, gauze, and even medicine. I was in Mulago 40 years ago and that did not happen. Why should it happen now, 40 years later -(Interruption)- I think I have had enough information. I am only stating facts and if anybody is going to tell me that the infant mortality rate is not 80 per 1,000 births, then I am going to sit down and listen.  

Tell me, do patients have to buy gauze, IV fluid, blood and medicine in most reputable hospitals in the country? Tell me, can we perform Endoscopies at Mulago Hospital? Tell me, is there a CT scan in Mulago hospital, which is functioning? Tell me are there X-ray machines in the regional hospitals in Mbale, Soroti, Tororo, Jinja, and Mbarara? Are there functional X-ray machines for the special procedures like upper GI and lower GI to be performed in what we call the regional referral hospitals? These are simple procedures; every doctor has been trained in this but they do not have the facilities to perform these tests.  So, what are we doing as far as health care of the people in this country is concerned? (Applause).

Mr Speaker, I will be brief, it is just that I have been kept back by the various interruptions. We complained about insecurity caused by the Karimojong. I am not ashamed to say that 100 years ago my own people lived the way the Karimojong live now. They wandered with their cows. But what we have failed to do in Karamoja is to settle the Karimojong. If only we settled the Karimojong! All these other things like collecting guns and training LDUs in Karamoja are not going to work. They trained LDUs the other time, and I think they were moving about 200 of them in Karamoja. They stopped the driver, got the guns and went away. They did not know where they were being taken. This is a fact. So, what are we doing? Let us get away from –(Interruption)

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, is Dr Mallinga in order to stand in this Parliament and start ordering that we should change the culture of the Karimojong by force. A culture, which is five million years old? (Laughter). Is Dr Mallinga in order to start trashing people’s culture in the Parliament?  

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think the provisions of chapter 3 of the Constitution are clear. People are free to practice their own culture. However, I think he saying that if he had the control he would force them to change.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The honourable member is a prince from Bulamogi. About 50 years ago, they were like the Karimojong but now he leads a totally different life. Some of their names are “Muloki”; what does “Muloki” mean? It means a Karimojong -(Laughter)- so, I am surprised that he comes from - anyhow, I will stop at that on the issue of the Karimojong. 

Taxation of fuel –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honestly, honourable member, your time is up. I give you two more minutes.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. About taxation of fuel, I think that is the biggest mistake we make annually. We increase the prices of fuel, and fuel is at the centre of the economy of this country. When you increase fuel prices, you disrupt everything: agricultural production, transport of produce from the villages to the cities, things like matooke or milk. 

We have increased the licence charges for cars. For every cc of the car you now pay Shs 200. This is very expensive. If we want to tax anything, we should tax beer and cigarettes. They are more beer drinkers in this country than the people who own cars. We would raise more revenue that way. And if we are to tax fuel, let the benefits of taxation go to agriculture directly. That way the majority of the people in this country could benefit; or the money collected from taxation should go directly to rural electrification. 

On page 26, there is mention of graduated tax and stopping people on the roads in order to collect this tax. Of all the African countries, Uganda is the only country which is still collecting graduated tax. By now we should have found an alternative way to fund the Local Government, and graduated tax should have been abolished. I am in the process of consulting with other Members of Parliament to move a motion in this House to abolish graduated tax. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think the proper procedure would be to repeal the law under which graduated tax is being imposed.  

MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I begin by thanking the Minister and the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget. I have read through the Finance Bill, looked at the estimates and listened to the Budget Speech. I would like to make a few remarks.  

In the Budget Speech on page 6, there is mention of the wet processing machines, which are said to be sixteen. I wish to inform the House that one of these processing machines is in my constituency, Nakifuma County. I wish to inform you further that it is under receivership and so it is not functional. When it was installed we were told wet processing is now the modern way and it improves on the aroma of the coffee. People started growing more coffee. It is an important crop in my area, but now people have lost hope. The machine is under receivership, maybe because of the banking system, or the fiscal monetary policies here.  

The banking system is strangling most of us. Recently, I read in the newspaper about a Member of Parliament who is about to lose his vehicle to moneylenders. There used to be a word called “usury” - this is where people lend money at very high profit rates. Recently, members of the tractor scheme borrowed money from one bank, at a rate of 19 percent. But they had to borrow money from another bank, at a rate of 20 percent, to pay the other one at 19 percent. Some  others  borrowed at 15%, but when you look at it, the actual interest rate is 28 percent. No one has control over this. 

Actually for those with foreign currency accounts here, whenever you withdraw about US $10,000, they take away 0.01 percent. So the bank takes away US $100, which is almost Shs 200,000. Thus, there is a way the banking system is failing our business. 

In 2001, Government removed VAT on accommodation in hotels and lodges. This year Government has reinstated VAT on accommodation in hotels and lodges in Kampala and Entebbe. That is unfortunate. Government wanted to get the revenue of 3.5 bn, forgetting that these hotels have a way of creating jobs. The initial purpose was to increase the number of hotel beds; every hotel bed produces six jobs. Uganda is becoming expensive by some design, maybe of World Bank or IMF. They are making hotel accommodation more expensive and sending away tourists.  

Tourism as of now contributes 7.5 percent of the GDP, and it is being targeted to increase to 15 percent by the year 2007. Now you are killing the whole policy of improving tourism! Actually, this year tourism will bring in about US $185 million, whereas coffee brings in about US $100 million. So, we are killing an area which should have been supported.  

Tourism is under the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, and this is an under-funded ministry. But whereas trade can address the growth issues of the country, it is neglected. The other time I went to the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry to get some information on trade negotiations. I went to the office of the Principal Commercial Officer, one Mr Raymond Agaba. His office has an old typewriter, and when I asked for information from him he gave me a document he had typed about four weeks earlier. And he said, “please, by all means go and photocopy it and give it back to me”, because he has no way of retrieving that document. 

There are meetings that are going on at WTO in Geneva and in Brussels, but you have to be on the Internet to follow these proceedings. How can a person on a typewriter follow this up? How can he negotiate for this country? And note that trade accounts for 75 percent of the GDP of this country. Whatever you do, or however much you stress agriculture, definitely you cannot benefit a lot without investing in trade.  

Recently the Prime Minister told us that he went for a trade mission in Washington. Some people of other countries who attended that meeting laughed at Uganda. I think they said that we are not taking trade very seriously. Why? It is because there were about four people to represent us - the Prime Minister, a minister and some others. Other countries went with about 50 people, so that when one is discussing, the others are negotiating with people for the construction of roads, hospitals, and other things. The problem is that the manager might want to do the work, but management is to enable others to do the work.  

Honourable members, there is something that is going to happen in September in Cancun in Mexico.  All the members of WTO are going to meet and discuss. They are going to discuss serious issues; they are supposed to negotiate market access, agricultural agreements, development issues, TRA services and all that. After that, Parliament will come and ratify those agreements. 

There are so many agreements, key agreements, we have already made. We already have the East African Community, COMESA and SADAC. Under WTO alone, there are so many agreements, about 14. But because we are not paying attention to trade, even our team at Geneva and at Brussels is small. Look at the budget; the money allocated is not enough for all those. Do we know what the Cotonou negotiations mean to us or who agrees on what? Does the Parliament know what the position of the country is? Do you not think we should call the Minister of Trade to come here and explain to us what is going to be agreed upon? 

About 14 months ago, the Presidents of East Africa agreed that they were going to take one common negotiation team to Cancun in Mexico in September.  Is that true? Are they working together? Recently the three Presidents agreed on the external tariffs and they said raw materials will have zero percent tax on them, intermediate materials 10 percent, and finished goods 25 percent. But when you look at the Finance Bill, the intermediate materials are at seven percent, and before they signed that protocol the maximum tariff here was 15 percent. 

Are we going to benefit or not, and after how long? Who has analysed all these? Is Parliament aware? When we come back, shall we just ratify? Should we not know the position so that when they go, we can question them as to why they changed? There are very many issues that are going to touch the economy of our country.

Mr Speaker, I am the Chairman of the Tourism, Trade and Industry Committee. You realize that most of these protocols have to do with trade, but even the Committee of Tourism, Trade and Industry has been neglected. For example, how many members of ACP have come back to report to the Committee of Tourism, Trade and Industry? People have gone to the Cotonou meetings and they are not from our Committee of Tourism, Trade and Industry, and they just keep quiet. They have gone as tourists whereas they should come and given us an input so that we know. 

We, the East African Parliaments, have agreed that we should work together and cause our governments to tell us their position so that they are not compromised, because you should know that there are other powers. There are three “Cs” for us Africans; we are only interested in complaining, criticizing and condemning. Whereas the others have competition among themselves, they are out to control us, and of course the other “C”, most of you know it - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Actually, I will wind up by telling you that in the world there are two trading regimes –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to demean Africans in the manner in which he has done, without explaining or even giving us the source of this kind of authority he has stated in the House? It is as if all Africans are like what he has explained. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Demeaning Africans?

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, the statement by the honourable member demeans Africans, including the Africans in this Chamber. By saying the Africans only complain, criticize and condemn, as if there is nothing else good that Africans can do, and without actually giving the source of this authoritative statement, is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think he is making an assessment of himself and he thinks other Africans are like that.

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Actually, I said that it had been observed; this was a generalization. Some people have observed that this is our tendency. The developed nations have control, they cooperate  amongst themselves and of course they compete for us; then they take you to sign agreements. 

For example, a whole President can come here to make sure that he competes with others. He makes you agree on some issues, so you have been compromised. For us we just complain, criticize and condemn. We are easily compromised. Not only that, but we also just sign documents. 

But I wanted to say that there are two –(Interruption)

MS KIYINGI NAMUSOKE: Thank you. I wish to inform the honourable member that our President is also making a film. (Laughter).

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you for the information, honourable member. I do not want to say all of them, but some of them. 

As I was saying, there are two trade regimes. One of the regimes is under the budget, but in the other one where we compete –(Interjections)- I need your protection, Mr Speaker. These people are actually –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Wind up, please.

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am sorry –(Laughter)- I have not been protected enough, but I want to –(Interjections)- I am waiting for your protection. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. (Laughter).

MR PEREZ AHABWE (Rubanda East, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, you will bear with me because this is my first time to stand -(Applause). I am not yet very conversant with Parliamentary language and certain procedures, so where I get problems I need to be advised and not to be ordered. (Laughter).  

First of all, I thank the hon. Minister of Finance for the speech he made and the Chairperson of the Budget Committee for the report. Sometime back in our sessional Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, I made an observation when the hon. Minister of Trade, Tourism and Industry appeared before us. I looked at the budget of the Ministry and compared it with the budget of one department in one of the Ministries. I recalled the position of His Excellency the President, emphasizing the need for trade, the need for investors, the importance of tourism and I saw two contradictory positions. 

I asked the Minister, “When you are in Cabinet formulating policies and you look at the position of the President with his vision for this country, and you look at this money that you are getting, are they related? Should I take your ministry as serious?” Actually, there are three ministries in one, and one other ministry that I think is misplaced. There is a Ministry of Trade, a Ministry of Tourism and a Ministry of Industry, with three Ministers of State and a substantive Cabinet Minister. Definitely, my opinion is that the Minister of State for Investment should possibly have been in that ministry, so that they are five. 

When you look at the budget of that ministry, you do not think it is a very serious ministry compared to the way it is portrayed in the eyes of the President. Surely, with that kind of importance, something must be done for that ministry, so that it is promoted and it becomes a core ministry in this country. I have a feeling that probably this is the reason that it is so dismembered. It is like a torso, a body with some of its limbs missing. I am very glad the Budget Committee recommended that some of these limbs be brought back to the main body. I am talking about the AGOA office and the Uganda Investment Authority. 

Our committee actually oversees and monitors activities of the Uganda Investment Authority. I know that other colleagues have already made this point, but I thought I should possibly repeat it with emphasis and concern. We have to emphasise this, if the way forward for this country is trade, if the way forward for this country is investment, and, therefore, industry and promotion of tourism. 

You have heard that the President is busy with a film-shooting team. I think he is trying very hard, as an individual, to promote tourism for this country. But we should go beyond that. As Parliament, why can we not give more money to this ministry and we elevate it to some kind of status?

My second point is about taxation. When the Chairperson of the Budget Committee was presenting a report, she touched - inaudibly though - on some form of taxation that we have avoided in this country for a long time, yet I think we cannot run away from it. That is property tax. Mr Speaker, I know I may not be popular after I mention this, because most members here are propertied. You can find out that; the IGG has those reports. You have declared your wealth. Many other people in this country, in civil service and everywhere, have property. 

Mr Speaker, we have a lot of property. People here own acres and acres of land. People in this country own very lucrative and expensive houses. Why do we not tax these people? Why don’t we tax this property? (Interruption)

MR BAMWANGA: Thank you very much, hon. Pereza Ahabwe. I would like to inform you, from my expertise as a valuer, that many people who own properties in cities and urban centres have been paying property rent and ground rent, but they have never received any services from the controlling authorities. I, therefore, do not know how developers and investors are supposed to be paying more than their share when the controlling authorities are not doing their duty to supply services. I thank you.

MR AHABWE: Thank you very much for that information. The assumption you are making is that all these properties are actually urban based. Land is not only urban based. There is land lying idle in Luwero, and there are also houses there. There are houses in suburbs beyond Kampala city, and these houses are built expensively, with Shs 50 million, Shs 40 million!  

I think we should get real, especially since we continue to get graduated tax from the peasants. A peasant who has only ten chicken, who has less than an acre of land, among the Bakiga for example, and you tax him graduated tax! Why don’t we reconsider our positions? We are propertied, let us agree to tax ourselves and help this country.  

I am well aware of the services these taxes are put to, everybody is aware. But we shall not shy away from taxation because, possibly, the services are not being delivered. That is another area where we should streamline. Once we receive the money, then we must make sure the services are delivered. I think this is an area that we should explore seriously in this Parliament. I am very serious on this one and I will pursue it up to the end.  

Mr Speaker, there is a recommendation the Budget Committee made on taxing exports and re-introducing the export tax. I do not agree with that one.  First of all, we are struggling to make sure that we boost our production capacity; we are not yet there. In fact, when I see figures, especially in the State of the Nation Address, that we have a 600 million market out there, as an agricultural economist I take that point. But I know it is not an adequate point because, first of all, how much of that international market is satisfied and what is remaining for us to compete for? 

Secondly, are we competitive with our products? Do we have products that are competitive? Do we have a low cost of production and transaction costs? We have to study that. Politics is not only talking about figures. We should move a little beyond that and become analytical. And that is the job of the Ministry of Trade, which is under-funded.  

We must not tamper with the few exports because if we tax them, definitely, taxes are always translated either into high prices in case of consumer goods or low prices in case of the producers. So, what are you trying to do when you tax exports? You are saying these people who are exporting should actually go back to the farm gate and pay a lower price than they have been paying. This is dangerous for production. With the few exports that we have, let us explore other avenues of taxation but not tamper with them. 

Mr Speaker, I wanted to say something about security but in the interest of time, I may make that point some time in the future. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Ahabwe. 

MS SINABULYA NAMABIDDE (Woman Representative, Mubende): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to commend the Minister of Finance for the Budget Speech. I want to specifically congratulate him on the areas where the economy performed well, like manufacturing, transport and communications, trade, and the increase in exports. 

Mr Speaker, I noticed in the Budget Speech that the Minister talked about the decrease in GDP in the medium-term was as a result of poor climatic conditions and their impact on agriculture. I would like to say that the time has come for this country to stop leaving our economy to the dictates of nature. It is surprising that at this time we talk about the negatives. Of course, the impact is negative, but then we have the ability as a country to mitigate this negative impact of rainfall on agriculture. For example, what have we done to boost irrigation in this country? What have we done to increase the valley dam coverage? What have we done to help people learn that they can harvest water?  

A number of people in this country have mabati houses, but it is a common sight to find people going to collect water immediately after it has rained. I think we need to teach people that they can harvest water and use this water to boost agriculture, especially horticulture, which is a very common practice in this country.

I would like to appreciate the improvement in the national infrastructure as an incentive for investment and growth. But I was disappointed when I read the Budget Speech and in the long list of roads, which are to be worked on this financial year, my very own Kampala–Mityana road was not included. Someone has said that it is being patched up, but this leaves a lot to be desired. I think the people of Mityana need an explanation on this. 

I know I will be talking to the Minister in the corridors, but the people of Mityana cannot understand why it has taken so long for Government to realize that it is important to work on this road. Mr Speaker -(Interruption).

THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRANSPORT (Mr Andruale Awuzu): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the honourable member for giving way. I remember that some months back the same question was asked in this House and I actually answered it. I said that this road is in the same line with the Mityana–Fort-Portal road. It was part of the same programme, funded by DANIDA. We have completed the Mityana-Mubende section and the Mubende-Kyegegwa section. 

We were working on the Kyegegwa-Kyenjojo section when DANIDA decided to withdraw from road support. But I am glad to inform the people of Kyegegwa to Fort-Portal that the Government has found its own funds. It is going to complete that road, which was done up to grade-one tarmac. 

I am also glad to inform the member on the Floor that we are in the process of rebuilding the Kampala section of the road. We are about to get funds to strip that road and put up a completely new road. Thank you very much.

MS SINABULYA: I thank the Minister for the information. But my observation was that there was no mention of what he is telling us in the Budget Speech. If it is not there, that means there is no commitment on the side of Government to work on that road. That is what we want to know. If the Government has a programme to work on the road, why is it not in the Budget Speech, like the Minister tries to imply?

Mr Speaker, the Budget Speech talked about a commitment by Government to review the existing labour legislation and to improve on the conditions, quality of employment, safety and health at the work place. This is a very welcome idea but I hope that at the end of it all Government will come up with a minimum wage for the workers in this country.

I happen to represent a district where there are a number of tea plantations, but when you visit these plantations and look at the conditions under which the employees are working, they are very appalling. There are no safety precautions in places, and their health is in danger. I hope that as they revisit this, the issues of safety of these people, improvement of their working conditions, and a minimum wage that is meaningful for these people, will be thought about.

I was disappointed with the Budget Speech because there was no salary increment in this financial year for the civil service. Last year there was an increase, but that increase does not match with the high cost of living in this country. For example, the salary of primary school teachers and nurses is far below what they spend daily. At the end of the month, they have nothing left for their survival. No wonder public servants in this country have developed coping mechanisms and the level of corruption is high.

Mr Speaker, the Budget Speech mentioned increasing the incomes of the poor, under Pillar 3 of PEAP, and emphasized PMA as a tool to transform and fight poverty. I know so many people have talked about PMA and even the Minister has gone on the defensive about the programme. My only comment about these programmes is that since they are meant to help the poor to better their lives, the poor people should understand these programmes. When you talk about PMA, the people do not understand it. 

I would like to have people understand PMA the way they understand UPE. When you talk about UPE, every Ugandan knows it. Many Ugandans are farmers, I want them to understand PMA as they dig or as they harvest. They should know there is a programme by Government called PMA, which is meant to transform them -(Interruption)

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: I wish to thank the honourable member for giving way. It is easier to understand UPE because it exempts the peasants from paying school fees. But PMA is creating an enabling atmosphere for one to invest in agriculture and its components. 

The problem is that you are taking PMA away from its components like extension through finance, infrastructure, which you have been talking about, and rural electrification; all these are part of PMA. I hope I will have more time to explain in full, but all these are part of PMA. I wish the honourable members would understand it that way, and the peasants will also understand it. PMA is not only concerned with crops, livestock and fisheries.

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable colleague for giving way. I thought PMA was about transforming subsistence agriculture to commercialised agriculture, which would be easy for a subsistence farmer to understand. If he cannot understand it, there is a problem.

MS SINABULYA: I thank the Minister and my colleague for the information, but I still maintain my view.  In fact, the explanation given by the Minister is complex and the people will still not understand it. If I cannot understand it, what about the people I represent? That is the point. So, I am requesting that we help the people to understand this programme.  

The Budget Speech also talked about low inflation in the medium-term as a result of dropping food crop prices. I agree that this is beneficial for macro economic stability, but I want to observe that this is a disincentive to the poor people. The poor people produce the food we are talking about. So, much as at the upper level we rejoice when the food crop prices go down, the poor are suffering. And I see this as a contradiction in policy, because on one side you are saying you want to help people come out of poverty as a result of agriculture, but when they produce food and the prices go down, you say this is good. So, I see it as a contradiction and something that needs to be addressed.  

What is important is not to think about lowering the food crop prices but to make sure that even when the prices of food crops are high, the people can afford to buy the food. We should look for ways of improving income across the sectors, so that whether food crop prices are high the people who depend on food from the market can still buy it. But the poor people who produce the food should also benefit out of an increase in food crop prices.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would like to talk about the increase in fuel prices. Much as it is important -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Although I do not know what you want to say, the point on fuel has come up in many contributions. You may as well take up another issue. I do not know, but it is your time and you can make it more useful.

MS SINABULYA: Yes, many people have talked about it but I wanted to talk specifically about the impact of the price of kerosene, and the fact that kerosene is the most widely used fuel. It is used for lighting in the countryside, so it affects the poor directly. So many people who talked about fuel talked about its impact on transportation and the price of other commodities. But we should also look at the way it impacts on the poor women, the poor men who use it as their only source of lighting, and the effect it has on environmental degradation. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS ALISEMERA BABIHA (Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want also to thank the Minister of Finance for the budget speech, and the Budget Committee for the report. 

I looked at the budget speech and the vision for this country, on page 34. On the vision of Uganda, 2025, it says, “balanced development regionally and across groups and rural transformation is one of the conditions of economic growth.” I also looked at the theme for this budget, which says, “Increasing Production for Increased Export and Eradication of Absolute Poverty.” 

From the vision and the theme for this year, I see that the Ministry of Finance is not really following what they say. When you look at economic transformation or rural transformation in this country, just look at what is happening all over this country when you move on the roads. Do you think this country is transformed, when the rural areas are very backward and they lack most of the essential commodities? Why is it like this?  

Look at the infrastructure. When we talk of the Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP) and we look at exports, how do you expect to get these products from the rural areas when there is no infrastructure? We are looking at modernization of agriculture, how do you modernize agriculture without infrastructure, especially roads?  

My sisters from Kasese and Fort-Portal, I want you to excuse me but I want to quote something. Recently, when the President visited on Heroes’ Day, he said - I want to say it in Rutoro because he said it in Rutoro - “Abantu ba Toro mutaaha ne munsaba olugudo. Hati olugudo ndubahaire. Hinywe habwaki nemwefula abakwenda omukazi akwefula alikwenda muno omwana hatari we, abanayisana nayenda kumulya.” 

It means, the Batoro have been pressurizing the President on the road when the road is theirs. And he said, “If a stepmother is so interested in somebody’s child, it means that child one day can have a problem. Now I have given you the road.” But even I say, if the mother is starving a child, we also say she is about to kill the child. This is the same thing he has done to the people of Bundibugyo. He has starved the child for all these years, and it means he is about to kill that child.  

We have managed to get funding, which is 50 percent, for the construction of the road from Bundibugyo to Fort-Portal, but the Government has refused to give the co-funding. I do not know why this has happened. I have the papers here. The funder has continuously asked government to co-fund this road and it has given us this money, but even in the budget that money is not there. So, I cannot say that the road from Fort-Portal to Bundibugyo is a priority. When something is a priority, it has to be in the budget. No donor can even give you money when it is not in the budget speech –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRANSPORT (Mr Andruale Awuzu): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you for giving way, honourable member. It is true that this road is not talked about in the budget speech, but that is not because the Government does not want that road to be done. 

In fact, the Ministry of Works is trying its best to get this road done. But you will agree with me that this funding, which has been offered from outside Uganda, came just very recently, when our budget had been planned. So, we cannot put it in our budget retrospectively. If it had come before, when we were planning our budget then probably we could have fitted it in it. But it came a bit late. 

I also want to comment on your statement about there being no infrastructure. That is not true. There is infrastructure everywhere. The Government is responsible for all roads in this country, beginning from classified roads, which the Ministry of Works itself maintains, to district roads. The Government maintains district roads because we send money to all the districts of this country every month for rehabilitation of feeder roads. So, feeder roads are available and government is helping to maintain them. 

There are community roads, which belong to the LC III and LC I governments. Those local governments are responsible for those roads and they are supposed to maintain them. It is true that some of them are misusing the money we send down for maintaining these roads, but then you cannot blame the Central Government for that. It is the Government’s intention that all roads in the country should be maintained and if some people are misusing the money, then I am very sorry about that. It is up to Parliament to make sure that money, which the Government sends down, is not misused. Thank you very much.

MS JULIA BINTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and thank you hon. Babiha. Recently we went to Kapchorwa District and we were supposed to proceed to Suam sub-county, but it took us a whole day to get there. We had to move from Kapchorwa, go back to Tororo through Malaba, then we entered Kenya, Kitale, and then we went to Suam sub-county in Uganda. That was because the road was impassable! We could not move through Uganda and we got stuck. So, what hon. Babiha is saying is serious. The Government needs to take interest in the development of the roads. Thank you.

MR KIBANZANGA: I want the Minister to clarify. Now that these funds came very late and the road to Bundibugyo was not your priority, what must we tell the people of Bundibugyo about this project, after 42 years of independence? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, these points of information should be directed to the honourable member. I think she is ready to listen, let us get it and then we proceed.

MRS KULANY: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to add to what my sister from Bundibugyo is saying. You know, the Government should really take these mountainous areas as a priority, as far as communication is concerned. It is very sad that Bundibugyo is not accessible. And then to reach the extreme border of Kapchorwa you have to go through another country. It is very ashaming!  

When we reached Immigration offices in Kenya, the people asked us, “What is wrong with your roads? Why can’t you pass through your country?” So, I am appealing to the Government to look at these mountainous areas and treat them as a special case. Let them be accessible, like any other part of this country. Thank you.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also come from the mountains. It is very disheartening that for us in the mountains they always want us only during elections, which is very bad. Now, we have also got a habit of saying “no change”; are we saying “no change” to the way we walk, the way we sleep? It is high time the Government became serious and looked at us as Ugandans. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now, I sense that some of these are contributions rather than information or clarification.

MR AWUZU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for continuing to give me time to intervene. It seems honourable members think that the Government is not giving priority to roads in mountainous areas. In fact, I want to say the opposite. Government is taking a very serious view and we are trying our best to handle the roads in the mountainous areas. In fact, let me talk a little about the three mountainous areas, which you have mentioned.  

The Suam road was mentioned; we wanted to tarmac that road from Sironko up to the Kenya border, but then the road from Kapchorwa to the Kenya border did not pass the internal rate of return. In other words, the traffic on it is not enough to –(Interruption)

MR MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Every country is supposed to provide social benefits to its citizens. Is it in order for the Minister to come and say human beings are far less than the vehicles that pass on the road so they cannot work on that road?  

THE SPEAKER: I do not think that is what he has said. He said that in their Ministry they have a test to determine where to start. That is what he has said. Maybe it is a wrong policy, but that does not make his contribution out of order. The policy may be wrong, but that does not make him to be out of order.

MR AWUZU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the ruling.

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, I think we shall also have time to deal with the Ministry of Works. There will be a session to deal with matters of the Ministry of Works, and roads are under this.  

This is a general debate on the budget and these points, which you have raised, will be repeated. The minister should be prepared to come and defend the policy, which he has just told us about. Otherwise, you are put on notice. I think you will come later, because you will defend your policy statement.

MS ALISEMERA: I wanted to also inform the hon. Minister that this grant was given to the country in the year 2002. They have been begging your ministry to extend the grant. Eventually they extended the grant and it is here. Uganda’s Standard  Chartered Bank had accepted to give you a loan, which you have not looked at. So, I am saying it is really a deliberate move to have the people of Bundibugyo continue with no road network, in this government.  

You know, when you look at the health figures/ indices, the maternal mortality rates, the infant mortality rates, the fertility rates in these areas where there is no infrastructure are very high. They are high because women cannot access maternal services and children cannot be taken to hospitals. I want to inform you that we also make up the indices for this country. When you are carrying out a census, Bundibugyo is included, Nebbi is included, Karamoja is included and the whole of mid-west is included. So, you should not only look at areas where good roads can reach. 

Please, Ministry of Finance, when you are planning, you should always think of the people who have suffered, think of the people who are hard to reach. And you say there will be regional balance! I want to tell you, as long as there is no regional balance, this country will continue having conflicts, you will continue demarcating this area to try and give balance –(Interruption)

MR KIBAALE WAMBI: Mr Speaker, hon. Jane Babiha has been a very strong supporter of the Movement Government. Today I am surprised that she is talking as if she has now left the Movement, or is she –(Interruption)

MR ONEK: Is the speaker right to imply that to be a Movement supporter, you must always lie and keep mum on what is going wrong? Are you in order, really, to imply that when you are supporting the Movement it will lose everywhere if they are not going to continue with lies? Is it in order, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we are not in a caucus meeting; we are in the Parliament of Uganda.  (Laughter).

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. Even if I were in a caucus meeting I would not be here without my people’s support. So, I must say what they want. I want to inform the Government that we are really disheartened. We went with the Social Services Committee to my district, it took them 12 hours to reach one point, and eventually we did not do what we were supposed to do. Is this the district I want to be proud of? Thank you, Mr Speaker.



PROF. LATIGO OGENGA (Agago County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before I came to Parliament I used to work as a consultant. One of our roles in 1998 was to prepare a Uganda Human Development Report, and the theme for that report was “Towards Rural Transformation.” Having been assigned that task, I read the budget speeches and the background to the budgets delivered from 1960 to 1997. That is why when I intervened, I said I never saw the word “livestock” in any of the paragraphs.  

It is now my opportunity to pronounce myself on this Budget Speech. I am not against the President, I know he is not the one who prepares it but rather the Ministry of Finance. This speech, if you sit down and look at it critically, is one of the most disappointing Budget Speeches ever delivered. (Applause). I do not know whether there is an assumption that if you bring these things to Parliament, people will not read or question them. Perhaps the Minister, knowing that he is not elected and accountable to anybody, does not have to bother about the quality of the Budget Speeches that he delivers.  

I do not care very much about the figures, because they have no linkage with the background. It is in those backgrounds that you will find the relevancy of all the figures that you are given. Let us look at a few. In paragraph 7 they said that real GDP growth in the last financial year was 4.9 percent. This is lower than the targeted rate of 7 percent. They also said there is no growth because of the question of food production. You go to paragraph 9. They said inflation, including the prices of food, was 5.9 percent. The underlying inflation, which excludes food prices, is 2.9 percent. This again tells you the problem is crop production. 

How does the Minister conclude in paragraph 8? He says they are going to do the necessary thing to deepen and accelerate the supply reforms required to boost the economy. Now, are we talking about the same thing; are we talking about this country in that statement? Let me ask the Minister of Finance, how will the supply reforms improve the weather so that food prices do not affect our GDP growth and inflation? How will it help the farmer to overcome the challenge of weather? This is the crux of the matter!  



Again you look at the actions to promote strategic exports - because the theme is export more and eradicate poverty - where is the attention given to agriculture? You even have a ministry for it, and yet the Budget Speech talks of things that are really callous. They are talking about importing 300,000 improved clones. In this country we have only four types of clonal coffee, but the Ministry is talking of importing 300,000 tea clones. I think you should have the Ministry of Agriculture advise you, because things like this reflect very badly.  

Then as we said before, you have said nothing on the livestock sector. There is absolutely nothing on coffee. Last year what was presented to us was the President’s aspiration to support AGOA and the textile industry. His aspiration was to see if the cotton industry could produce one million bales in five years. This year we are not talking about cotton.

Then the Minister talked about strengthening the financial sector, I think this particular bit really upsets me. The Minister says that we have pronounced ourselves on UCB, and he still quotes UCB! The privatisation of UCB was a key action in strengthening the financial sector, but what has inflation done? It is shooting through the roof. The interest rates -(Interruption)- go and find out. 

When they were arguing about selling Uganda Commercial Bank, they were saying that it would bring down the interest rates. He is now saying we have done very well to have privatised Uganda Commercial Bank, yet the interest rates are climbing. We are doing very well! You see, the problem is this: until we as a country realize that we must find where we want to be in 10 to 30 years down the road - like a child who says, “I must reach Makerere and become a doctor,” and he works hard for it - there is no way that these games of adjusting here and there will lead us anywhere. 

There is no way that the market forces will lead us to where we want to go. This is because many times where we want to go runs counter to the market. And we allow ourselves to be deceived that the market forces are the alpha and omega of transformation! We must set clear development goals and use the market force as one of very many factors that we must deploy to achieve our goal. It means we must have a national vision.  

Before I came to Parliament, I was in the agricultural sector where as an expert we developed the Uganda Vision 2025. The vision statement meant a harmonious nation, prosperous people and beautiful country. In this paper, in paragraph 39, the Minister of Finance has now come out with a new Vision for Uganda, Vision 2020, which is the Poverty Eradication Action Plan. It is in this - I am not joking - it is here. You check paragraph 39.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I thank my friend, hon. Prof. Latigo for giving way. I have restrained myself to react on most of these issues because I believe I will have sufficient time to do so. But when you say that mentioning Vision 2020 is in a way doing away with Vision 2025, I do not understand. I want to inform you that Vision 2020 is not mutually exclusive of Vision 2025. On the contrary, it is to ensure that the target of Vision 2025 is achieved in the year 2020. So, is there any problem with that?

PROF. LATIGO: When you got up, Mr minister, I was kind of scared that perhaps I missed something. Fortunately, when you looked at what I referred you to, you realized that what I was saying was not politics. Now I want to read it for purpose of our record. Paragraph 39 reads: 

“Uganda’s planning mechanism is based on a long term vision, Vision 2020, the Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP), which is implemented through the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) and the sectoral plans, such as those for education, health, roads, justice, law and order, and the Plan for the Modernization of Agriculture.”  

Therefore, Vision 2025 is dead and buried.  Unfortunately, PEAP, which is Poverty Eradication Action Plan, is the programme framework; it is not the vision. It is a programme framework that addresses various sectors, and here I am talking about the technical level. 

Mr Speaker, what we need is for this country to sober up, sit down and clearly spell out a road map for its development, with specific targets, resource allocation and clear achievement goals all properly co-ordinated. Many of these sectoral plans, if we were to add them up in terms of what you want to do in five years and in terms of the resources you want to commit in five years, somebody will say you are crazy.  But let us have a comprehensive plan that tells us that the Bundibugyo road will be done by 2006; nobody will come here and quarrel with you then.  

The situation that we are in now is like of those who are skinning an elephant. For smaller animals they are formulae. You can for example cut from the chest and then put it aside. With the elephant, it is the knife that cuts that matters. The sharper the knife the more you get. This is the situation we are in because there are no clear plans for the sharper knife, and in the process you are creating a situation where you are disintegrating society.

Finally on this, there are no deliberate strategies targeting the poor. You see in the Budget Speech, the theme is “Increased production for increased exports and eradication of absolute poverty”. Where are the strategies to eradicate absolute poverty from among those that are absolutely poor? Look at this. We are implementing a financial reform that they said would start next year. Right now, CAOs are being put in jail for “eating” money meant for school construction. 

The next reform, which they called Fiscal Decentralization Strategy, is to give money to local governments and they are free to re-allocate it. Can you imagine what is going to happen! These reforms are not based on the reality on the ground; they are just being pushed. Mr Minister, as long as I am still a representative of taxpayers, I will not stop urging you to stop playing games with people’s money. You cannot send money like that and expect something to come out. 

If you are targeting the poor, the Plan for the Modernization of Agriculture is not the instrument for targeting the poor. Some time ago, I did prepare a document through the former Vice President, and I gave a critique of PMA. I would like to reinstate in the presence of my minister that the sooner we throw that thing away and start having a fresh look at agriculture, the better. The people are going to eat you because they expect you to deliver.

Lastly on taxation strategy, Mr Speaker, the minister some time ago had removed excise duty on beers made from local raw materials, basically sorghum. Now he has re-imposed 20 percent excise tax, just when people are beginning to grow sorghum in areas as far away as Masaka. I do not know what the intention really is. If you want to help agriculture, it is through these strategies. You do not necessarily have to invest directly in agriculture. It is through such strategies that beer became cheap. In the villages it cost Shs 800. So, instead of the farmers drinking this debilitating crude waragi, at least they could drink beer and wake up sober the next day to go and cultivate.

Secondly, so many people were asking for the sorghum seeds because the market was there. But now you are saying it is taxed. The most interesting thing is that even when we are to benefit from that tax, the Minister puts a condition that to qualify, at least 75 percent of your finished product must be locally produced. So, I do not know what this means. I know that beer is made up of 90 percent and above water. I also know that there are many ingredients of beer that are there to add flavour. How do you calculate that it is contributing 40 or 50 percent of that product when it is just adding flavour? Are these statements meant to justify tax that should not be there? 

Finally, Mr Minister, I tried to catch your eye when the debate of the ministerial statement on security and the President’s State of Nation Address were being made. Since this is a general debate, I beg your indulgence. Please, give me two minutes to say something about security.

THE SPEAKER: No, you will have another opportunity. There are so many members who want to make their contributions.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO:  Okay, thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR HERBERT MUNTUYERA (Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also wish to thank the Minister of Finance for the Budget Speech, and the Committee on Budget for their report.  

Last financial year, the budget component supported by donors was about 53.4 percent. Our debt stock has grown by about 7.9 percent while the GDP growth is at 4.9 percent. We have no guarantee that you will continue reducing dependency on foreign support for our budget.  Is this the only economic model, or development path that is available to us as a country? Would the Minister of Finance like to tell us about other alternatives? I think that without focusing on serious investments in the agricultural sector, we will not overcome the poverty levels and empower the majority of our people to get into modernisation. 

We are told that currently about 35 percent of our population live under the poverty line where the benchmark is those people who earn US $1 per day. When you translate 35 percent of our population, it works out to about 8.4 million people. It is assumed that 65 percent of Ugandans live above the poverty line. But could the Minister give us a breakdown of the earnings of the 65 percent? Because you might find that the majority of the 65 percent are actually on the borderline and are almost joining the 35 percent. We need a comprehensive plan for agriculture, to be able to translate the economic growth into social economic benefits for the majority of our people.  

I would like to give you an example of tea. We are told Uganda has the potential of 100,000 hectares, which could be utilised for tea production. But out of the 100,000 hectares today, we have only 20,000 hectares under production. Kenya, our neighbour, has 100,000 hectares under tea production. Our income from tea exports, I think last time it was about US $43 million. When I look at the production of tea in Kenya in 2001, they exported 294,631 metric tonnes of processed tea; Uganda had 33,255 metric tonnes.  

In 2002, Kenya had 287,044 metric tonnes while Uganda had 33,831 metric tonnes. In 2001 Kenya earned US $700 million from tea exports alone. And look at our inflow from exports in the last financial year! It is almost what Kenya got from tea alone. So, Mr Minister, when will you give us the investment plans for our agriculture so that we could be able to drive our budget without necessarily having to go to the foreigners?

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you honourable colleague for giving way. I would like to inform the House that we have a tea research centre located in Kyenjojo District at a place known as Rwebitaba. This tea research centre was one of the best in East Africa. It was abandoned in 1977 when the East African Community broke down. When you go there you can see what Uganda could have become if this facility had been maintained. I am wondering whether the Ministry of Agriculture has an immediate or long-term plan to rehabilitate this particular research centre. I thank you.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: I wish to inform the honourable member that as we are re-activating the tea industry, one of the constraints is the quality or the varieties of high yielding tea. Last year, we allocated Shs 150 million to the National Agricultural Research Organisation to undertake research. They have identified, so far, that Rwebitaba has over 80 varieties and soon we may overcome the problem of importing varieties from Kenya.  

The tea industry suffered like any other industry, but the strategy is very clear. One is research; the second is to rehabilitate the tea acreage, which was over 2,000, now it is only 200 acres, which have not been rehabilitated. The tea estates that have not been rehabilitated belong to absent farmers, and the new tea acreage is coming up as farmers are being assisted to have access to planting materials through the strategic export intervention. I think these should really be taken into account.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Mr Speaker, only last weekend, Buhweju County, where I come from, was celebrating 40 years of tea growing. The mzungu who started that tea growing came over and it was a very big function. We went to a site, which was graded. The Minister was not there, but he sent one commissioner. There is a site for a factory, which was graded in 1975, and the money was stolen but nothing has been done about it up to now. 

The acreage in that area is so high, to the extent that all the leaves cannot be collected because they are transported to a distance of about 80 kilometres. The only item lacking on that site is the power to attract investors. The tea from that area is known to be the best, because we have got over 1,000 hectares of tea. I wrote to the Minister of Finance about it at the beginning of this year, he has never replied to me. I heard that he wrote to the Minister of Agriculture and others, bringing to his attention the very important resource and how we are likely to lose the intervention he has put in, because he has put in some intervention. 

People are planting, there is expanding acreage, but the there is no light at the end of the tunnel. There is nothing to provide the infrastructure in terms of power to attract the construction of the factory. In fact the mzungu was asking – he lives in Malawi – “Ugandans, you are talking about fighting poverty, what have you done about this important resource?” I felt I should give you that information. Thank you.

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you. I want to inform you that the Minister of Agriculture might not really know what is happening in all these districts. One day I went to the Ministry of Agriculture because a donor was supposed to give us money for that road and he wanted me to give him the value of the crops in Bundibugyo District. So, I went to the Ministry of Agriculture; I went from commissioner to commissioner and they did not have the value for crops in Bundibugyo District.  

We had to go down to the ground, with the mzungu, and we got local information, not from the Ministry of Agriculture. So, you can imagine what is happening! Those factories you are talking about may not be known. Thank you.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: This is very interesting. You may recall that we have brought two bills here, the Uganda Tea Authority Repeal Bill, and the other one is the Uganda Tea Growers Corporation Bill. What is happening in Buhweju is also happening in Kyenjojo, Mityana and other sites where four factories had been initiated. Because of changes in policies, they could not be financed during those years. So, the only way to attract investors is to remove these statutes. 

If we acquire any consultant to study the tea industry and its opportunities, the statutes will be encumbrances. Much as these statutes are seen as dormant, they are in the books. They are really encumbrances. We could not go very far because of the oddities. What was required had not been undertaken. Until we have repealed these statutes, it will be difficult to attract investors in the tea industry for those four factories. 

Otherwise, I feel that the power infrastructure to Buhweju could be undertaken under rural electrification, because an investor will not really incur that expense. The Government of Uganda has tried, in one way or another, to see that power is on the site in order to attract any investor. If we identify an investor, this will be part of the negotiations.

MR MUNTUYERA: Thank you for the points of information. I also sit on the Committee of Agriculture. We never let you proceed with the UTGC Repeal Bill because we wanted something in place to move from the 20,000 hectares, which we produce today, to at least the 100,000 hectares, which are potential. That is all we needed. 

Just like a road map, as they say, show us how we get there. I suppose the Ministry is working on that and then we will be able to resolve that repeal issue. 

The strategy of commercialised, high-value, small-scale agriculture production alongside industrial expansion, through value addition, will probably transform Uganda. But in order to realize this, we need to put in place deliberate – and I stress the word “deliberate” - arrangements to spur these investments. We are talking about affordable credit for the agricultural sector, improved production technologies, reliable markets and transport, but above all, competitive production costs are important.

The ultimate shared vision, to help create wealth in Uganda, and social-economic transformation to deal with poverty and unemployment, will have to be developed and embedded in institutions. As Napoleon said in 1817, “Men are powerless to secure the future; institutions alone fix destinies of nations.”  Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank all my colleagues who have contributed to this great debate on matters of the budget. I only want to dwell on Government waste and how we should work very hard. In spite of all the widening of the tax base, if we do not address the waste by Government and its institutions and agencies, I think we will be adding no value to anything we do as a country.

I want to look at the area of transport. Mr Speaker, we have imported used and new vehicles from one destination, Japan, and Government has done the biggest importation. What Government has not paid attention to is the change in technology, from mechanics to electronics. So, you find computers, traffic lights, and all the likes of digital and electronic technology, going to waste because part of what we should be doing has not been addressed.  

We all know the traffic jams that we have to deal with whenever it rains. Being an agricultural country, I think it is not new that we receive a lot of rain. But the terrific jams that have dogged us and delayed and slowed down the work of Government, the work of Ugandans, have not been addressed anywhere in any policy document. I want to ask the Minister in charge of Works, Transport and Communications about what he intends to do about the dead traffic lights, which have been a souvenir of the Japanese Government. How on earth could we have received aid in form of traffic lights, which we cannot maintain? 

I would like to know how many people have been trained as part of this aid. And for the benefit of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, what is the kind of policy we are pursuing, in terms of foreign aid and in terms of such aid that is not followed by adequate training, to avoid such waste? I am aware that all the traffic light sets that were made available by the Japanese Government have gone dead, and nobody in this Government is able to tell us how to fix them. (Interruption) 

MR ANDRUALE AWUZU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. A number of the traffic lights, which were granted by the Japanese, are out of action. That is quite true. However, it is not right to say that all of them are dead, because I know at least the ones at Wandegeya are still working. So, that statement is not quite correct.

Secondly, I would like to inform the honourable member on the Floor that there is a transport master plan for the whole of Kampala, in which traffic jams and so on were considered. So, it is not also fair to say that nothing is being done. 

About the flooding, which is worrying the honourable member so much - I know she is worried about the flooding at Kyambogo, which affects me also because I live that way and she lives in Jinja. That flooding is worrying her, but you can see that we are trying our best to alleviate it by putting some major culverts along the road. You know that this kind of flooding used to occur at Lugogo, but when we put some culverts at Lugogo it was solved and we are hoping to solve it also at Kyambogo.  

I would like to inform members that this problem of flooding in Kampala is not anything unexpected. Ten to twenty years ago, Kampala was a small town - although it was called a city - with only about half a million people. The number of buildings in Kampala, or the paved area, was also limited. So when it rained, a lot of the rain went underground and very little went into the channels. 

You will definitely agree with me that Kampala has really developed and has been widely built, which means a lot of the roads have been tarmacked. People have tarmacked or paved their compounds with concrete and so on. So, more water is coming down into the channels. You will also agree with me that the Nakivubo Channel, as widened, is taking away a lot of water. But what remains to be done is to rehabilitation of the smaller channels, which are taking the water to the Nakivubo Channel, and this is the problem at Kyambogo. Thank you very much.

MRS MUSUMBA: I want to thank the Minister for the information. I wonder if he is proud that in an entire nation there is only one operational set of traffic lights. In an entire nation, there is one, moreover seasonal, and yet we say we are growing! What exactly are we talking about? 

If we are importing cars and we cannot manage the traffic, is that growth? We do not have the technical capacity just to repair Kampala Road lights, which have been dead for I think five years now. They are dead and are such an eyesore! I even get embarrassed when I hear we are getting visitors. I am glad President Bush will not come as far as Kampala, because he would wonder whether also the traffic lights caught AIDS and died, because really it is a shame! 

It is a shame that a lame man periodically directs the traffic on Kampala Road, and he has to limp across the road, stop all these cars, limp backwards - in an entire country, we do not have functional traffic lights! I think it should be a priority for the Ministry of Works – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you hon. Salaamu Musumba. The information I want to give is about the traffic lights at Spear Motors. I come from Ntinda and the lights at Spear Motors, Ntinda and Kyambogo have been out of action for the last seven months.  

When you come to Nakawa, at the junction to Makerere University Business School, those lights were recently put there but it is also six months since they went out of action, nothing has been done. So, when the Minister talks of the lights working, I wonder where those lights are located.

THE SPEAKER: By the way, honourable members, I wanted to remind you that we have set aside a day to discuss the affairs of Kampala City Council. So, take that into account.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, hon. Salaamu Musumba, for giving way. I happen to be the representative of the people of Nateete. Government removed the roundabout in Nateete town, which used to assist in channelling cars appropriately, and they put traffic lights. But the traffic lights die day after day, and they are becoming a menace to traffic in Nateete. What a shame! What do we do? (Laughter).  

MRS MUSUMBA: Thank you very much. I think the point has been made, honourable minister – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this point has been made. We have a report on the activities of Kampala City Council, and this will be one of the issues to be covered.

MRS MUSUMBA: Yes, thank you, Mr Speaker. I leave that point because I think that as a nation with only one city that has lights, we should be able to manage at least 50 percent of the traffic lights. They help us get to work quickly and we do not have to give excuses, and we wouldn’t need lead vehicles to come to work.  

I would also like to propose something to the Government. In light of the technology on the vehicles that we are continuing to import and the kind of waste we go through when just one component of the vehicle cannot be repaired here by our jua kali boys and girls; it would be in the interests of this Government to train people who have been at this job long, who have sustained the repairs of our cars. I am sure they have shown the interest, the skill and the capability. If we only added value to them! We should send them to Japan where the cars come from, send them to all the sources of our vehicles - they would get training and bring it back, and we would reduce on this wastage.  

In the same vein, I would like us to look at the computers. Many of the computers in this country, even in ministries, are used as typewriters. The majority of them, especially in the Ministry of Finance, are dead yet they only lack small components for them to work again. While we are busy importing used computers, the very computers we have here need only to be repaired with small components. The point that I am driving at is that we could train more technicians to take care of the technology gap that we want to bridge.  

Mr Speaker, I want to deal with the health sector, and I want to thank Government for the Kamuli Spanish loan, finally. Finally, the Spanish loan got into gear but with a lot of waste. I come from a place called Namwendwa, which has been identified as a level 4 health centre, and which health centre has been rehabilitated three times. I was surprised that the health centre, which has just been rehabilitated by the German taxpayers’ money, has now also been broken down to make way for level 4 rehabilitation. 

I was wondering to myself; when we opened that health centre, the German Ambassador was there too. If today the German Ambassador was asked where the German taxpayers’ money spent on Namwendwa Health Centre went, it would cause a diplomatic row. The whole place has been broken down to give way for rehabilitation. In the light of such waste, how will we improve the health facilities in this country, when every morning we are breaking and adding? 

I think there are distortions within the Ministry of Health. There is just total confusion at the level of construction. There is one project, which is doing rehabilitation, overlapping with the Spanish loan, and overlapping the extension of level 2 parish health centres. I am wondering: have we run out of things to do? Have we run out of health centres to build, so that we must break down Namwendwa Health Centre three times? This kind of waste is so annoying. 

And to say the least, the people of Bugabula South are not amused by the planning capacity in the Ministry of Health. They would have preferred another health centre in another parish, to add to the stock of health facilities that they have. (Interruption)  

THE MINISTER OF STATE, HIGHER EDUCATION (Dr Beatrice Wabudeya): Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give to the House, which I am sure hon. Salaamu Musumba already has, is that actually the honourable member participated in this project, the Spanish project.  

I am surprised that it is today that hon. Musumba is realizing that Namwendwa was already rehabilitated and it was put on the same list. I think we need to consult each other on this one.  Thank you.

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I think I am more in the know about Namwendwa Health Centre than the Minister, because I was born and bred there. I live there, that is the command post of Bugabula South. Perhaps the National Political Commissar remembers that he was the Chief Guest, together with the German Ambassador, at the opening after rehabilitation of that health centre. It is hardly five years ago. 

When we accepted the Spanish loan, we knew that they were going to increase the stock of buildings, not to break the old ones because these ones are even stronger than what you are going to build. Why break them down, in the first place? We have enough land in Busoga; I do not think we lack space!

I would like the Minister of Health to take this matter very seriously. I would like him to go and check; he may not be aware that this breaking down of the centre is not even under the Spanish loan. The breaking down is under another component called “rehabilitation”. Why were they not planned together? Why rehabilitate a place that has already been rehabilitated twice in the lifetime of the Movement Government, and break it up a third time? 

If it were your personal money, would you use it that way? That is what the people of Bugabula South are asking. If it were your personal money, is that the best way to use it? You would not use your personal money like that, even to rehabilitate an old building! These places -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, PRIMARY HEALTHCARE (Dr Alex Kamugisha): Mr Speaker, I am listening carefully to what the honourable member is saying. I have not been to this site, but I also know how the system works. If you break down an existing building either for renovation or to replace it, there must be a reason. There must be a reason. You just cannot come as an engineer of Government, or a ministry, and you break down a building simply because it was put up by Germans and you want to put up another one by the Spanish.  I just cannot believe that. 

I can assure the member that I will investigate this matter, because the Ministry has got a very good capacity for planning. We have got very excellent planners; the engineers are well trained in the health sector engineering, and I cannot imagine how such a mistake was made. There must have been a valid reason for doing what they did. 

I promise the honourable member that I will give you a valid answer. But also, since it is your centre, I am sure you should not have allowed this to continue without coming to us well in time. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS MUSUMBA: Thank you very much for that advice and the undertaking to inform this House about that project. 

I just want to give you more information, honourable minister. The rehabilitation is under the Arab Contractors and the Spanish loan across the road is under SPENCON. It may be too difficult for you to imagine that this anarchy is taking place in this Republic, in your sector. But I would like you to check quickly, because I think we could have done better with that money. 

If the Germans knew that their money went to waste; I think we should also be very sensitive towards such things whenever we are planning. I have a feeling that somebody wanted money quickly and there was money, so they contracted the Arab Contractors quickly, because we were also shocked. We were never made aware of the Arab Contractors or that there will be another project. I would have brought it to your attention. So, I will be very glad to receive an answer. (Interruption)  

MAJ. KAZOORA: Thank you, hon. Musumba. Mr Speaker, when hon. Musumba started speaking and she talked about waste - I can see she is about to conclude - I thought she would further inform the House about the institutional indiscipline that this country is exposed to, because we would save quite a lot. 

Just walk, after this sitting, to Kampala Club or to Kabira Club and see how many Government vehicles are parked there, with drivers, long after work. Let an important person have Okuhingira and get on any of those roads, you will see the kind of convoy with UC, UH, UF, UE, with drivers and escorts. Mr Speaker, you can imagine the amount of fuel, the wear and tear that would be involved in that! In Tanzania that kind of thing could never happen.  

Recently, Mr Speaker, for more than three times, the Cabinet chartered planes to have Cabinet meetings in Gulu. These days, big residences are now used as official institutions. There is a residence that has come up and all these Government vehicles and all that manpower - I thought hon. Musumba could clarify on that. Thank you. 

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I want to wind up -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You mean you have clarified to –(Interruption)

MRS MUSUMBA: I do not know.  I want to wind up about the area of waste because if we do not deal with Government waste, we will never build a stock of capital or savings because nobody is paying attention to this. And this is impoverishing the people for whom we speak in this House.

Mr Speaker, many children have died just because there are no basics like oxygen to keep a child breathing. You can imagine a child taking in oxygen with difficulties. What facilities are available to this level IV health centres that can make the child have a chance to live? Just mere oxygen is not there - I had a sick child - maybe I should turn this into an opportunity. 

I had a sick child and I did see a child being given oxygen and the facilities that were available to this child. If this child were in Uganda, the child would be dead. So many children that are not able to access the facilities that I was able to access at great pain, would just die. Should we allow the children of this country to die just because this country cannot find cheap machines to make oxygen available? Is it not a crime against humanity? If it is not, it should be clarified to us why we do not have these basic facilities.  

I could be comfortable with adults dying of whatever we have chosen to die from, but children to die because of lack of a basic thing like IV fluids and oxygen? These are basic things that are found in every clinic and elsewhere in this world - I know the Minister is itching to give me information. I will take it later but let me wind up, because I think I have taken quite some time.

I want to say that if this country does not embrace ICT as a basic tool for professional development and to increase professional competitiveness, we might as well forget about education. When I read the Budget Speech, I saw ICT being explained in a variety of ways, that it is the basic for training now. There would be no competitive lawyers, and they will not be able to get jobs anywhere outside this country if we they do not have skills in ICT, not even doctors. We may have the best theoretical knowledge but nobody will allow you to touch his or her patient without ICT knowledge. So, I plead that in training our doctors and our professionals, which we do at great pain, we should be able to make ICT part of our requirements.

Finally, Mr Speaker, about strengthening the business environment. I wonder how they plan to do this because we have heard about an enabling environment. Does it enable itself just like that? Why is it that our population, including the business community, has not responded to the stimulus of enabling environment? I have two examples, Mr Speaker, the printing industry is complaining that the Ministry of Education has externalised all the contracts for books, even basic Luganda books. We must fly to South Africa; we must fly to Nairobi; we must go to Europe and the United States of America in order to have Luganda or Lusoga books printed, and yet we could have empowered the printeries down on Nasser Road to be able to print these very materials that we pay for in foreign money.  

I do recall, during the Presidential campaigns, the first posters of President Museveni that they brought were from South Africa. They became so pale after two weeks. When they got finished they printed more from Nasser Road and they were of good quality. I am sure the hon. National Political Commissar will be able to bail me out on that. Those posters that were done here were of equal quality. So, why don’t we build capacity within our own country and have this money circulated within our own people? 

We are talking about reducing poverty. Unless you are working to reduce poverty in other jurisdictions, but I believe we have a responsibility to our people. The bulk of printing in the Ministry of Education, which makes books very expensive because they have to get them at high cost and we have to pay for them in dollars; these could be made cheaper if we chose to print from around the house. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MRS AANIMU ANGUPALE (Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for selecting me to contribute to the debate on the Budget Speech. I would like to thank the hon. Minister of Finance for the Budget Speech, which focused on increased production for increased export and eradication of absolute poverty.

I would like to begin by seeking guidance from the hon. Minister of Finance before I start tackling other issues. This is about local Government funds. The Ministry of Finance is fond of decentralising funds towards the end of the month say from 20th, and the funds accumulate in the banks up to the tune of Shs 400 million; then the Ministry of Finance directs local governments to reimburse the money back to the centre. I want to know the real measure and strategies they can use to re-allocate these funds back to the local governments for implementation of their programmes.

Mr Speaker, on page 6, the Minister clearly stated that since the launching of the Strategic Export Programme in September 2001, 46 million coffee seedlings have been distributed to 200,000 households. I am going to talk in the context of Arua District, because I host the voice of the people of Arua. As I talk now, all the farmers who were made to raise coffee seedlings have not been paid and the coffee seedlings are my height. You can see the waste the hon. Member from Kamuli was talking of. Honourable minister, I will give way for you to explain it. The farmers who supplied the seedlings were not paid, and those who were made to raise seedlings are not paid to a tune of over Shs 280 million. I want the Minister to give me an explanation. 

Secondly, policies in this country are always made to benefit the rich people, make them drive Pajeros and keep the drivers of the top political cadre busy while the poor rural communities suffocate. I wish I had powers over this issue of NAADS and PMA, I would let the funds be decentralised to district level, and avoid too much capacity building, monitoring and workshops in the rural areas. What do you monitor when farmers are not implementing anything? The rural people, after capacity building for six months, forget everything that was given to them in workshops.  

What is the way forward given the fact that Uganda, as a developing country, needs a strategy to handle the agricultural sector; and given that the Government is allocating funds to the agricultural sector and the sector is paralysing the system totally? I want the Minister to explain. I saw you stand up. I give you room.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Mrs Mary Mugyenyi): Thank you, honourable member. Mr Speaker, two issues were raised. The issue of coffee seedlings, I take note of the fact that not all the coffee seedlings have been purchased from the farmers. The Ministry is aware of this, and the problem was to cut the budget on the strategic intervention programme. As a matter of fact - maybe the Minister of Finance could bail me out on this - this is not the making of the Ministry of Agriculture. It is because of budget cuts in the strategic intervention program budget that the Ministry was not able to buy all the coffee seedlings as had been budgeted for.  

Secondly, on NAADS, you are talking about decentralisation of NAADS. I wish to inform the honourable member that NAADS is a decentralised programme. I think quite often we comment on these programmes without actually taking detailed study of what the programme is all about. NAADS is decentralised to the districts and to the sub- counties, and that is a fact. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS ANGUPALE: I thank you very much, honourable minister. I said a lot of money has been left at the centre. I am well informed of the decentralisation programmes. There is a very small portion, which is decentralised to the districts, and the small portion that is given to the village for which we cannot see the impact on the ground. That is what I am saying. I wish the amount were increased, and further decentralisation given to the parishes where implementation of the programme is being done. 

Honourable minister, I am informed that the extension workers are idle. That is also to prove that really there are fewer funds, which are decentralised to district level.  

On the point of road construction, I expected the Minister to tell us about the completion of the Nebbi-Pakwach road. It was not mentioned at all. I am expecting the Minister to tell the House what is next after the person who won the contract delayed and was doing sub-standard work.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRANSPORT (Mr Andruale Awuzu): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you member for giving way. I know I am supposed to take notes and reply at the end of the debate but when there is something, which could mislead the nation, then that has to be dealt with immediately.  

Late last week, somebody wrote in The Monitor newspaper on the same subject saying that the Government is going to come to West Nile only at the time of elections, which is again misleading people. The road from Arua to Nebbi has been completed and the work from Nebbi to Pakwach will be completed. It is not sub-standard because there is a resident engineer who makes sure that the work is up to standard. 

It is true that the contractor has delayed, but the Ministry, through the resident engineer, is handling it because we could not terminate that contract. Terminating a contract is very expensive and the Government could lose. Probably the contractor will be a little late, but definitely the work will be completed and it will be up to standard.  

Let me also inform the honourable member on the Floor that the contractors building the road from Pakwach to Karuma have been selected, and within two to three months the work will start because the money is available. Thank you.

MS ANGUPALE: Thank you very much, honourable minister for that information. I actually meant the Nebbi-Pakwach road. I am aware the Arua-Nebbi road is complete. I am one of the Members of Parliament who uses the road to go to my constituency. That is why I am raising the complaint. Given that the Nebbi-Pakwach road is substandard and without offshoots; in the case of Kampala where there is no offshoot, definitely we shall realize floods. That is why I am saying it is sub-standard, and I am calling upon the Minister as the technician in that area, to re-address that issue. We should not face the same circumstances, which have here in Kampala town.  

Mr Speaker, on the issue of electricity, I do not want to sing the song every year. Given the fact that the Finance Minister has stated here that the work for Bondo-Nebbi will start this month, we are now in July and I am yet to see it. 

On the issue of water and sanitation, I would like to thank the Minister of Water, Lands and Environment for the work done. However, I would like to raise a concern that really, the areas along the River Nile are sandy. As we talk now there is no water provision in these areas, particularly in Arua District. You mentioned areas like Madi-Okol along the Nile, that area is dry. In the next financial year, the Ministry should address that issue so that the water component in that region is solved.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to conclude by urging the Ministry of Agriculture to once more put proper plans in place before the implementation of programmes is taken to areas. Otherwise, the donors who are putting in or injecting in this money would get frustrated and may even fail to contribute more funds when this country really needs it most. 

The Minister said there was a plan but there was no money to be given to the farmers who were meant to supply coffee seedling. You can imagine such a circus. Why do you do things, which are not planed?  I thought the budget is here for planning purposes.  

Now there are funds, which are being decentralized in the district, but the Ministry of Agriculture is saying there is no money to be given to the districts for paying these farmers. You can see how the farming sector is completely demolished. These people have lost interest in agriculture because all programmes are being frustrated. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Minister of Finance for exciting me on budget day. I have never been excited by a theme, since 1986, as this time around.  

Page 2, paragraph 2 shows us that the theme is, “increased production for increased export and the eradication of absolute poverty”. Mr Speaker, I was so excited – as you can see this theme is as a result of visionary thinking. But what did I see later on in the speech? My excitement was short lived. First, I looked at the same page and there was private sector-led economic growth. I did not go into the details of this because yesterday, hon. Guma Gumisiriza talked a lot about this. But I want to emphasise that if you disregard the concerns of the peasants who form the bulk of this economy, I do not think you can go very far with such growth.  

On page 16 of the Budget Speech, on water for production, they are talking about the construction of 50 valley tanks in Luwero, Nakasongola, Masindi, Mbarara, Rakai and Sembabule, in order to enhance provision of water for production. In the last Budget Speech this was the same statement. The people of Isingiro North have no water at the moment, and I believe it is happening all over the place. We were given a schedule for these dams, but the dams are not coming. And we shall meet the same promise again next year.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke): Thank you, Sir. I wish to inform the hon. Member for Isingiro North that the statement in last year’s budget on valley dams touched Karamoja, and repairing those dams that were constructed and uncompleted under the Ministry of Agriculture. In this budget, we are extending the programme to include the cattle corridor in the districts he has mentioned, including Isingiro. Isingiro was not included in last year’s budget statement. I am conscious of what we contributed in that statement and this year we are committed to provide this service, especially in his cattle-rearing area. (Applause).

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minister of State for Lands has told us that somebody is working around the clock to design the construction. In the Sixth Parliament, I was on the Select Committee on Valley Dams, and we requested for engineers in this Government to determine value for money of the valley dams, which were constructed by the Ministry of Agriculture. We were told we could not get anybody to give us value for money. 

That is why, Mr Speaker, somebody who had been given a job by the Government, from Nigeria, whom we later found out was not really an engineer, has been released by court for having no evidence against him by Government. Now, where has this person come from who has designed the 50 valley tanks in Luwero and so forth? Who is that one?

MAJ. KAZOORA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you hon. Rwamirama for giving way. I would like to sympathise with you and to encourage you not get disappointed after only two and a half years you have been in this Parliament. The kind of explanation hon. Baguma Isoke gave is not new to some of us. You will recall that in 1999 there was a very bad drought in South Western Uganda and we lost very many animals. I stood on this Floor, with the hon. Elly Karuhanga, among others, and brought that plight to this House. We got the same answer - that it would be addressed.  

Hon. Mary Mugyenyi comes from that area; she is a neighbour of Kashari. Right now she knows what is taking place. There is another drought and animals are dying. You cannot say that it was only last year! Certainly, I was not in this Parliament from last year alone. So, hon. Baguma Isoke, you should get a better explanation. 

MR KALULE SSENGO: Mr Speaker, on the question of providing valley tanks, I remember very well that in last year’s budget, Gomba area was mentioned as one of those areas to be given water. These are cattle keeping areas, and I imagine that these budgets are supposed to keep flowing from year to year. But we are surprised that in this budget there is no mention of Gomba, and I would like to know the reasons why Gomba has been dropped. Is the Minister leaving the cattle in Gomba to die off during the dry season? What is really happening? We should have been mentioned, just as we were mentioned in last year’s budget.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said some of these matters will be better handled in the sector committees. We shall get facilitation reports from these committees. Otherwise, we have gone too much into detail about the functioning of ministries. I think we rather reserve some of these points for the sector committees to handle.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank hon. Baguma Isoke for repeating what he has always told me. What you have told me is not new. I am so surprised that I am telling you that the people of Isingiro are dying because of lack of water - a jerrycan of water costs Shs 400 - and you are stamping your feet, at the front bench!  

Mr Speaker, you cannot have a vision to eradicate poverty and attach less importance to provision of water both for consumption and for production. I want to repeat that if you do not provide a standard for these areas and provide adequate water for people to live by, then you are also increasing health hazards. 

Taxation; when hon. Ssendaula talked of taxing fuel, which is a traditional casualty for revenue harvesting, I got concerned. I got concerned because it also affects the environment. People have now switched from using kerosene to wood, and you know our woodland is highly affected. The increase of the tax on fuel has set everything in motion. 

First, the consumers are being taxed indirectly, because the cost of transport is high. Take an example of agricultural produce. People have to pay highly in order to get food, and because the prices have gone up, consumption has gone down. Because consumption has gone down, the price of agricultural produce has gone down so low. A bunch of matooke now costs Shs 1,000 in Mbarara. It is very simple. I have used a simple explanation because that is how it follows. 

Mr Speaker, if you look at the effect it has caused in the area, I wonder why we cannot reduce the cost of administration. Why don’t we do it the other way round: reduce the expensive way we live? Why do we have to import six-cylinder cars here? You go to the Ministry of Finance here and see how six-cylinder vehicles are parked. You go to the Ministry of Health and you will fail to get where to park. I have been to the Ministry of Health three times and I park almost a kilometre away - six-cylinder vehicles! How do you maintain this fleet at the expense of the taxpayers; and you say you are eradicating poverty? Forget! This is not the way we are going to do it -(Interruption)

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. The point must be made that procurement of vehicles has been rationalised. Ministers are now entitled to a Prado. In the past they were entitled to two cars, now they only have one car. Of course, whenever you rectify a problem, there are historical linkages or continuities of history. There are some cars, which were bought in the past, but now each minister is entitled to one Prado.  

May I also take this opportunity to point out that when planes were hired for ministers to go to Gulu, it was cost-effective? What is more, it was essential for the Ministers to have their pulse at the place where His Excellency is camped and is handling the issue of insurgency. Hon. Kazoora is hereby informed. 

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, thank you, and I thank hon. Bright Rwamirama for Isingiro North. I want to inform hon. Rwamirama that the question of driving very powerful, luxurious, Land Cruisers by Government officials is such a desirable matter. It has been approved and found necessary by scientists that top government executive officials should drive these vehicles.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr Speaker, the Rules of Procedure are clear. When I informed hon. Rwamirama, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister was in the House and could have had a chance of responding to what I said. In fact, when he stood up now I thought he was going to inform the House of how I went together with other Members of Parliament to his office in 1999 to talk about the problem of water. He promised that it would be handled immediately; since 1999 up to today, there is nothing. I thought that is what he was going to inform the House about. Is he in order, therefore, to bring in my name, long after I had contributed, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: How can I ascertain this?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Rt. hon. Prime Minister, for that information. I hope it will take root, but at the moment it is invisible. Everybody who moves to the Ministry of Health or who moves here will not find where to park. 

Mr Speaker, another area of concern was on page 23; measures to assimilate investment and promote export. Look at page 23 under industrial zones. 83(f) talks about exemption of withholding tax on interest on external loans. In the same vein, it mentions dividends repatriated to get relief from double taxation. Honourable members, if I am an investor here and you allow me to take money back without tax and then you also give me a window to borrow outside, I will borrow from my own money. So, why are we moving around, what is this game that is going on? Mr Speaker, I would like the Minister to explain the rationale of this and how is it going to help boost investment, because it is like digging a hole to fill another one.  

Mr Speaker, another area of concern was on page 24, the hotel industry. The last paragraph says, “To assist the industry and encourage the development of tourist facilities in the country, I am proposing to remit duty on essential inputs in the hotel industry. However, these inputs must be imported with the names and logos of the respective hotels printed on them. This relief will not include construction materials. The details will be found in the Finance Bill.”  

Mr Speaker, is this the way we are going to help the economy grow? Is this the way we are helping the tourism industry grow? Because, what you are doing is letting these people import items free of tax. What measure are you going to put in place to ensure that these small writings on TVs, glasses and other things are not going to be erased? Why do you have to use measures that are vulnerable? Why don’t you use airtight measures? 

People are going to import TVs and they are going to flood them onto the markets. They are going to import glasses and flood them onto the market. If my hotel is “XY”, I will write on the glass “XY” and dip it in methylated spirit and it will become white and I will sell it. Mr Speaker, I was not amused.

Again on hotel accommodation, you may recall that VAT exemption was extended to the hotel industry and tourist lodges as a way of promoting tourism. This policy is being reviewed to limit the exemption to hotels outside Kampala and Entebbe only. This measure is expected to result in revenue gain of Shs 4.1 billion. Thank you very much, but for these people in Kampala, you have given them another side from where they can reap their profits and close the other ones. So, you have maintained the status quo.  

What I would imagine is, it is relevant for hotels upcountry, in any case that is where tourism is; much of our tourism is upcountry. Here in Kampala, it is Kasubi Tombs and in Entebbe it is the Zoo, which most tourists see on their last day. So, Mr Speaker, I think this also makes some of us uncomfortable.

I was also shocked to hear that they are exempting inputs on flower growers. What about the peasants? If you want to help the agriculture sector, it must be across the board. Why don’t you help the farmers to grow? We do not give subsidies; at least let us show a token. Now that we can recognize the flower growers, who are in most cases the owners of these hotels, then we should also look at the side of farmers.

Finally, Mr Speaker, it has been said, and mostly so by the Ministry of Finance officials, that inflows of foreign money may cause micro-economic distortion in the framework. I heard the speech. I know at one time the Ministry of Health was trying to import equipment and the argument was put that yes, they may get this money in form of equipment, but we have not provided for the money to repair this equipment. 

But you know, we have a high inflow of money from gold. I do not know how many gold mines we have, but we have exported too much gold and this gold is bringing in foreign currency. I do not know what measures they have made to control or maybe regulate this inflow. I come from the West, and I do not see any serious mines that would generate the levels of gold we have exported in the previous years.

Mr Speaker, if you look at Table 6, -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I thought you said, “finally”; the point you were developing was the final one.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: This is the conclusion. Mr Speaker, if you look at Table 6, I am not amused by the figures on the Police and the Prisons. When shall we stop using untrained people to fight rebels here? What is happening in Soroti now? Why don’t we boost the Police? I would like the Prime Minister to take serious note of this; it is more expensive to use untrained people. 

One, there is waste and then there is a lot of risk. You have mobilized people in the village to go and fight rebels. Some of these small rebels could be fought by a combination of the Army and the Police. Mr Speaker, with those few remarks, I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I thank you for your time and for your contributions. I believe this is a convenient time to adjourn. I want to assure you that I have your names here. You have been standing and I captured your names. 

To assure you, I will read them: hon. Rwakimari, hon. Mukama, hon. Ogola, hon. Wakikona, hon. Bikwasizehi, hon. Onek, hon. Kalule Ssengo, hon. Sebagereka, hon. Mutuluuza, hon. Sentongo, hon. Mate, hon. Eriyo Jessica, and hon. Kibanzanga. I have your names here and you will contribute.  

I appeal to you to be punctual tomorrow so that we can start at exactly 2.00 p.m.  If we start at 2.00 p.m., I think we shall be able to cover a lot of work.

(The House rose at 6.50 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 9 July 2003 at 2.00 p.m.)

