Thursday, 3 July 2003

Parliament met at 2.39 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the distinguished visitors we have in the gallery are students and teachers of Iganga Boys Primary School –(Applause)- from Iganga, of Busoga. You are most welcome.    

Honourable members, I have been advised that your mail boxes are very full yet the staff want to put in more policy statements from various ministries. Therefore, it is important that you check and clear them, so that other copies can be put in.  

Starting Sunday until Tuesday, I was in Cape Town in the Republic of South African, on the invitation of the Parliament of South Africa. They invited all Parliaments of Africa, with their presiding officers, to meet in Cape Town and discuss matters affecting the African Union. As you know, members, the African Union was launched in July last year in the city of Durban. Under the constituting Act there were organs or bodies set, and a charter that would help the African Union operate. 

One of the organs set under that constituting Act is the Pan African Parliament. This is a different move from the Organisation of African Unity, which was largely a body for Heads of State and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. This time there are many commissions and organs that have been set up to deal with that.  

The purpose of our meeting in Cape Town was to see why this organ is not in motion. Since it is an organ of the African Union, the African Union will limp if all the organs are not there. So, our purpose was to discuss this issue, as you will hear from a brief report by one of the colleagues I traveled with. I went with hon. Amongi and hon. Sebalu, and you will hear the details from them. 

Otherwise, we are supposed to send some five Members of Parliament from here to the African Union, so that the body can operate. That was another thing we discussed but I request hon. Sebalu - if he has any report to make - to give you the details now and we see the way forward. And since the Prime Minister is here, we should know why the ratification has not been done yet there are no principle hurdles to prevent the ratification.

REPORT ON THE MEETING OF THE AFRICAN PARLIAMENTS ON THE PAN AFRICAN PARLIAMENT

MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members of Parliament, I beg to present to this august House the report on the meeting of the African Parliaments on the Pan African Parliament in Cape Town, South Africa, held between 30th June and 1st July 2003. 

The Ugandan delegation was headed by the Speaker of Parliament, hon. Edward Ssekandi, and included hon. Betty Amongi and myself. 

The opening session was presided over by the Deputy President of South Africa, His Excellency Zuma, who clearly stated South Africa’s political will, commitment and determination to ensure that the African Union takes off with all its major organs in place, especially the Pan African Parliament. He called upon all member states to do likewise. 

The same session was addressed by His Excellency Amara Essy, the Interim Chairperson of the African Union Commission, and hon. F.N. Gimwala (MP), Speaker of the South African Parliament and Chairperson of the Steering Committee for the Pan African Parliament.  

The purpose of the meeting was to examine the progress so far registered in the establishment of the Pan African Parliament with regard to the status of ratification by member states of the African Union. This is because the Pan African Parliament is such a crucial and necessary organ that will help the acceleration and consolidation of the African Union by linking all the peoples of African continent through their elected representatives. It is expected that through the Pan African Parliament, the African Union is expected to enhance and consolidate good governance, human rights and democratization of the African continent.

Background to the Meeting:  

The meeting was a follow-up of the different activities so far undertaken by member states to ensure the establishment of the African Union and its organs. This has been undertaken and there is evidence to that effect in the form of:

1. Constitutive Act of the African Union, to which Uganda is already a signatory. 

2. The protocol to the Treaty establishing the African Economic Community Relating to the Pan African Parliament.

3. A communiqué of the Steering Committee on the protocol to the treaty establishing the African Economic Community relating to the Pan African Parliament, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, 28 April 2003.

4. A protocol relating to the establishment of the Peace and Security Council of the Union.

5. The African Peer Review mechanism.

6. Draft Statutes of the Economic, Social and Cultural Council of the African Union.

7. A statement adopted at the meeting of the African Parliaments in Cape Town, South Africa, 28 June 2002 and presented at the inaugural summit of the African Union, Durban, South Africa, 2002.

8. There is in place already a steering committee, which is chaired by South Africa, whose mandate it is to work closely with the commission in making all necessary preparations for the early establishment of the Pan African Parliament. 

There were presentations made in this meeting. In order to further underscore the need to speed up the process of African integration, the following Papers were presented to the meeting:

- Familiarisation with the protocol and the status of ratification.

-Progress on the establishment of the African Union and the relationship of its organs with the Pan African Parliament.

- Operation of NEPAD.

- Vision for the Pan African Parliament.

- The issue of involving all people of Africa was emphasized. 

The main issues and observations made in this meeting were the following:

There was a general call by participants to those countries that have not ratified the protocol to do so as soon as possible, to enable the establishment of the Pan African Parliament at the earliest opportunity. It should be noted at this point in time that although Uganda is a signatory to the constitutive Act, it is among those countries that have not ratified the protocol. 

An issue of general concern was raised to the effect that member states should always translate the political will of African matters into tangible actions. The case in point was that heads of state and nations meet and agree but the follow-up, in terms of implementation, was at times found wanting.  

The funding of the union as well as its organs was discussed as being crucial to the new organization, if it is to run on a sustainable basis. So, funding is another issue that was seriously considered. 

Amendments to the protocol were raised but were differed since some member states have already ratified the protocol and hence can only be amended when the Pan African Parliament is formally established and constituted. There are provisions for amendments in the protocol, which can only be put to application by the Pan African Parliament itself. It is that very Parliament that has the mandate to amend the protocol.

Gender issues were raised in regard to representation. Although the protocol provides for at least one woman among the five representatives of national assemblies, there was general consensus in that meeting that at least two out of five representatives to the Pan African Parliament should be women. So, the meeting was very sensitive to the cause of women. I must at this point in time register that Uganda participated in this endeavor very seriously. Hon. Betty Amongi and myself put up a good case for it, and Uganda and South Africa were recognized as being in the forefront in terms of affirmative action. So, I think we deserve to acknowledge that initiative.

The issue of involving all the peoples of Africa was emphasized, because it will allow for the Union to be owned by all African peoples, unlike the OAU, which was termed an exclusive club of heads of states and governments. So, this is a complete departure because the organs provided include Parliament, the civil society and other major players, unlike the OAU.  

The media in all member states must be brought on board in order to assist in mobilizing the people and popularizing the cause. The media is an interested party in this cause and all efforts should be made by member states to ensure that the media plays a major role in this.

The way forward was reflected in the declaration that was made at the close of the meeting, whose main issues were the following: 

One; the national Parliaments should monitor developments in the African Union and consider establishing working groups or committees on the Union. 

Two; the national Parliaments should engage in political processes towards the establishment of regional Parliaments in the spirit of Pan Africanism at regional level. But for the case of East Africa, we have already moved in that direction so has ECOWAS. South Africa is in the process of forming the SADAC Parliament. So, again the East African region – and Uganda in particular - scored highly on this one.  

Member states that have not deposited the instruments of ratification were requested to do so before 31 December 2003. However, the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda did pledge to the meeting that he would ensure that in our case, our instruments are deposited much earlier, preferably before the Maputo Summit, which will be held next week. That way, we shall be considered among the founding members of the Pan African Parliament. Already the number that is needed for the Parliament to take effect is about to be realized, and Uganda is not one of them. 

It was highly recognized that Uganda is one of those countries that have played a big part in championing the Pan African cause. So, it would be a renegade on our part not to be part of the founding members of the Pan African Parliament. Therefore, at this point in time we call upon all the authorities concerned, the Minister in charge of this should ensure that the pledge that was made in Cape Town is realized and we become members of the founding group.

The next assembly of the African union should determine the seat of Pan African Parliament and set a date for its first session. There are two countries that have offered to host the Pan African Parliament and these are South Africa, which has already put in place a magnificent, huge building with a capacity of about 2,500 seats, to take care of this home. Libya is also in contention. They also want to host it. So far those are the two vying for the role. Nigeria opted out. Those who have the powers to decide will do so preferably at the next meeting, which will be held in Maputo.  

Member states were also encouraged to expedite the establishment of regional Parliaments with law-making powers. The Pan African Parliament is also going to be advisory in the first stages, but it is supposed to take on legislative functions. It should look at the budget and all other matters and make laws pertaining to the running of the African continent. So, there was a general belief that even the regional Parliaments should be given that level of power and be able to make some laws.

In the initial stage the Pan African Parliament will be elected by Parliaments. In the case of Uganda for example, members should be elected by the Ugandan Parliament. But it is envisaged that in future, members should be elected through adult suffrage, so that the process is owned by all the peoples of Africa. Therefore, at a higher level, the level of legitimacy will have to be extended to the people of Africa.

Governments should submit early drafts of protocols and other documents related to the African Union to Parliaments of member states for consideration and input prior to adoption.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we only came back yesterday, and I had to draft this report early this morning. If it has any deficiencies, I beg that you excuse me for that. But other relevant documents are available and will be presented to the relevant committees. If my colleague has anything to add, with your permission, I beg your indulgence. Thank you very much, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you for the presentation.

MS BETTY AMONGI (Woman Representative, Apac): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not going to delve into the issues already raised, because I think it is a good report that my colleague has presented. I shall perhaps add a few things.  

One; we live in a global world, a world that is full of competition, and a world that is very hostile. The only way we can survive in this world, which is competitive and hostile, is to form alliances. In modern times, you see the example of European countries forming alliances because individual states cannot on their own, fight the hostile global economy. I think it is vital for Uganda as a country to form this alliance at a continental level, to fight for its interests within a broader and bigger body. 

That is why the Pan African Parliament is envisaged to particularly bring on board the oversight function to the African Union. You might want to know that the African Union is composed of the heads of states. Therefore, if the heads of states are left alone, they would be doing what they feel is best for them. The Pan African Parliament is supposed to come on board to provide an oversight to the African Union, to develop a budget, and to harmonize all the laws in member countries so that all the organs and initiatives in all African member states are harmonized. All these are efforts at a continental level, to give us a bigger voice, and to give us a bigger force to fight in this global economy. That is what I think is very vital for Uganda. 

The only thing that Parliament can do now is really request, through the Prime Minister who is the Leader of Government Business, that the Minister in charge of this protocol brings it before Parliament within a specific time period. That should be the Minister of Foreign Affairs or International Affairs, or the one for Regional Cooperation. We should ratify the protocol as soon as possible so that we are members of the founding body of the Pan African Parliament. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, thank you very much. I want to report that this morning I contacted the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs. I expected him to be here now to give us a position on this, but since the Rt hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business is here, maybe we will be able to hear from him.

MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I first of all thank hon. Sebalu for giving us such an elaborate report. I want to utilize this opportunity to pose some few challenges to the House that would eventually help us handle the motion for the report presented by hon. Sebalu.

I think it would be appropriate that this Parliament sits down and we put our heads together to find out who the actors in the foreign policy of this country are. Mr Speaker, I say this because this latest meeting, which has been reported to the House, has at least got the involvement of Ugandans through their Parliament. It is the formal way of conducting the foreign policy of a country. But to my disappointment you will find that less than three weeks ago, a very serious foreign policy decision was made single handedly by the President of this country without the involvement of Parliament. So, it is a very big irony to find that in certain instances the Parliament is involved, and in certain instances - like the ICC - it is a lone decision, yet it has serious implications.

The second example I would give is the US invasion of Iraq. The African Union took a stand not to side with any of the warring factions and to my dismay Uganda jumped out of league with this Union to which it is a member of, to say that it is okay for the US to attack Iraq - when they feel it is necessary. And this same statement came from the Presidency. At what point is the foreign policy of this country going to be made by an individual at the expense of a diligent House like this?

So I really pray that as we debate this and consider it at an appropriate level, we should broker those who love taking lone decisions to also involve Ugandans. That is my first submission.

Secondly, I suggest that when the issue of the African Union Parliament comes to this Floor, it would be advisable to have an in-house selection. We should have members of the national Parliament -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: For your information, you will be electing the five representatives from among yourselves.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, thank you. Mine is a departure from that because I see there is an inadequate feedback mechanism from the East African Parliament. So, at an appropriate time I would still lobby my colleagues to have five Members of Parliament relinquish their seats to take up the African Union seats, other than having people from out where we do not have a formal forum to enquire. (Interruption)

MR SEBALU: I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. The whole idea of ensuring that the members that go to the Pan African Parliament are members of their national Parliament is provided for in the protocol. It is to get that representative character, because through this Parliament those members have the mandate of the people. If that is to be undertaken in any case, it has to be when the Parliament has been constituted. Then it is the Pan African Parliament itself to make such an amendment, assuming it is in the best interests of the cause.

The way the protocol is at the moment, members have to be Members of Parliament of their national assemblies, to bring in that element of representative character, which has been grossly missing in the OAU. The OAU was only for heads of states, and there was no clear mechanism of getting in touch with the people. Even then, when it goes to adult suffrage still someone will have to be a Member of Parliament first then he goes out to offer himself to the rest of the population. I thought I should give this information.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Most obliged. I wish that were the case for the East African Parliament. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I thank you and your team for involving us in the foreign policy of this country. 

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge South, Kyenjojo): Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity, and I would like to highlight two issues.

The first is to welcome you and the team that went to South Africa back, and also acknowledge that by reporting to this House you have set a tradition and a trend, which enables all of us to share in the experience, although we may not have traveled too. I plead that this kind of tradition continues, so that we can all share in whatever our members may have benefited.

Mr Speaker, I would like to allude to a point which was made by hon. Sebalu, and this is the point of equal opportunities. I want to salute the Movement Government for introducing the policy of affirmative action especially where it comes to the representation of women. I am glad to note that we are talking about at least two women. The word “at least” should be emphasized, and I would like to thank the delegation for pushing for this position.  

Finally, Mr Speaker, when you look at the Constitution, the chapter on international relations, Article 123 says, 

“The President or a person authorized by the President may make treaties, conventions, agreements, or other arrangements between Uganda and any other country or between Uganda and any international organisation or body, in respect of any matter.

(2) Parliament shall make laws to govern ratification of treaties, conventions, agreements or other arrangements made under clause (1) of this article.”  

Mr Speaker, as you realize this law has not been enacted. Therefore, when we come across treaties such as this one, which has just been mentioned, our hands as Parliament are tied. We have to consult with Government –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, if I may inform you, in the Sixth Parliament we passed a law on ratification of treaties, and these treaties are classified. There are those which are under our mandate, and others that are under the Executive. It would appear that this one is something that the Executive should deal with. But there is a law on ratification.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that information. I am aware that there is a law, but I am talking about the deficiency of this law especially when it comes to matters of ratification. This law does not oblige Government to bring those particular laws back to Parliament.  

As you know, Mr Speaker, this creates a gap. When we are talking about domestication of the international conventions and treaties, we have no reference point. Members are not informed about the principles that should form the basis of our laws.  

Therefore, I hope that in due course, this matter will be rectified so that treaties, conventions and other international agreements that Uganda enters into are brought to the House. This should be done so that the House is informed, and so that the House can make laws that are in harmony with the international community. I thank you.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in welcoming you back from South Africa and thanking you for having ably represented Uganda, this beautiful country. 

However, I would like to make one comment and seek clarification. The first comment I would like to make is that the constitution of the African Parliament, in my view, is a very nice idea. A number of Presidents in Africa make mistakes from time to time. They take action internationally, which on a number of occasions is a negation of the Constitution. 

In the case of Uganda, we have been implementing policies internationally, which negate the national objectives of our Constitution, namely, national objective XXVIII, which talks about non-interference in other countries’ affairs, acting in a manner that is non-aligned. I beg to move that the constitution of such a Parliament would restrain wrong doers at Presidential level, and Uganda is such a country.

The first clarification I am seeking is as follows; Mr Speaker, noting that as we speak the East African Parliament is still advisory - it has not yet taken that stance of action - why should we embark on the constitution of the African Parliament before we make the East African Parliament act? Why do we jump the ladders? 

The second clarification, and the last one I would like to make, is directed to the Government of Uganda. A number of protocols related to the protocol, which we have perceived, have been signed by Uganda and many of these protocols do impact on the people we represent. Is it not advisable that before we ratify any of these important protocols, like the one on the Africa Parliament, the people we represent do equally get informed and advise us before we commit the nation of Uganda to these protocols?  

In the past we have not been doing that and we must be apologetic to the population we represent. I have been directed by the people of Lubaga to articulate these concerns. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. First of all, I am disappointed that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is not represented here. But it is understandable, because as you know President Bush will be visiting us. So they must be very busy dealing with many intricate matters. It is a great privilege that the President of America is visiting us. There are many other nations, which would like to be visited, but they have not got that opportunity. 

However, the arrangement is that if a ministry cannot be here, they must ask another person to represent them. That is really my disappointment. I will therefore cause the minister to come and clarify on the many issues raised here. But being a political scientist, I cannot escape from giving a few lectures to hon. Lukyamuzi.  

He must know that even if we have not got full regional integration, it does not forbid us from dealing with Pan-African matters. If you take the very practical view by the late Mwalimu Nyerere, regional groupings enhance integration, and if you move steadily through these groupings, then you stand a chance of achieving practical and well-tried integration. 

Of course, Nkrumah took a different view, and you may be taking that view, that if you try these small arrangements, they may make it impossible for us to acquire continental unity. It is as if before getting married, one tries to experiment with certain facets of integration and then they are frightened to go into matrimonial integration. But I do not accept that view because it is not practical. You have to start slowly. For example, we have started with functional aspects of integration, and when you have realized them then you can go to political integration. I think we are moving extremely well and I do not see any cause for alarm.

May I also say that there is a committee that deals with foreign affairs. It has a large responsibility to ensure that if there are problems – and it has always met His Excellency the President and they have discussed fully, various dimensions of our foreign policy. We welcome your input.  

What I think is most undesirable is for the Executive to take a stand that has international implications and then the Legislature appears to disagree and then people get a feeling that this is not a country. That is extremely bad. We must move together, otherwise we shall be taken very lightly when we make contradicting statements on a matter that is meant to facilitate our national interest.  

If you know how countries move when it comes to foreign matters on their relations, actually the President, of course being assisted by various organs, plays a critical role. Some of the issues are of a secret nature, but we can always discuss them through our sessional committee. 

So, I want to urge the committee to deal with any matters that cause irritation, and they will be clarified here. Of course, if I had been privy to what was to be stated today, I would have done a lot of research work and given you the information. 

As you know, I have been abroad also facilitating the interests of this country. I represented the President on a trade summit in Washington DC. I have just come back, and I am delighted to be back. But I will cause the relevant minister to come and answer all your questions, as he must always be here. If he is unable to be here, he must be represented. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

II) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2003/2004.

III) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2003/2004 ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.


THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (INVESTMENT) (Mr Sam Kutesa): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that Parliament do resolve itself into a Committee of supply for the consideration and approval of:

1. The revised revenue and expenditure for the fiscal year 2003/2004.

2. The budgetary proposals for the fiscal year 2003/2004 estimates of revenue and expenditure

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. Go ahead! 

MR SAM KUTESA: Mr Speaker, honourable members are aware that on 12th of June, the hon. Minister of Finance read out the Budget. He also presented the estimates of the revenue and expenditure for this coming fiscal year, and the budgetary proposals. 

Honourable members have the speech and the necessary documents. I beg that this be debated.

THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Kiraso Birungi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week on Tuesday 24th, the Budget Committee with all the chairpersons of the other committees, who are ex-officio members, held a meeting. In that meeting, we resolved to advise Parliament that although the Budget Speech normally generates a general debate, we should try as much as possible to focus this general debate on budget related matters. We did this so that it is different from the debate on the State of the Nation address, which may attract various issues on various subjects. 

Mr Speaker, in reaction to the motion and in accordance with the Budget Act, 2001, allow me to present to the Members of Parliament the report from the Budget Committee. This is the report which was presented to His Excellency the President by the 15th day of May, as is required by the Budget Act.  

Mr Speaker, as we did last year, we thought presentation of this report to Parliament would form the basis for a good debate, having listened to our issues and the issues which are detailed in the Budget speech that was read on the 12th.

Mr Speaker, on the same day, as is required also by the Budget Act, the Minister of Finance did lay before Parliament a report on the total indebtedness of Uganda today, specifically talking about grants, loans and guarantees. 

While the Budget Committee will at an appropriate time come up with a short speech on the general or salient issues concerning the total indebtedness of the State, we agreed that various sessional committees will look at those loans and grants, which have gone to specific sectors. While they are presenting their reports on the policy statements, they will also put in a paragraph or two on the utilization of those loans and grants, specifically those that are project and not budget supported.  

I would like to remind honourable members, especially those who are supervising specific sectors - that is, sessional committee chairpersons and vice chairpersons – what this Budget Act requires of each minister. And of course, this is for the information of the Prime Minister. I know he is aware that the ministers are required to submit their policy statements by the 30th of June.

So, the policy statements, which we are receiving now, I think came some time back, but maybe because the pigeonholes are full –(Laughter)- I hope most of them beat the deadline. Otherwise, the deadline by this law is supposed to be the 30th of June. 

Mr Speaker, I will try as much as possible –(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, before I left, I sent a reminder to all ministries that by 30th of June they should have their policies in. If there is any ministry that has not done so, it must be blacklisted and should face stiff sanctions –(Laughter). I thank you.

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, after the Budget Committee had prepared this report and passed it on to Government, we also had an interaction with the Ministry of Finance on behalf of the President. They came up with answers or reactions to most of our recommendations, especially on policy issues and budgetary issues. 

Section 11 of this Act says, “Parliament shall analyse programmes and policy issues that affect the national budget and economy, and where necessary recommend alternative approaches to Government.”

In as far as possible, we have looked at policy issues in each and every sector and made our recommendations where we thought we should make recommendations.

Honourable members, before I read the report, I would also like to say that, although the Constitution gives us up to the end of October to pass the Budget, since we started operationalising the Budget Act we could commend ourselves for having done a very good job. We passed the Budget last year at the end of August. In other words, there is a good justification for that Act.

This year, we may do even better, Mr Speaker, because we have also agreed that sessional committees have actually done most of the interactive work with their sectors during the pre-budget discussions. Now they will look at the utilization of resources that were expended to the various ministries during the past financial year.  

Mr Speaker, this Act also requires that policy statements be submitted in a standardized format. This standardized format prescribes certain activities and programmes in an easier way for us to analyse and report on.

I would like to remind honourable members that all the recommendations you gave last year, when we debated the budget speech and the policy statements, were condensed in this book by the budget office, which has been widely circulated. If you do not have one, do not hesitate to get one from the budget office.  

This will also help the sessional committees to hold their sectors accountable, in answering why they did not take on some of their recommendations or what difficulties they have. So, the condensed book is here detailing all the recommendations that we gave last year.

Mr Speaker, there is another message or recommendation from the sessional committees in particular. Section 6(2) of this Act says, “A policy statement made under sub-section (1) shall be in a form prescribed by the Minister responsible for Finance and shall reflect specific data on value for money and the extent of achievement of the objective targets on money received and spent.”  

The Members of Parliament are saying, it is one thing to receive written information from the ministries but it is also another thing to verify some of that information. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, since on the PAF funds there is five percent for monitoring, we would like to recommend to the administration of Parliament that together with the Ministry of Finance, some of that money comes to Parliament. Sessional Committees that are charged with this responsibility of ensuring that there is value for money, at appropriate times may then go out to carry on-spot assessments of what has been put in the policy statements.

Mr Speaker, I will try as much as possible not to go line by line or paragraph by paragraph, since you have got a copy of the report of the Budget Committee. 

Section 4 of the Budget Act, 2001 requires the President to lay before Parliament a three-year macroeconomic plan and programmes for the economic and social development, and the indicative preliminary revenue and expenditure framework of Government for the next financial year. This should be done not later than the 1st day of April. This was done, Mr Speaker, and it formed the basis of our pre-budget discussions with the various sectors, which culminated into us preparing this report.

Mr Speaker, I will go to the macroeconomic plan and budget framework and give the observations of our committee. Parliament recognizes Government’s macroeconomic objectives of promoting rapid economic growth and structural transformation in order to eradicate mass poverty by the year 2017.  

The committee notes that careful and realistic programming and stability of key macroeconomic valuables are essential for long term planning and investment. These include low and stable inflation, realistic GDP growth rates, real competitive exchange rates and a prudent level of foreign exchange results. 

Parliament is, however, uncomfortable with the description of projected growth as “rapid”. We think this is misleading, as it implies an element of suddenness and surprise in the nature of growth.  We would rather Government considers projecting accelerated economic growth that is smooth and orderly. When we interacted with the Minister, he agreed with us on this issue.

Mr Speaker, on the GDP growth rate of seven per cent for the medium term, it does not relate to the 6.1 percent in the macro-economic budget framework report that was given to us. But I think it was clarified in the budget speech, and we know that the Ministry was referring to 6.1 and not 7 per cent.  

Honourable members, it is not realistic, and the Minister said so in this submission to us, to attribute growth of the economy to Bujagali Dam Project alone. This project has not taken off and there is no concrete assurance that access to power from this source is going to be a reality soon.  However, there should be an indication to clearly demonstrate how other important sectors such as petroleum exploration, mining and others impact on the projected growth. The real economic growth as projected is not supported by the trends in the international economy, upon which we rely heavily for taxes, trade, grants and loans to support our economic activities.

The committee noted that the intervention of government reforms in the agricultural sector has largely been on marketing with insufficient attention paid to production. Generally, the growth in the private sector credit is projected to be stagnant in the medium term, having risen sharply from 4.2 percent in 2001/2002 to 24.5 percent in 2002/2003, and settling on 15 percent in 2003/2004, 2004/2005 and 2005/2006. 

The private sector credit growth should be increasing as the economy continues to be private sector led. 

On inflation, Mr Speaker, the projection of 5.8 percent for Financial Year 2003/2004 is high and has the potential of causing laxity in the fiscal and monetary policy management. The high projection may lead to relaxation of the fiscal and monetary stance. The projected outturn of 5.4 percent for 2002/2003 could be reasonable given the exogenous factors that affected the economy during the financial year. These factors should not be the basis for the projection for this financial year.

Low inflation as a result of a drop in food crop prices over the medium term should be viewed as a disincentive for the rural poor who are food crop producers, and measures should be put in place to support them. For example, through agro-processing, storage and preservation facilities, irrigation and other farming methods.

Government should, under strategic interventions, provide support incentives to production, storage, processing and marketing of agricultural products in order to mitigate the potential negative effects of very low food prices; and provide for incentives of the private sector for value addition.

Money supply is projected to grow rapidly in 2003/2004 than it did in Financial Year 2002/2003, and yet both the fiscal deficit and the budget support inflows are projected to decline. It was not clear to the committee as to what could be the basis for higher projection in the growth of money supply of 14.8 percent in 2003/2004 up from 9.2 percent in the last financial year. The committee, therefore, wondered whether some of these projections were realistic.

Mr Speaker, it is very important for us to note that if inflation is to be controlled and at the same time we have got this very high deficit, the interest rates will remain high. I wish the Minister would comment on that so that we know what the Government is doing about the high deficit. Of course we do not want them to fix their interest rates, but if the deficit issue is tackled, then we think the interest rate issue will also be tackled indirectly.

In addition to real GDP growth, inflation, money supply, private sector credit growth and gross reserves as key economic indicators, the human development index, interest rates and domestic savings rates as percentage of GDP and employment rate should be strongly considered as specific macro-economic indicators. It is unfortunate that no projections have been made for the exchange rate in the medium term, yet some expenditure items in the macro-economic plan are listed in foreign currencies.

Mr Speaker, I will not talk about the table in the report, since you have the figures with you. However, we recommended that the Government should make realistic projections of key economic variables such as GDP, inflation and exchange rates. Particular attention needs to be paid to GDP growth rates, and all sources of growth should be identified and targeted so that we do not heavily rely on food crop prices for our projections.

Reduction in the projections of the fiscal deficit from 11.7 percent in 2002/2003 to 11.3 percent of GDP in 2003/2004, then to 11.1 percent, and a further annual reduction of one percentage point thereafter would be welcome, if the opportunity cost is carefully considered.

Rapid reduction of the fiscal deficit as a short-term macro-economic stabilization measure should be weighed against longer-term benefits of investing additional resources in productive sectors such as health, education and other infrastructure, given a substantial size of un-funded priorities.  

The committee observed that the economy has been largely left to the “invisible hand” of the market while there still exist widespread market imperfections that make resource allocation under this system deficient. Even in advanced economies, Mr Speaker, there is still some strategic regulation of the market. We know our economy has been liberalized, but I think there should be some specific intervention, where we at least monitor the market.

Maintenance of sufficient levels of reserve cover is commendable, though it is not clear why the level of the reserves is declining in terms of months of imports over the medium term. 

The committee notes the Government’s desire to raise domestic revenue collection to 12.8 percent of GDP in this financial year, through a combination of administrative efficiency and introduction of new revenue measures. The narrow tax base should be addressed in relation to the large informal sector, which is not assessed. We recommended that a deliberate policy to formalize activities of the informal sector should be put in place in order for the sector to make meaningful contribution to GDP and improve on the tax base.

At this juncture, Mr Speaker, I will request for an explanation under taxation and tax measures. Honourable members, it is page 23 of the budget speech. There were measures to stimulate investment and promote exports, particularly in section 88 where the Minister said that industrial zones for the production of exports would be set up and investors locating in those zones would be provided with various tax incentives - he goes on to itemize them.

Mr Speaker, the committee feels very strongly that this might be abused because who are those industrial producers for exports, and who are not industrial producers for exports? Why the departure now from accelerated depreciation, which the Government took on some years ago, to this one? Of course when we were discussing this some few companies were named, which are getting preferential treatment in relation to others, and we thought this might be prone to abuse. The discretion is left to some people to give holidays and all these incentives to one company and not the other!  

The committee notes the shortfall of Shs 40 billion required to meet the budgetary demands but in the budget speech the Minister alluded to this shortfall and also explained how it is going to be handled. So, I think members will look at that. This was done at a time before the budget speech presentation. 

Mr Speaker, efforts to widen the task base and introduce new tax measures should avoid elements that distort production and investment. The committee, on top of what the Minister or the Government has been exploring, proposed the following to be explored so that our tax base can be widened:

1. Property tax.

2. Strict computation of input and output ratios for tax.

3. Mineral sector royalties.

4. Export tax, to a limited extent especially on goods where there is no value addition.

5. Increase on PSV fees, and registry of companies’ fees and charges. 

6. We thought the Registrar of Companies fees and charges were not well streamlined.

7. And then there are NGO’s that are profit making. NGOs should be separated into those that are making profits and those that are not. The profit making ones should be taxed, and their employees too.

8. There should be vigorous pursuit of non-URA sources, including dividends and repayments from parastatal companies.

Mr Speaker, in his response the Minister agreed with the committee on most of these proposals and he says the Government will have to put a study in place to look at these areas, to ensure that the tax base is widened. Otherwise, we did appreciate the work Uganda Revenue Authority has done to keep very close to their targets in the last financial year.

The pressure to increase the Pay-As-You-Earn threshold beyond Shs 130,000 per month, we thought should be looked at. The issue of raising the threshold should be looked at by Government and the Minister says he noted this concern. However, the majority of employees are below the threshold and any adjustments upwards will not help the majority of them. That is the explanation from the Minister.

The committee noted that the removal of VAT on hotel accommodation did not yield the expected benefits, and that Shs 3.53 billion was lost in taxes. This is according to the Minister’s information to this Parliament, in this book. The committee recommended that the VAT law be amended to reinstate VAT on hotel accommodation in order to promote the principle of equity and fairness in production and investment.

The Minister says he has noted the recommendation, and this will be considered in the context of the budget. We hope the Finance Committee will look at the Finance Bill to see if this one has been re-instituted.  

Mr Speaker, the committee also noted that the reduction in excise duty on beer did not yield the expected revenue. The reduction of duty from 70 percent to 60 percent did not result in lower prices and hence increased consumption as had been envisaged.

The committee recommended to Government that the above be revisited, and the Minister says we have realized a modest volume of growth of about 2 percent. This modest volume growth suggests that there is a switch to other items, for example airtime. But I think in the Finance Bill we have noted that there is some slight change on this excise duty, as per our recommendation.  

The status quo on petroleum taxes should be maintained as the oil industry is experiencing external instability, and for its influence on prices of other goods and services in the economy. That was our recommendation but in the budget speech, honourable members as you noted, there was an increase of Shs 50 per litre of petrol. The explanation which was given to us, was that it is envisaged that with the end of the war in Iraq, the supply on the international market of petroleum products is likely to increase thereby bringing down the price of petroleum products internationally. So it may not, to a very large extent, affect the economy. That is the explanation we were given.  

We did appreciate the vigorous reform programme of the non-tax revenue. But we said this should bear in mind the efficiency and bureaucracy involved in revenue administration. 

Government ministries and departments should abide by reporting requirements for the Appropriation-in-Aid, in accordance with section 17 of the Budget Act. The hon. Prime Minister had asked us to give him the list of those ministries that are not conforming to this section, and those organizations are there in paragraph 18. The Act requires them to give a performance report to Parliament, on a quarterly basis.

The committee also noted the size of domestic arrears. It is still too high in spite of the commitment control system, and Parliament seeks an explanation on how Government intends to deal with this matter. We have been given figures, Mr Speaker, showing that the release of funds to pay domestic arrears has steadily been increasing over the years and we hope that with the commitment control system, soon we shall have no more domestic arrears.

An interest cost of Shs 227 billion on a resource envelope of Shs 2,272 billion for this financial year, represents a very high expenditure and points to unsustainability of the debt situation.

The committee also observed, with a lot of concern, the decline of 18 percent in budget support projected for this financial year. Of course, Mr Speaker, we know that dependency on foreign money has dropped to 48 percent from 52 percent – I think - last financial year. But when we factor in this money in our budgets, and it is not disbursed for one reason or another, it does distort the whole budget. And then this deficit may lead to non-compliance to the Budget Act and the Public Finance and Accountability Act, especially by re-allocating funds.

Mr Speaker, the committee noted that mismanagement of the Defence budget was a very big factor, which contributed to the decline in this budget support disbursement. It was explained to the committee and to Parliament by the Ministry of Finance that some disbursements could not take place until Government gave the out-turn in the Defence Ministry to the World Bank. 

The security sector, whose share in total allocation is projected at 16.4 in 2003/2004 up from 13.9 percent in 2002/2003, should be a matter of concern to all of us. While the Defence review process is useful to justify further funding, most aspects of the review should emphasize efficient application of the resources within the sector. The committee wishes to examine the details of the Defence expenditure so that it is approved by Parliament without subjecting other sectors to budget cuts like it is in the present fiscal year.  

Hon. Prime Minister, what Parliament is saying is that if the need to fight the Kony war is justifiable, why do we not bring here the budget figures, which are realistic, and we pass them? Instead we are being given figures, which are not realistic, and after a short time some other figures are demanded. What we are saying is we are partners in this, and there should be full disclosure if possible.  

The committee commends the Government on progressive reduction in public administration expenditure. Honourable members, I am sure you saw the measures that the Government is taking to reduce expenditure on public administration and if I could repeat some of them –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Sergeant, I think we are impaired by the noise coming through from the corridors. Do something about it.

MS KIRASO: The Government says it is committed to reducing expenditure on public administration by keeping Presidential Advisors on a part-time retainer fee basis only, abolishing the position of Deputy RDC in districts with less than 500,000 people, and abolishing all Assistant Resident District Commissioners. The number of Movement Directors will be reduced by half, and there shall be a reduction in the costs of running districts mainly through reducing the number of members on each committee. 

The Government also says they are going to merge regulatory bodies, which I am happy to note was a recommendation from the Budget Committee. We realized that there are too many regulatory bodies most of which are duplicating work, and some of them could be merged so that they work on different sectors.  

They will also reduce vehicle costs, which have become a major drain on the budget. This one is as general as that. There is nothing specific on how the vehicle costs in Government are going to be tackled, but it is a matter of concern, which I believe was also picked up by the Committee on Finance.  

There are also measures to reduce public sector spending over the medium term, by harmonizing the salary and establishment structures of commissions and semi-autonomous agencies with those of traditional Public Service. Standardizing costs per senior officer of various recurrent discretionary line items namely allowances, vehicle use, recreation and travel will also be done. Then there is rationalizing the costs of foreign missions in view of their current financial burden, and establishing a Cabinet technical sub-committee to examine ways of reducing expenditure across Government through identifying areas of spending with minimum positive impact on public service delivery.

Mr Speaker, these are very welcome measures because while the Cabinet looks at the budget in totality, I think it is important that it gets a sub-committee, like the one Dr Kazibwe had started, to specifically look at the budget. They also need to look at ways we as Uganda could minimize spending; and prudent management of public resources.

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that there is yet no systematic and comprehensive policy on construction or provision of office accommodation for the Government. Consequently, each ministry or department is left on its own to locate a plot for office construction, or private places to rent. At the same time, the policy of divestiture and privatization is on course and Government is selling non-core assets of public enterprises. What they are selling includes building that could easily be secured and retained for Government office accommodation. Examples are Bugolobi Coffee Marketing Board Plant, UCB Headquarters, NIC building, UDB Towers, URC headquarters and Crested Towers. 

Shared office accommodation by ministries on the same plot should be explored as the Condominium Law reinforces this approach. Budgetary allocations for construction of ministry’s headquarters should be re-allocated to other critical activities with immediate impact on poverty. We are saying we do not see why buildings, which belong to Government should be sold while the same government goes ahead to rent office accommodation, or even put up new buildings. I think the Minister agreed with us on that one.  

In spite of having the Poverty Eradication Action Plan as a guiding principle, recourses and other budgetary allocations to different sectors seem to be presently determined by decisions devoid of scientific content. The committee is of the view that the volume of allocations of resources to various sectors be determined by sector contributions to GDP, taking into account short, medium and long-term strategies. 

We are saying, Mr Speaker, that we seem to be feeding non-layers -(Interjection)– off-layers? No, not off-layers. We want to milk cows which we are not feeding, and we are feeding bulls for that matter, yet we want more milk. So the committee is saying, why do we not scientifically look at areas –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: A bull is necessary too, is it not? (Laughter)

MS KIRASO:  Mr Speaker, we are saying there are sectors of the economy where if more money was put, more growth would be generated. That is the scientific approach we are talking about. 

The committee notes that the macro-economic plan contains a list of Government un-funded priority activities to the tune of Shs 324.8 billion, representing 14.3 percent of the resource envelope. The size of the un-funded priorities casts doubt on the commitment of the Government to stick to the budget. It is, however, difficult to consider these activities in isolation of the ones that the Ministries have accommodated in their current ceilings. 

If the Sector Working Groups left them outside the ceilings then they can only be considered if other activities exit the budgets of the concerned ministries and departments. This is in addition to the budget pressure of Shs 40 billion in new revenue measures, which are yet to be proposed which have already been proposed.

Mr Speaker, the budgetary pressures should be dealt with decisively so that those that fail to be accommodated in the next budget or in this financial year’s budget - by replacing lower priority activities - are either absorbed in future budgets or dropped. We thought it was not prudent budgeting for us to have un-funded priorities. They cannot be priorities and at the same time be un-funded! And some of those include contributions to international associations and organizations.

On the expenditure outlook and options, the medium-term expenditure framework for the coming financial years has a resource envelope of Shs 2,272 billion; which includes Shs 227 billion of interest payments, Shs 45 billion for arrears, the provision of Shs 30 billion for VAT payments by government, and making resources available for sectoral budget expenditure of Shs 1,970 billion for the coming financial year. This is an increase of Shs 77 billion, equivalent to 4.1 percent compared to the approved budget of the last financial year. There is an increase of 4.1 percent.  

It is further noted that over the medium-term, the resource envelope is projected to grow at a rate of 5.4 percent. 

There is a limitation of resources and the critical expenditure requirements; that is common knowledge. And the un-funded programs vis-à-vis the revenue gap has been explained by the Minister in both the budget speech and in his reactions to these concerns of the committee.  

Mr Speaker, the committee welcomes the following reforms initiated by the Government to support the move from project donor support to budget support  mode of budget financing. I have itemized them in the report. The move from project support to budget support will need more monitoring, more accountability and more prudent management of public resources. So, we would like to commend Government for these reforms, and also for reforming some of these laws. The other reforms to support budgetary innovations should be carefully managed and coordinated, for effective service delivery.

The Public Finance and Accountability Act should serve to restore discipline in financial and public expenditure management. I would like to urge all of us members, although we are the ones who passed that Bill, to revisit it and ensure that it is followed to the letter. It is an initiative from Government but as stakeholders we should ensure that there is prudent management of public resources.

Mr Speaker, we did look at the various sectors and I am trying to avoid going –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Do we not deal with these sectors when we eventually handle the reports from the various committees? What you have done is give us an umbrella picture on the budget, which would help us make more informed debate. But I do not know, it is your report really.

MS KIRASO: Yes, I agree with you, Mr Speaker. If I do a sector by sector analysis and give our observations and recommendations, and then when committees report on the policy statements they come up with the same issues, then there will be duplication. I think we will leave the various sectors. Since the report is with you, honourable members, during the debate you may have issues arising out of this report or out of the budget speech.

On proposed budgetary re-allocations, honourable members, the committee recommended that some departments, programs and projects seem to be misplaced. It observed that some of these should be put where we think they belong. 

For example for the Uganda AIDS Commission, the committee recommended that it be moved from the Office of the President to the Ministry of Health. This is for better co-ordination of some of these activities. We did note that at the beginning the President, in person, had a lot of input in advocating for Anti-HIV/AIDS activities. But now this is a national issue, and there is a Ministry in charge of Health. HIV/AIDS is a health matter. Therefore, the Uganda AIDS Commission should report to the Ministry, and the monies going to it should not be allocated under the Office of the President but under the Ministry of Health.

Mr Speaker, AGOA has to do with trade and export. We have got the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. Why should we mutilate our ministries? We put ministries in place, with their respective ministers, but when there is big work like that of AGOA, we take it and put it under State House! So, we are recommending that AGOA moves, together with its budget, advantages, benefits, disadvantages and liabilities, to the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry.  

The Uganda Museum, and Antiquities, which are presently under the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, we also thought was misplaced. Museums and Antiquities –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Should it be under tourism because people come to see -(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Sorry, this was a contentious issue because we have got a Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. This ministry includes cultural affairs, and we thought museums were more of culture – but it is a matter for debate, this was our recommendation. 

The Uganda Investment Authority is under the Ministry of Finance. The committee recommended that it be moved to the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. 

In the Ministry of Local Government, the committee noted, most of the activities had now been decentralized. Therefore keeping the Minister and Minister of State, together with the whole structure there, was not cost effective. So the committee recommended to Government that this ministry be abolished, and made a department. (Laughter). The committee recommended that it should be made a department under the Office of the Prime Minister. 

About the Entandikwa and Youth Enterprise Scheme, we noted with a lot of concern and pain that the money to be accessed for micro-credit enterprises is under the Office of the Prime Minister. Now, the Minister in charge of this money is in the Ministry of Gender. He is the one who should be looking at how to dispense this money. So, we are saying that either the money goes to where the Minister is, or the Minister is moved to where the money is.  

We are also proposing that the Industrial Court be moved from the Ministry of Gender to the Judiciary. This is a judicial organ, it is a court, and courts fall under the Judiciary. (Interjection) Mr Speaker, protect me from hon. Baguma Isoke.  

Honourable members, we proposed some budgetary re-allocations, and I am glad to inform you that all our proposals have been catered for in the Minister’s response to Parliament. Where they are not catered for the way we wanted them, for example by re-allocating from one vote to another, the Minister did propose how he is going to fund these activities which we have put here. I will not waste time by reading item by item and what the Minister has proposed. I will ask the Clerk-at-Table to photocopy these two while the debate goes on. 

Before we pass the budget, the Members of Parliament should know that these proposals were all taken on by the Government. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and the whole Budget Committee. Honourable members, you have received the guidance from the committee. These recommendations will assist you to make your contribution on the budget.  

MR OMODI OKOT (Kole County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Although the chairperson has appealed to members to confine themselves to budget areas during the debate, I would like to observe that there are certain areas that look essentially very unconnected, only to find that they are related. 

You take the issue of security. The issue of security is part and parcel of the budget speech. So, I appeal that we may have to graze generally here and there on this matter. Mr Speaker, in all budget presentations there is always an aim. There is an aim to either attract funds or to attract donations from lending institutions. There is an aim to maintain consistence for development programmes that are already in the field; it may also include implementing credible programmes, which are being initiated. 

Mr Speaker, this year’s budget is either the ninth or tenth since we got the 1995 Constitution. I am sorry to observe that in all these nine to ten budget presentations, we have got promises, we have got proposals that are meant to bring recovery to the economy of this country. In all these promises, year in year out, this House is treated to a lot of rituals, to a lot of rhetoric that things are going to get better because of this and that; only to find that things are getting worse - if not worst.  

We have got a Government saying it has built hospitals, it has built health centers. But the question is, where are the drugs? And yet budgets are always providing money, which must buy drugs, drugs that must be in the health centers.  

Mr Speaker, roads. We were told by the President that so many roads have been opened up. In real sense, if you take a stop, if you walk throughout this country you will be dismayed, and you will be annoyed. The roads are so bad! It looks like nobody is caring and yet year in year out we get budgets.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE, COMMUNICATIONS (Mr Werikhe Kafabusa): I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. I do not know which roads hon. Okot is referring to. However, I believe when he travels from Kampala to Lira or even to Gulu, he travels on a very good road. When he talks about roads, there are many new roads that have actually been opened up and paved. The other day I gave out a list here, indicating roads in all regions. For example, Mutukula-Kyotera is about 45 kilometers; Nebbi-Arua up to Pakwach, that is a new, paved road; and Busia-Bugiri-Malaba is a road that has just been rehabilitated. These are examples. I do not know which roads he is talking about. Tirinyi-Iganga, is another road I can -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I respect my honourable colleague in charge of roads. Is it in order for him to tell this august House that Busia–Bugiri road has just been inaugurated and that it is wonderful, when he knows very well that the road is almost impassable? You know it very well. The one in front of my house. I have told you so many times about it. Is he in order to mislead us here when he has privately admitted to me that they are going to re-do the road because it is almost unusable? Are you in order, Mr Minister?

THE SPEAKER: If you are asking me to make a ruling on that point, I will have to visit the road first before I can make a ruling. (Laughter).

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the wise ruling. 

I just want to request my colleague on the Floor not to make a blanket claim, which is not substantiated. I gave out a list of roads that have been newly constructed, and even those that have been rehabilitated throughout the country. That is the information which I wanted to give. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Of course if you ask him for the roads he is talking about, he will name the ones you have not. However, the point is taken that some roads have been worked upon and perhaps others require repair.

MR OMODI OKOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minister should realize that his ministry is in charge of Uganda. So, if he knows of a good road in Mbale - which is his own area - a good road in Arua, and perhaps a good road in Rukungiri, that is not the rest of Uganda. I have got a trunk road in my area, which starts off at Aboke towards Icheme, to Gulu. This is a trunk road. It is blocked as we speak now. What can the Minister say about that? It is a trunk road, not a feeder road. You see! It is important that he understands that Ugandans want to be treated equally. There is no point thinking that Uganda is only a small area.  

Mr Speaker, I move on to education. University education is now a burden to very many people, and a fortune to a few who can afford it. What is all this? Where are we going? There are many universities scattered all around but what do Ugandans get from them? For those who cannot afford, they will sit and die without getting education. For those who can, it is their fortune.  

The UPE –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you very much, hon. Member of Parliament for giving way. Many statements have been made on education and during the last ten years, it is the education sector that has expanded optimally. (Applause). I do not think there is anybody who can deny that. When my colleague said earlier on that since the new Constitution we have had so many budgets and nothing seems to be coming up, I want to draw his attention to the expanding education sector.  

At basic primary level, such expansion had never been achieved anywhere in the countries of Africa. Within a period of six years the number of children going to school in the country has risen from 2.7 million to 7.3 million. 

And if I continue a little bit - because I know he will move on to other levels - we are now counting on 758 secondary schools that are government-aided. We have also moved on to four public universities right now. We have Makerere University, the traditional one to which many of us went, then Kyambogo for which you passed the resolution last week, Gulu University and Mbarara University. This is within a span of less than ten years. So, I think the problem now is how to handle the rapid expansion in the education sector. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, hon. Minister of Education and colleague. The member on the Floor talked of expensive university education, but I would like to hear from him on whether he wants to propose free university education before we get free secondary education. 

MR OMODI OKOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not talking about free university education because it is not attainable at all. What I am saying is, conditions should be put in place in the economy to make people get money so that they can afford to pay for certain services. That is one.  

The Government has also got to bear certain expenses. Take for example secondary education, even Universal Primary Education. The Government pays about Shs 5,000 per child per year and then parents are left with expenses of getting uniforms, getting exercise books, and all other things that come in over and above what the Government pays for this Universal Primary Education. So, it is an appeal I am trying to make to the Government. They should give us some concession so that we reach a point where parents can afford university education. 

At the moment getting accommodation for students in hostels, feeding them and even security, have become the problems of the parents. It is as if it is not the Government that should ensure the security of the learners.

Mr Speaker, I now want to say something about the budget before us. The mandatory 23 percent cut, which was instituted in the previous year’s budget has lived to undermine the integrity of the budget. It has negatively affected the transactions and operations of poverty eradication programmes. I am sure it has affected other areas as well. It is important that once a budget is passed, Government must ensure that implementation is carried out without interfering with what Parliament has come up with. This makes it very –(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Hon. Omodi Okot, of course I agree with you very much on budget discipline and sticking to the budget the way we pass it, otherwise why should we budget at all? But the good news is - that is why I appeal to all of you to ensure that the Public Finance and Accountability Act is followed. In that Act, I do not remember the section, Government will not make any re-allocation or any additional funding over and above what has been appropriated by Parliament, without coming back to Parliament. So, when they come here first, at least we shall have an agreed on position. That is the new law, which was effectively passed on the 1st of July. That is the good news.

MR OMODI OKOT: Thank you very much, Madam chairperson. That way the Government must ensure greater transparency and greater accountability in the public finance sector. This will make it possible for us to put to good use whatever little money we have. And maybe we shall not run short of money under the given budget. Coming back to Parliament to ask for more money will be easy and understandable. 

Mr Speaker, it is important that the Auditor-General also gets access the so-called classified accounts. This is especially so for the Ministry of Defence. We have lost a lot of money in various ways in this ministry, and it has gone on for long. So, the Ministry of Defence must also be made to prepare a budget, just like any other ministry, and subject –(Interruption)

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: I wish to thank my colleague holding the floor for giving way. I want to inform him that the Public Expenditure and Accountability Act, which we passed, has a specific provision for classified expenditure being audited by the Auditor-General. The Ministry of Finance is supposed, with effect from July this year, to issue guidelines on the operation and auditing of such classified accounts. I thank you.

MR OMODI OKOT: Thank you for that information. I want to say something briefly, about poverty reduction programmes. This has been the key phrase in the budget for a long time now. The sector needs to be allocated enough money, Mr Speaker. The question is: if every year we are allocating money for poverty reduction and we are not realizing any result, then what is wrong? Where is the money going? 

If we are to take the aggregate of poverty relevance for this year, I am talking about the area I represent in this House I want to inform you that people are now poorer than they were last year. Why, yet money has been spent on poverty eradication? Why is this? Are we failing to manage –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (INVESTMENT) (Mr Sam Kutesa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Once again, I would like to thank my honourable friend for giving way. The surveys that have been done all over Uganda show that the level of poverty, that is the number of people who survive on US $1, has fallen from 56 percent to 34 percent. Yes, that is what the survey that has been conducted shows. It may not be the average for one village, but it is certainly the average for the country. So, it is not correct to say that poverty reduction has not taken place. The surveys show a decline, and this is empirical evidence.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, before you continue, I have to remind you to wind up. I did not indicate the time to be taken by each member, but it should not be more than five minutes. Please, wind up.

MR OMODI OKOT: Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the Minister to tell this House the kind of sampling he took into account. Which area did he consider? Did they include Gulu, Pader and Apac? If you considered samples from Kampala and Ntungamo, there is bound to be some difference.  

Finally, Mr Speaker, I want to seek clarification from the Minister on one or two things. Article 152 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, on taxation, says; “No tax shall be imposed except under the authority of an Act of Parliament.” 

I want to know from the Minister whether commissions, local governments and other institutions are following this law. Because there is a general cry the country over that certain taxes are coming in, and they are proving to be a burden to people. So, I would like the Minister to clarify on that.

Two, I want the Minister to tell this House the total public debt of Uganda. 

I also want the Minister to inform this house the result of the total amount of money realized from privatisation since the whole exercise started up to today. I beg to support the budget speech.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Kabula County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the Budget Committee and the Ministry of Finance for the great job done. At least this time the Ministry of Finance has reduced the percentage of the budget that is donor-funded, from 52 percent to 48 percent. That is something good for the economy. You know that if you are funded inter-dependently for quite a long time, your programmes, which you budget for in time, are affected if you are not paid on time.  

Two, I would like to make an observation that the budget was good as regards taxation. Within an economy, capital transformation must come from derived savings from the local people. But you find that with Pay-As-You-Earn, it is double taxation. As local people want to save, you find that they are taxed Pay-As-You-Earn, and even the amount being saved is taxed. 

I would like the Minister to take this as a necessary case for revisiting income tax. Even the threshold, depending on the viabilities of our economy, is Shs 130,000. It has not been reviewed for the last seven years. So, this needs to be revisited, because the shilling is depreciating every time.  

My third point is about the finance sector. You find that in the Background to the Budget, on page 10, the Government is trying a lot to strategically intervene and reduce the interest rates, but the banks themselves have high charges. People deposit their money, but the money is being taxed. The Government must come in here, because this is the best way. Once you avoid that, people will run away from the costs of the bank, they will not keep their money in the bank and then the economy will be affected.

I would like to make another observation that as we really need an optimum level of intermediate business transactions and value-added production in exports, we also need to identify people who are involved in the export sector. For instance, it should have been the Ministry itself to identify people involved in cotton growing and then give them incentives, other than spending money on Cotton Development Authority structures, which have been run down. 

It is better for this money to be given as incentives to farmers who have been identified in production. With that, we will have more export earnings, and then maybe our foreign exchange earnings can grow and the depreciation of the shilling can be held at a certain rate. (Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: The honourable member has mentioned a very important point, which touches the central point of the economy of this country. The people referred to as the farmers now depend mostly on themselves. In a situation where Government has scrapped co-operatives, how can this assumption not be made?

MR KAKOOZA: This is why I am saying - maybe to clarify a bit better - that our budget now is into private sector-led growth. So, if a person is involved in farming on a large scale, instead of reviving the other structures and putting the money there, it should be given to these people who have been identified to do the job, so that the expansion of production in exports is attained. This is what I am saying.  

Another point, Mr Speaker, is that over concentration on tax is also causing unemployment yet we are fighting poverty. The criteria of increasing fuel costs and also the road license fees from Shs 90 to Shs 200 per c.c is going to affect most of the people in the transport sector. I would like to tell honourable colleagues in the House that in 1998 there was the highest increase in road licenses fees for all vehicles. But what happened? People failed to pay; they hid their vehicles in garages and started traveling at night. So you find that it has an effect. The more you lower the fee, the more people are going to afford to pay, and it will decrease the transport costs and the economy will achieve better results. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR SULAIMAN MADADA (Bbale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will begin by thanking the Minister for his budget speech, and the committee for the points made. 

I would like to start by commenting on the issue raised by the committee on page 6, point 24, which talks about Vision 2025. I know that planning a vision sets the focus for every country, and a country without a vision is a country in problems. If a country has a vision and it is not familiar to many stakeholders, this is a dangerous point. It took a lot of time to develop Vision 2025, but I have listened to many speeches made and this vision is not referred to. If through random sampling you talked to many Ugandans, including key policy makers, maybe many would not be able to interpret and articulate Vision 2025. 

Whatever we do in this country, to create a common agenda, to have a minimum agenda in this country, the issue of Vision 2025 must be given prominence. There should be a lot of education and a lot of reminders about this vision. It should not be a waste of time, because without this vision we shall have each of us pursuing his own agenda. I think that this is a very important point that should be looked at seriously.  

On the same page, in point 22, the committee commends the Government for its efforts of progressive reduction in public expenditure. One of the areas being mentioned is the reduction in the numbers of the Deputy RDCs. I think this is a commendable thing, but I would like to look at the criteria used, beyond population. 

It was mentioned that a district with less than 500,000 persons would not have a Deputy RDC. But we need to also look at the geographical settings of certain districts. If you went to Kayunga you would find so many kilometers bordering Apac, with very few people living there. Some districts are smaller in size but with a high population. So, you should look at other criteria also.  

Going to other issues raised in the budget, I would like to look at the measures of increasing the quality of the population, and I want to focus on education. I would like to look at primary and secondary education. I must commend government’s efforts of increasing the enrolment in the primary section. But you should also take caution: there should be a deliberate effort to sustain this number. I have done some research within my constituency and I have noted that this number is declining.  

When UPE had just started, there was a vigorous campaign to ensure that it is given a lot of prominence, so it should continue. And when you look at the ratio of pupils to teachers, it is reducing from 65 to one, to 54 to one. But let us also look at the even distribution. There may be more teachers in urban areas, but not in areas like my place in Bbale. I have about 40 primary schools with pupils preparing for primary leaving examinations. I was shocked that they could only raise 12 first grades in the whole constituency. When you analyse the situation, you realise that although the ratio of teachers to pupils is getting better, some constituencies still have a big problem. So, we need to look at that.

The other area that we need to look at seriously, as the number of pupils from primary to secondary schools increases, is the Government policy under the Education Strategic Investment Plan. It stated that in 2003 there would be one Government secondary school in every sub-county. I wish to say that when you read documents, they indicate that last year there was no secondary school that was grant-aided, because there was no provision for it. I am not sure whether in this budget this has been catered for. Worse still, there is the banning of recruitment of secondary teachers. This makes the situation worse.  

The education sector is a serious one. In my constituency for example, I have one government-aided secondary school although I have over 100,000 people in that place. To make matters worse, I have only four Government teachers in the secondary school, although the Ministry had recommended 12 teachers for each secondary school. You can imagine having four Government teachers in the whole constituency, yet there is still a ban on recruitment of secondary school teachers. 

I think we should seriously look at this area. Because we have more pupils coming from primary schools, we have to focus a lot on secondary education. So, this is a serious matter that should be looked at.

The last point I want to make, given the time limit, is about the hard-to-reach areas. I would like to learn from the Minister what criteria are being used in determining the hard-to-reach areas. When I was still Education Chairman of Mukono District, my constituency was referred to as the Karamoja of Buganda. Today, it is not part of the hard-to-reach areas. So, I would like to know what criteria there are, so that I am able to explain to my constituency why this area is not part of the hard-to-reach areas. Thank you very much.

MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank, immensely, the chairperson and her committee because they have made our work easier. The things that we have been talking about, especially in the last budgets, have been greatly addressed. However, I will concentrate on economic growth, and I will concentrate on the industrial growth because that is what I am more conversant with.  

In every economy, for an industry to grow there must be factors that facilitate its growth - and she has ably elaborated on some. But when you look at a country like Uganda, which is land-locked, we depend heavily on imported raw materials. And if you do not look at the railway sector, whatever you are doing is doomed to fail.  

Mr Speaker, the President clearly stated that the market of East Africa is clearly saturated. In other words, it has got an impact on the investors we get into East Africa, the quality and the quantity. This means that what we see as industrial growth within East Africa, all the investors we see running to Uganda, is just a mere re-allocation of investors from Kenya to Uganda. They follow good factors of production or tax incentives in the country, which gives them.

Mr Speaker, we saw some industrial growth in 1996, 1997 and 1998. There was an exodus of investors from Kenya coming to Uganda, and the reason was that there was political uncertainty across the boarder. But after a successful transfer of power to a new brand of leadership in Kenya, we are seeing the investors moving from this country and going to the other side. So, I do not think there is any industrial growth as I talk now. 

The reasons are: to get a container of raw materials from China to Mombasa takes only one month but to get one from Mombasa to Uganda takes two months, and yet we are fighting for the same market. Then why can I not transfer my industry to Kenya or to Mombasa? Why should I tie all my capital to the containers moving from Mombasa to Kampala? The Government must come out with a deliberate policy and invest in the railway network. There is no land-locked country that has ever developed without a railway network. It has never been there.  

Mr Speaker, I want also to comment on the interest rates in this country. (Interruption)    

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the member holding the Floor for giving way. The issue related to the operation of a railway system in a developing country, like Uganda, which is also land-locked, is a real issue that we must not abandon. The information I want to give the honourable member is that Government has not only abandoned plans of reviving the railway network, but in my own area, around Kabusu near Wankulukuku, the railway line itself has been totally dismantled. This has created room for assumption that the railway system will never operate again until doomsday.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you for that information -(Interruption)  

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (INVESTMENT) (Mr Sam Kutesa): Thank you, hon. Byabagambi for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to assure hon. Byabagambi that Government is as concerned, as you have rightly stated, about reconstructing the railway between Mombasa and Kampala. The way we are going to do it is to first of all have joint concessions between Uganda and Kenya, so that we have the same management. The studies that we now have show that if you do that, you will shorten the turn-round period, which has been a major concern in the movement of goods from Mombasa to Kampala.

The second thing is that we have been having a lot of non-tariff barriers, for example delays in customs, in clearing of goods and documentation.  This, we believe, is going to be eased with a common customs union, which we hope will be coming into effect in November of this year, under the East African Community.  

The other thing I want to say is that we hope that when we have joint concessions, then rather than have small wagons you can have block trains going straight from here to the coast and vice-versa. In this way, we hope we shall be able to deal with and alleviate the problem of delays, and also reduce the cost of doing business in Uganda. Thank you.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you for that information. Mr Speaker, I hope you will give me one more minute, because it has been consumed by the Minister. I wish the Minister would do this and save our President from going abroad, wooing investors to come here and they are frustrated and then they shift to the next country. In other words, we do the job for Kenya; and by the way Tanzania is also catching up at a very high rate, at the expense of Uganda.

For hon. Lukyamuzi, yes that is true but I want to thank the wanainchi, especially those in the North and in Iganga, for knowing the use of the slippers of the railways lines. This question of saying that they are stealing, they are not stealing but they are saving their money. The Government has failed to utilize them so let them take them, change them into heavy hoes and dig. I think they are doing a good job, so they should be commended for that. After waiting for 25 years, they are a waste on the ground.

Mr Speaker, I wanted to comment on the interest rates. I think the Government must learn the culture of paying back. They borrow from the banks, the private man also borrows from the same bank, but the private man pays back and the Government does not. That is why you find that the banks shoot up the interest rates, in order to catch up with the costs because the only performing loans are from the private sector. The Government is sitting on about Shs 260 billion, and they are not paying money back. 

Mr Speaker, since I am already caught up by time, I think I can stop here. Thank you very much.

MR MAURICE KAGIMU (Bukomansimbi County, Masaka):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all I would like to comment on the cost of airtime, which was increased. Perhaps the Government had a misconception that we misuse airtime, and that is why they increased the taxes on it. Airtime is already expensive, and I think it was not wise to increase taxes on it. Moreover, MTN charges are very unrealistic; whereas Celtel charges per second, MTN charges per minute. One time I remember the House talked about that, but MTN refused to consider it.

Mr Speaker, another point is about the taxes that were increased on petroleum products. As one colleague mentioned, if you increase the tax on fuel, of course everything else will increase. I do not see the rationale of reducing the tax on soft drinks while you are increasing fuel prices. Of course, it offsets the reduction you made; so I think every time Government wants quick money, it increases the tax on fuel.  

In our constituencies, people are poor. The businessmen of course push these taxes to the consumer and you find that our people are suffering. Things are very expensive; sugar prices are increasing everyday in our rural areas. The Minister should be kind enough to reduce the taxes on paraffin as well, because these are the things that are used by the local man in the villages. Our people use these small candles called “tadooba”, but still paraffin is expensive. (Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: I would like to thank hon. Kagimu for giving way. He is tackling a very important point, especially on the issue of sugar. Even the poorest people would require sugar in this country. Many of them substitute it for food, when they have no alternative. 

So, the information I want to give is that the issue of sugar has affected the people we represent to the extent to that as we speak now a kilo of sugar has shot up to Shs 1,600. Imagine, from Shs 1,100 to Shs 1,600! How much do these people earn? Government has already abandoned them. Government is no longer caring about the crops they used to grow, from where they used to get money. How do they survive? What is the Government up to? Why do you not take action now?

MR KAGIMU: Thank you very much, hon. Lukyamuzi.  Mr Speaker, the Minister should have the people at heart when he is drawing up his budget. He does not increase the prices of Mercedes Benzes and these luxurious cars, yet these are the things for which he should increase prices. These are rich people, but they are not taxed and you increase tax on fuel for the poor man!  

In some countries, Mr Speaker, there are some special petrol stations for rich people, where the rich people go, and they find it prestigious to do that. Hon. Kutesa would be very willing to go to such petrol stations. So, the Minister should categorize.   

When you listen to the budget, the Minister does not have the people at heart. For example, at least taxes should be reduced on things like matchboxes, because these are things our people need; they are very essential. Hon. Lukyamuzi talked about sugar. Sugar is a luxury; some people take sugar once in three months, but people still need to take sugar. 

Let me stress the issue of soda. Reducing taxes on sodas is useless. Soda is a luxurious good. Let the Minister reduce taxes on these essential goods that affect our people. 

There is this issue of tendering the collection of graduated tax. I think this should be abolished because people are being treated like animals in our constituencies. People are bundled on Pick-ups. When they see a vehicle approaching, they run away thinking that the tax people have come. People are brutalized when taxes are being collected. This should be abolished. 

Our people depend on coffee, they grow cotton and you know that cotton is seasonal. At least the taxes should be collected at the end of July. But now the coffee is not yet dry and the people are being harassed. They are being chased like animals. It is terrible! They are being tied with ropes. The tax collectors come even at night; they have started collecting taxes at night. They are going to even start getting people from ceremonies. Mr Speaker, this is terrible!

The President promised the Shs 3,000 graduated tax, but in my constituency it has never appeared. (Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable member that we could request this august House to request the Minister of Local Government to change their timetable of collection of graduated tax. Initially they were going by the calendar year, normally starting with January to December, and that is when they started enforcing the taxes in April. But now they are going with the financial year of the Government, which starts on July 1st.  

I want to support my honourable colleague; the Minister of Local Government should implore the local governments to change their calendars so that they conform to the financial years. Then we shall also be able to accommodate the coffee, which normally ripens around June, and other crops like maize.

MR KAGIMU: Thank you very much honourable member for that serious information. Unfortunately, the Minister of Local Government has gone away, but I will follow that up.  

Mr Speaker, the Minister talked about roads, but the roads are bad! Maybe I will invite you to my constituency, honourable minister. Take the road from Kyabakuza to Matete and to the constituency of hon. Kutesa, that road is bad. It has not been repaired. I thank you because the one from Bukalasa to Sembabule has been repaired. It is murram but at least it is okay. But other roads are bad. 

During the debate of the President’s speech, you were saying 2,000 kilometres are being tarmacked, 4,000 are being tarmacked; the Government is very good at figures, but -(Interruption)  

THE MINISTER OF STATE, COMMUNICATIONS (Mr Micheal Werikhe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Kagimu for giving way. The one that was done was actually ours as a ministry. The one that is not done belongs to the district administration. So, we have played our part and perhaps you should consult with the district administration to do the other part.

MR KAGIMU: Thank you very much. I consulted them but they say there is no money. They always say there is no money from Government, but for other things there is money -(Laughter)- I may step on people’s toes if I mention them. 

Mr Speaker, there is the question of graders. I think more graders should be put at district level for our constituencies. Once in a while they could allocate a grader to about five constituencies, or six or even ten. Then I will know that in Masaka at least there is a grader, and I can go and ask for that grader to come and work on the roads in our constituency. The roads are really in a very bad shape. But –(Interruption)

MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Kagimu once again. Really, it is the policy of the Government to have a road unit in every district. However, we have regional centres that have some equipment, which is available to any member. In fact, we even issued a circular one time to all district leaders. If there is need for any equipment that is available, even honourable members can access this equipment at regional centres for use in various districts and constituencies.  

So, the policy is, every district should get a road unit. In addition to that, we still have equipment at regional centres for use by all of us. This is the information I wanted to give you.  

MR KAGIMU: Thank you very much. I will take advantage of that. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to talk about Government debts. When you deal with government, it does not pay. If it pays, it takes very long to do so. I suggest that it is high time Government started paying interest on its debts. If for example Government owes me money, then it should pay interest because I borrow money from the bank. I borrow money from the bank, supply Government with goods or something, and then Government does not pay on time, and the bank harasses me. The bank harasses me, but the Government is there sitting on the money and it brings you problems and you go to court. 

Another thing is that, if I owe URA taxes and Government owes me money, then URA should offset that debt from the money that Government owes me. You find that URA harasses me, I go to Government and Government does not pay, they send me to so and so. The bureaucracy! I now hate dealing with Government in business, because it is really frustrating, unless I have a big man behind me. Someone told me that with a big man behind you, they pay you easily. Otherwise, they can take four years to pay. For example, one time Government took four years to pay –(Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER: Try to wind up.

MR KAGIMU: Lastly, I would like to stress that graduated tax was abolished in Kenya and Tanzania. Why do we not abolish it too? There are many ways of getting money. There are so many taxes - operation tax, income tax - but this poor man in the village, who can hardly get Shs 10,000 in a year, is taxed. Why do they really not abolish that tax? 

First of all, this tax is more expensive even to collect. At one time I am going to prepare a paper on it. I will prepare a paper for Parliament to show, first of all, that this tax is very expensive to maintain. We get very little from it, and you find –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, are you aware that graduated tax belongs to districts?

MR KAGIMU: But, Mr Speaker, we have the power to sanction everything. Even at the district we can pull the strings. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the Minister of Finance. In the budget speech he talked about establishing industrial zones for exports, I would like clarification on the location of these industrial areas. Where are they going to be? Are they going to be put in places like Mayuge for cassava, Nsinze in Busiki for oranges, or they are going to be put in a given place? Will they be located in Kampala and Jinja? I would like to get that clarification.

In addition, I would like the Minister of Finance to be a bit careful with the tax holiday of ten years for the investors. In the last five or so years we have had people come in, masquerading as genuine, yet they were “briefcase” investors. They will put up structures but continue importing items for sale, and then claim the items are actually from the factory. So, I would like the Minister of Finance to be a bit more serious and aggressive; and monitor these people. Otherwise, people will take advantage and masquerade as investors and we shall loose revenue.  

The other issue is about roads. When you look at the budget speech, Item 56, the Minister talks about having worked on so many access roads, and I think he has a programme for working on many more. However, I would like to observe that there are some other districts that have been left out, I think unfairly. 

First of all, I would like to look at a district like Mayuge. There is no road equipment there, and you did not provide for it since it is a new district. You gave others, which already had. Here is a district that only has 17 kilometres of road, and when you look at other places like the North, Shs 10 billion has been provided to open up about 6,000 kilometres or so! 

I would like the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Transport and Communications to add us more kilometers. About a quarter of the roads are actually known as access roads by these ministries, but we have about 56 kilometres leading to the landing sites. So, let Mayuge, with that disadvantage, have road equipment and have more roads so that we open up to other economically potential areas.                 

Another issue is something to do with service providers, which is mentioned on page 14. It says that Shs 15 billion has been put aside for salary increments. My concern here is about teachers. In the previous financial year teachers had several riots. The teachers were up in arms, fighting for an increment. The Minister of Finance is not clear now; has there been any increment in the teacher’s salaries? There is a very big disparity between the head teachers and teachers, and I hear, the teachers are planning to go on strike under their new teachers’ union.   

So, let the Minister of Finance assure the House that something has been added, because I see here Shs 15 billion, but no details. Is there any increment for a simple secondary school or primary school teacher?

The other issue was about the promotion of the mineral sector. Last time I was giving information that in as far as this is concerned, we have several minerals and that the Ministry of Energy should be a little more serious. According to researchers, there is gold in Butamira, Busoga College Mwiri and South Busoga. So, I am just making an appeal - and I would be willing to give information to the Minister - let us take more exploration measures in order to exploit these minerals. Since the President was talking of putting up a refinery at Entebbe, in his speech to the nation, let us take advantage of that.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I would like to comment on honey in as far as the exports of Uganda are concerned. In his speech, the Minister talked of the need to improve on the market, infrastructure and skills we have. What is our policy in as far as honey is concerned? In Bunya East I have several farmers who do not have the skills of harvesting honey. They have the hives around but they are actually very ignorant about harvesting. 

Could we get a policy and a way forward on how we are going to harness all this honey in places like Buyugu and other places in Mayuge? Mr Speaker, I beg to stop here. Thank you.

DR MATOVU BYATIKE (Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to start by thanking the committee for the report. I think among the many sensible recommendations or comments they have made, the one on page 22, under the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry stands out very clearly. It says that, “The committee notes that the sector is not accorded the priority it deserves, given its strategic nature.” 

I think that is a very sensible comment, because this ministry deserves a core status. If we are going to be serious, this ministry should be among the core ministries. 

Mr Speaker, how are we going to add value to the farmer’s produce, under the modernized farming programme? How are we going to do that without industry - if we are not putting enough emphasis on industry? We must develop industries. We have to graduate from being perpetually raw material producers to finished goods industrialists. I think this calls for a special status for this ministry.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, Uganda’s beauty must be exploited by boosting tourism. I know it is doing very well but we have to do better. How are we going to do this unless we do better at marketing Uganda as a tourist country? This calls again for the emphasis that we have to put in this ministry, or in this sector –(Interruption)

MRS KAVUMA: Thank you very much for giving way. I would like to emphasize the tourism industry, starting with the areas that are secure. We have got areas like Sese Islands, where there is no insecurity, but I wonder whether any official from the Ministry of Tourism has even bothered to visit the place. There is no infrastructure to develop the place at all. The ferry to the island does not have fuel, as I speak now. So, how will we get the people there? 

I really feel that instead of concentrating on places where the rebels are, there are areas that are secure, and which should be looked at a little more seriously. Thank you.

DR MATOVU: Thank you for the information. Mr Speaker, I was still putting emphasis on the issue of trade. How are we, as a country, going to benefit from the World Trade Organization if we do not put enough emphasis and resources into the trade sector? How are we going to top there, if we do not have enough emphasis? We do not appreciate that a sector with a maximum of three people as representatives of the country at the World Trade Organization, to attend over 12 committees, is a bit too much; and it does not show seriousness of our country as far as this organization is concerned! We really have to do better than that if we are going to develop our trade sector, tourism and so on, globally.

How do we massively mobilize and encourage the civil society to participate in development and expansion of trade unless we appreciate the importance of the sector and allocate enough money to this particular ministry? How are we going to do that?  

Finally, I think the committee’s recommendation to re-allocate AGOA and the Investment Authority to the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry is a step in the right direction. But let this be accompanied by corresponding enthusiasm first, and the resources second. If we are going to achieve the desired goals, let these two go to their new premises with the enthusiasm and the resources they have been enjoying wherever they are. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA (Bulamogi county, Kamuli): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by saying that transforming the economy of Uganda into a modern economy requires organisation. If you are going to talk about an economy at all, it means all the sectors should be organised and living. When something is living, it is organised. When something is dead, it is disorganised. When something is dying, it is losing its capacity to function normally. 

When the chairperson is winding up, I will request her to tell us how we are fairing in organising this economy. At the moment, if I look at the cotton sub-sector, which is supposedly the flagship of AGOA, it really shows that we are not serious; that we are disorganised. In fact, we are hurting the farmers because they are working so hard and yet the roads are not accessible, and cotton seeds do not get to the people. 

The peasant farmers are begging for seeds, but the seeds do not arrive. Are we running an organised economy or a disorganised economy? This is something which I think is hurting us. I beg the Ministry of Finance and other officials to take it seriously. Organise seminars at the grassroots so that the people see where the opportunities are. It is not enough for us to just talk about the budget here. It is necessary for the Ministers to go to the grassroots and tell the people that there is this opportunity in this section. If this is not done, it is impossible for us to achieve the goal of Vision 2025. 

The second point I would like to make is; I have heard people saying that the cost of administration is very high. For sure, Mr Speaker, Kakira Sugar Works is only a quarter of a Gombolola in Jinja District. It produces something like Shs 460 billion, of which only Shs 46 million comes to the Government of Uganda. But the cost of administering that establishment is also quite enormous; it might be even bigger than the Shs 46 billion which it is giving to the Government of Uganda. 

I am talking about 20,000 acres of land allocated to Kakira Sugar Works; and it uses that piece of land to produce sugar. And Wambuzi, who is clamouring for 200 acres from a district, compared to Kakira, which has 20,000 acres, is being told, “That is rubbish, you cannot organize yourself.” No, it is possible for us to revisit primary production! 

I think it is possible for the cost of administration of a district to be realized if we peg the productivity of a district to our conditional grants. If the district is not producing and is not capable of producing, then it should not be given district status. But I am saying that the district of Kaliro, which has been asked for, is possible and is viable. It could also grow through one crop – cotton - which we are being stopped from growing. It is only Bulamogi in Busoga which is currently producing cotton seriously, and we are being told not to produce by Kamuli District. 

The seeds have been wasted, the ready money has been squandered; what shall we do? Teachers are being stopped from teaching because they are not receiving their salary. So many primary schools are not coded. They are grass-thatched, as though there is no SFG! Whom shall we cry to, Mr Speaker? This is something which I have put forward. I have cried my voice hoarse about it. The Minister of Education knows, but everybody is looking the other way. Are we part of Uganda? Where shall we run to, after all we are in the middle of Uganda?  

Mr Speaker, the road sector money for feeder roads is also being squandered. For most of the districts, particularly Kamuli District, 80 percent of the funds for roads have been squandered. What shall we do, if the people have decided that that is the way things are to be done? When I come here and say, “You give me my district, I will be able to organise and pay these people”, you say, “no”. But where shall we go? Life cannot go on like this. We have to become organized.  

Mr Speaker, let us go to the health sector. You say that you are to build a Health Centre IV and a sub-district hospital, but there are no roads in these places. Even the contractors would not be able to access these areas. The money for roads has been squandered. The contractors will ask for claims, and say that they could not access the areas, yet you promised them that the roads would be there. Where are we going? Let us get organized.  

Mr Speaker, the story goes on in the agriculture sector. The key job of any government is to act as a catalyst. The government’s job is not really to produce, as we are doing now with privatisation. The government’s job is to become a good catalyst; to go into a situation and cause people to start producing. I think we would like the Government to continue with the job of causing that catalyst effect, and cause people to produce honey and other things.  

Mr Speaker, the time you have allocated to me is very short, but I have got a lot that I could actually say. I would like to conclude by urging that roads must be pegged to productivity of an area. If an area is very productive, it should get priority in getting road services, so that the goods can be lifted out in time. I thank you for according me this time.

MRS SARAH NYOMBI (Ntenjeru North, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start off by thanking the Budget Committee for coming up with such a good report. They tackled most of the issues, and I would like to start with agriculture. 

On page 3 of the budget speech, it is mentioned that we did not achieve the target we had estimated on our GDP. This was on account of the deterioration in climate conditions, relative to the very good conditions that prevailed in 2001/2002. On that note, the committee recommends that the Agricultural Strategic Investment Plan should pay attention to soil fertility and irrigation as key ingredients in agricultural production. 

I would like to know, since we had good conditions in 2001/2002, what has been done in the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture to tap that God-given water, which we have in plenty now? Do we really have a plan within our Plan for the Modernisation of Agriculture, for tapping this water to be used in irrigation schemes ahead? That is a question I would like answered. 

Some information I would like to give on this sector is that Kayunga District, Ntenjeru North constituency especially, has been -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, FISHERIES (Dr Fabius Byaruhanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. The Plan for the Modernisation of Agriculture is an old document. It is almost three years old, and I hope you have got a copy. 

In that document, unfortunately, when it comes to irrigation, it talks of capacity building for small-scale irrigation. This was so because our development partners insisted that irrigation is capital intensive. But it is good that people have began to see that it is not possible to carry on with agriculture without irrigation; that talking about modernisation of agriculture without harnessing water is no talk at all. 

This is the difference between Africa and Asia. The so-called green revolution escaped us because in Asia, 40 percent of their land is under irrigation, and yet in Africa, only one percent of our land is under irrigation. So, I hope that you, honourable members, will bring all your force to bear on us, the Government, and our development partners to understand that you cannot have modern agriculture without irrigation. Thank you very much.

MRS NYOMBI: Thank you, honourable minister. I pledge that we will do that, as you have asked for it. 

Mr Speaker, I want to bring to the attention of the Minister of Agriculture to Kayunga District as a whole, and Ntenjeru North constituency in particular. We have been hit hard by the banana wilt and the coffee wilt. I, therefore, beg that the technical team for research on that wilt should continue to go to Ntenjeru North. They visited a few places, but now it has hit the whole constituency. I beg that instead of supplying coffee - I had taken clonal coffee and it has dried up too - we could be given vanilla vines. I would be grateful.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I would like to give information to the Minister of Internal Affairs. I really commend Police for its improved efficiency. However, I would like to raise one issue regarding traffic police. I think it is erroneous to treat traffic offenders as hard-core criminals. 

Some people who commit minor offences like driving a car with a cracked screen or a shattered window screen and the papers are off, are held and handcuffed. Mr Minister, maybe you are not aware, but handcuffing a traffic offender, I believe is really not necessary. I believe some traffic offenders should attract caution instead of filling prison cells. The law may not be harsh, but the iron-hand method of implementation should be checked for improved handling of cases. That was the information.

Thirdly, rural electrification was clarified by the Budget Committee, but I would like to bring it up.  The major problem hindering development in most areas is electricity. I would like to pick out one example. I have a sub-county called Busana sub-county; there is no electricity and you cannot expect any development from such an area.  

Therefore, I appeal to the Minister of Energy to really consider rural electrification as a key priority. Advance it further to get to all areas, so that we can be really considered. Busana sub-county has three health centres with a theatre, which cannot operate, and we cannot move. So, I really wish to have that also taken care of.

Lastly, I would like to know from the Minister of Finance whether it is possible to negotiate with service providers on airtime and fuel providers, petrol stations. It is right to tax, but let those service providers not shift it to the consumer.  Let them reduce their profits. You should negotiate for that increase to really affect their profits, because they really make money out of us. The tax increase is okay, it is commendable, but how could you negotiate for those service providers not to shift the burden on the consumers. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

MR LULE MAWIYA (Kalungu County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the Minister for the Budget. I want to thank the chairperson of the committee for those concerns she articulated.  

Mr Speaker, I have just a few comments to make here. The first one goes to the Minister in charge of Investments. What criteria do you use in allowing these investors into the country? We have very many Chinese and very many Indians who are here under the guise of investment, but they end up selling pancakes, like in her constituency down here. We have very many in Kikuubo who end up in kiosks. What is your criteria? Our people are harassed when they try to access other countries to do business. What criteria do we use? Don’t we have any, or we just abandon them?  

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I want to -(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Thank you very much for giving way, honourable member. I take advantage of the hon. Minister for Internal Affairs being here. I think we need to strengthen our immigration laws because some of these people come in under different criteria, they are given work permits and nobody knows what they are coming to do. They are not given investment licenses, they are not investors but they are causal labourers. How do they get in?  Why are they doing jobs that can be done by Ugandans? This is for the Minister of Internal Affairs.

MR KAKOOZA: Maybe I can take advantage too because the Minister in charge of Investments is here. Most of the problems in investment is because the monitoring system - what they come to do, how much they have invested here - is still a bit poor.  I have been working with some companies, but after getting a tax holiday for five years, you find that what they have done is nothing. They have taken advantage of the exemption and run away. So, we need the monitoring system to be strengthened so that we come up with the right people to invest here.

MR SAM KUTESA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable member holding the Floor for giving way. We have an effective and vigorous monitoring department in Uganda Investment Authority (UIA), and they make monthly reports of projects that they have licensed. 

Initially when you get an investment license, you tell us how many jobs you are going to create and how much money you are going to invest, and then you are licensed; sometimes you are even given land by Uganda Investment Authority.  So, we pursue you to see if you have created those jobs. We pursue you to see if you have brought in that level of investment. If you have not, your license is liable to cancellation. 

So, I do not think that the people you have seen selling pancakes come in with investment licenses. They probably come in to work for some businessmen here, and when they get here they disappear. Somehow they remain in the country, and I agree that we need to tighten the mechanism on how they come in and how they get out.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Minister for giving way. On that questionnaire, the type of jobs are well elaborated - skilled, non-skilled, professional e.t.c.  

The clarification I want from you, Mr Minister, is, really do we need workers like waiters in hotels - like the Indians whom I saw at Speke Hotel serving me food - or gatekeepers at Mukwano Industries? I do not know whether you have got that team which goes on investigating to see whether the laws are implemented or not. That is what I want to know from you, Mr Minister.

MR KUTESA: If I may just answer this specifically, I think there is no way we can give a work permit to a waiter. What does happen, and I think we must all face the reality, is that they are brought in under the cover of something else. Someone may be compromised and allows them in.  

But as far as I know, the original purpose of the investment authority was that it was supposed to be a one-stop centre. They help to obtain work permits for people who have invested. That is why they ask you, in their form, the type of people you need, provided they are not available in the country. 

The board of UIA has also got a member of the immigration board on its board, for the purpose of facilitating and hastening acquisition of work permits. What I know is that they do not give a work permit for a waiter, for example. Someone says I need three engineers with such a degree and maybe says they have this particular specialization in this particular industry, and those you bring in. 

For example, I know that we may have hotel managers from the hotel industry in Kenya, like we have managers in the banking industry here. If you go to these foreign banks here, you find that Kenyans dominate management jobs in Standard Chartered Bank, Barclays Bank, in whatever. It is true that these people have had more professional development than we have for those categories of professionals, and we have already allowed them to come in. 

But we do not bring in waiters, maybe hotel managers. Or possibly the waiters pose as hotel managers for purposes of passing through immigration.

THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you. To supplement the information given by the hon. Minister of State for Finance, actually some of those people lose the jobs for which they got our work permits, and then they hide around and get those cheap waiter’s jobs. My appeal to you is that all citizens of Uganda should be vigilant so that if they see anybody, a foreigner, doing a job that they are not expected to be doing, let the authorities know. That way, some of these people who are loitering around can be dealt with. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR LULE MAWIYA: Thank you, honourable members for supplementing my point. So, honourable ministers, you see how serious it is. We need to do our homework.

The second point I want to comment about is tax on polythene bags. It was during the previous session, I remember, when we actually increased the tax on polythene bags. But we have to be clear on this because while increasing this tax, we categorized the polythene bags. Some are being used for packaging things like bread and sugar, and others are used as carrier bags. I think our major emphasis was the carrier bags which are being disposed of anyhow.  

But I want to discourage the misuse of tax methods. As we apply the tax method, therefore, we have to think of alternative bags, say using paper. I mean all of us actually travel abroad and even in developed countries a polythene bag is being used; but how it is disposed of should be the question. So, what is Government’s policy on polythene disposal? Government needs to address this seriously.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, members have commented on poverty, which is actually eating away at us; it is eating away at the people seriously. Government has tried to do its best through the various interventions like UPE. UPE is doing better, it is doing well and I appreciate it. I commend its functionality, but I want to comment on one programme which was abandoned. I do not know whether you have reclaimed it. This is the SFG programme.  

In many schools you find that there are classrooms or buildings that were constructed under SFG, but have been abandoned. When you go there they tell you that the programme is abandoned. All this was government’s money, so why do we tackle another programme, or go to another programme when the one we started off is still hanging? We should actually address this.

However, I want to question the agriculture money.  Where is the agriculture money going? Year in, year out we budget money for the agricultural sector. Where this money ends up, we do not know, because we do not see the results. Where are the results from the money that goes into the agricultural sector? Our people are being drained day after day.  We who represent these people in the countryside know that people are completely poor. They cannot afford to buy fuel of just Shs 1,000. So, we have a lot of work to do on this. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether we will continue with this tomorrow. We can still continue on Monday, so Members should not worry. I will definitely give you a chance to contribute, because tomorrow we shall be here. If you do not want to be here on Friday, then you surrender Monday so that we continue on Monday. 

I can let you go today then we reconvene on Monday afternoon. That is up to you, but according to the programme I have from the Business Committee we should sit today then again tomorrow. Okay then, I will adjourn to Monday afternoon instead of tomorrow. 

MRS RUTH KAVUMA (Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Budget Committee for looking at all these sectors. I have a few comments.   

One of the comments I have is actually about the Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries Ministry. What has worried me about the comments from the Budget Committee and recommendation on agriculture? It is focusing on irrigation and all those things in the whole of this department, but saying nothing at all about boosting the fisheries industry. We have actually been told that our exports of fish are bringing in a lot of money but the fishermen, the people who are producing it; how they produce it is not catered for.  

In fact, at one time we had a comment that the fishermen are just chasing the fish. You know, we are just wild hunting the fish and bringing in a lot of money. So, something should be done about the industry to improve it at least, so that we get an industry in Kalangala where a lot of fish is produced. We are told, when we ask for money to help in the district, that we cannot raise the revenue for the district. The comment we get is that the people of Kalangala are only 30,000 and that the district may even disappear. But when you think how much the 30,000 people are putting into the revenue of this country, it is a lot. We should think about a way of supplementing what they are doing and supporting them in a special way, and not just think about issues of numbers when we are looking at this.  

This actually takes me to the sector of education. Almost every village is an island in Kalangala District, but we have a Government policy on boarding primary and secondary schools that does not consider this. This means that the islanders would have to transport their children on water every day, morning and evening, including the fact that they may have to use motorized boats, whose fuel price has gone up. When we assess education levels in the district, the people of Kalangala are not even studying. 

A good number of the schools, with so much money put in, are actually empty. When we advocate for those geographically difficult-to-reach areas to have boarding schools instead of a secondary school per Gombolola, what will happen? I mean, the numbers are just not there. You build a school in an area yet there is one that is already there but there are almost no pupils in that –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mrs Bitamazire Namirembe): Thank you very much my colleague for giving way. Mr Speaker, boarding schools were phased out, as a policy of government. Where we now have boarding schools, the parents and any other individuals manage the boarding component. That is because when you look at the cost of maintaining boarding schools on the part of Government, it is high. We would not have the number of schools we have today if we had maintained the policy.

Therefore, I would like to inform my colleague on the Floor that her case would be a review of the policy, because that was phased out a long time ago. What we are trying to put in place now are day, affordable, secondary schools. So, if there are special areas like Kalangala, then it would be a review of that policy. Right now, as the Ministry of Education and indeed the Government is trying to improve access in a general framework, we should soon get into the details of where we can review the policy and probably consider a boarding school.  

There is a suggestion, which is being floated around, that we can float the boarding element for any investor. Ugandans who would like to run the boarding school element in schools might be interested in such a scheme. So, Mr Speaker, the information I am giving is that the policy was phased out. The focus is now on putting up as many secondary schools as possible, and to have day schools where our children can access secondary education.

Those other isolated and hard-to-reach areas will be accommodated in a review that will be done in future, and that includes Kalangala. I thank you.

MRS KAVUMA: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I really wanted to hear that, and hear it a little louder because I have been pleading for this. 

My other concern is the fact that schools are built, with so much money put in, and you only get five pupils to go there. When we say that every sub-county should get a school of its own, that becomes a bit of a problem. 

Mr Speaker, I would also like to comment on the Works Department –(Interruption)

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I want clarification from the hon. Minister of Education. The member has mentioned schools where there could be about five pupils. In the recent past, the Ministry of Education had come up with a policy of multi-grade teaching that would cater for special areas that are not densely populated. I do not know what happened to that policy, which was sponsored by the World Bank, or something like that. Thank you. I want that clarification.

MRS BITAMAZIRE NAMIREMBE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable member. I would like to inform Parliament that the multi-grade teaching methodology is in Kalangala and Kalangala only, but at primary level. 

Secondly, probably I should add that Serwanga Lwanga Secondary School is one of the best schools in this country, and it is operating in Kalangala. But as I said earlier on, the policy might be reviewed probably regarding boarding schools, but multi-grade is already there and we are very proud of the progress. Thank you.

MRS KAVUMA: Thank you very much. I would like to actually comment that I said five pupils, in the whole school. That is, ranging from primary 1 to primary 7. So, even multi-grade teaching does not increase the numbers as such. It is a bit helpful, but it does not do much.  

I would also like to comment about the Ministry of Works. I am very worried about the promised steamer. Nothing has been mentioned about it. Yes, it is being worked on, we are told, but I feel that once we do not mention it properly in our policy statements, it will disappear from our list somehow. We requested –(Interruption) (Mr Werikhe rose_).

THE SPEAKER: Let her finish, if you think you have to answer, then you will answer.

MRS KAVUMA: We also requested that as political leaders we should be involved in the process of knowing the acquisition of the steamer and so on. But up to now we are completely lost. As political leaders, we have no report on it. In fact, one of the comments I have heard recently from my people when I was talking to them, they said, “You are waiting for 2006 and you start telling us about the steamer,” yet I am not in the know about it. 

Then, we are very grateful that we have a ferry but this ferry quite often does not have enough fuel. We need to know: is it to be privatized so that we fend for ourselves as the people of Kalangala? Is Masaka still managing us? Are we a fully-fledged district or do we still have to be managed by some other people? As I speak now, there is no fuel and we cannot travel to the island. There is no steamer and no fuel, only very dangerous motorized canoes, which are not properly monitored by the Ministry of Works. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, COMMUNICATIONS (Mr Werikhe Kafabusa): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague from Kalangala. While procuring the Kalangala ship, during the process of opening the bids, colleagues were invited. I remember hon. Tim Lwanga attended, he is a Member of Parliament. So, Members of Parliament were invited. It is unfortunate that perhaps my colleague was not available, but at least the information was passed on. 

This was to show that the process was beginning, even a constructor has been identified, and the process has started. So, what we can do is to keep colleagues informed as to where we are and how we are actually progressing. However, the process is underway and I believe my colleague has been informed. She is aware, of course this is between her and me, but we have always actually discussed this. We envisage this process to be over by early next year, so we will keep our colleagues informed.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I thank you very much for your contributions. As we have agreed, we have to adjust the programme drawn by the Business Committee so that I give you Friday off. We shall continue with the debate on Monday afternoon, so the House is adjourned to Monday afternoon to continue with the debate.

(The House rose at 5.39 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 7 July 2003 at 2.00 p.m.)



