Thursday, 4 July 2002

(Parliament met at 2.12p.m. in Parliament House.)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, on Sunday, 30 June 2002, Brazil and German were the World Cup finalists in Japan, and Brazil won the match. The following day, 1 July 2002, the Parliamentary Football Team also had a match with the youth of Uganda at Wakiso, and our team was victorious. I therefore think that it is something we should be proud of. 

It is also necessary that we support our team in as many ways as possible so that it can perhaps participate in the national super league. I congratulate our team for making us proud.

Another issue is that we intend to have youth programmes in future so that the youth of this country can come here and see what we do. That way, when they become leaders they will know what to do too. 

Today we have guests in the Gallery, from a school in Kampala. You are welcome by the Members of this House.

On the Order Paper, item three was repeated. There is therefore need to correct it. I am also expecting another statement from the Minister of Foreign Affairs, although I do not know whether he is here yet. Meanwhile let us hear the first statement from the Minister of Defence.

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, on March 12 this year, I made a statement to Parliament explaining why there had been a delay in presenting to Parliament a comprehensive bill for an act to regulate the Uganda People’s Defence Forces as stipulated in Article 210 of the Constitution. In that statement I notified you that the Ministry of Defence had already started the process of producing this comprehensive bill. 

I reported that a draft of the bill, covering the whole of Article 210, paragraphs (a) to (d), had already been prepared and was going through a process of consultation in the Ministry of Defence.

In the statement I further notified Members that everything was being done to ensure that the bill is tabled before Parliament as soon as possible. I informed you that at the meeting of the Army Council held from February 12 to 15 2002, I directed the army leadership to expedite the process of consultation so as to enable me table this bill. 

I pointed out that before the presentation of the bill before Parliament, we depend on the conclusion of consultations in the ministry and Cabinet, as you know. For that matter it was not possible for me to indicate the date when I would present this bill.

I wish to inform the House that I have not been able, up to now, to present this bill before Parliament. Reason being that the process of consultation within the ministry has taken longer than had originally been envisaged. The process involves debate of the draft bill by officers and men of the UPDF in the units, which of course represents a fundamental departure from the practice before this Movement Government came into power, and when some of my colleagues in this House were in charge of public affairs.

Most of the units of the UPDF not based in the operational areas have already submitted their views on the draft bill. Members of the army policy organs with views contrary or supplementary to those contained in the bill have also responded.  

Aware of my undertaking to present this bill before Parliament, and cognisant of the necessity for the law proposed in the bill, a meeting of the High Command and the Army Council was convened last Tuesday and yesterday, respectively, to finalise the draft. I am happy to report to Parliament that the Army Council adopted the bill yesterday. I will present this to Cabinet for consideration and adoption. 

As soon as the above processes have been completed, I will of course table it before Parliament. I therefore beg the indulgence of the House and I would like to once again assure you Members, that everything is being done to ensure that this bill for an act to regulate the UPDF under the Constitution is tabled before Parliament as soon as possible.

Government gains absolutely nothing in the delay of the passage of this law and is most keen to present it. But this can only be done after due consideration and involvement of all the stakeholders. Knowing the keenness of Parliament to debate this law, I intend to continue - like I am doing today - to keep Parliament updated on the progress this bill is making. Thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a more-or-less elucidatory remark. I appreciate what the hon. Minister of Defence has said, that consultations have been going on for a long time, especially of soldiers, officers of UPDF and finally yesterday the approval of the document, which is subject to further examination by the Cabinet and other authorities.  

About 14 days ago, however, the same ministry came up with a document called, “Ministry of Defence Reform 1,2,3”. I would like to know from the hon. Minister, this document that was presented by the Commander in Chief as part of the reform process in the Ministry of Defence, is it consistent with the forthcoming army bill? Is it a departure from what we requested for in this House? Is it a new law? Will the hon. Minister give this House this bill before we debate the vote or are we going to assume we shall debate the two separately?

On a serious note, for the hon. Minister to come here and tell us, “I am not ready, I will come back again,” is totally superfluous. He could have just kept quiet and came next year with the bill.

MR JOHNSON MALINGA:  Mr Speaker, I am rising on a matter of procedure concerning the state of affairs in our country. I remember a week ago there was – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: We are dealing with the Minister’s statement.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament. I would like to get clarification from the Minister of Defence. From his submission, the bill will be out very soon. We want to know the framework. When exactly does he envisage the bill to come out? 

My colleague here has rightly put it that there is soon to be a debate on the vote on account of the Ministry of Defence. How are we going to debate that vote when we actually do not know the framework within which the ministry is operating? We would like to at least be given a date as to when the bill will be presented to Parliament. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification on whether the people called Gombolola Internal Security Officers (GISO) will be incorporated in the bill that the Minister is proposing? If not, I am very interested in knowing where the GISO exactly fall. Are they being monitored? At the moment I am having more problems with their performance than with any other security officers in the country.

THE SPEAKER: You see hon. Members, we cannot know the contents of the bill because there are stages through which a bill has to pass. 

First of all, he has to report to the Cabinet. It is the Cabinet that will determine the principles pertaining to that bill. When it comes to us, we shall know the contents and then if you are not satisfied, you will be free to amend and inject in anything that you want. Otherwise, we cannot go into the details now because we will be going against the rules. That would be anticipation. Perhaps what you should ask him is, “when are you bringing the bill?”

It is the Minister to bring us the bill, it is up to him to decide the contents, but we may or may not agree with him. I think the important thing here is to know when he is going to do this. Your concern in this matter has been going on and on, it was even an issue in the 6th Parliament. What you should ask for is when the bill is coming to the House. As for what will be there, definitely you will have to wait and see. In any case you have a right to improve on the bill.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I join colleagues to express concern about the form of briefing advanced by the Minister of Defence. As we speak now, news has spread that the UPDF has been deployed unofficially in Kenya. 

On a more serious note, many sons and daughters of Uganda have lost their lives because of the absence of this law, which we are trying to urge government to put in place. In view of the seriousness of the matter, and noting that even up to now as we speak UPDF is still in Congo because of lack of that enabling law that should negate Article 210(d) of the Constitution, I would like to propose that we do not dispose of this matter until the Minister of Defence, in specific terms, lets us know when the bill will get here. Otherwise you are creating a situation where you are using the delays to ensure that you deploy the forces unabated, and we cannot tolerate this.

MR OMODO OKOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is the Minister aware that his long delay in bringing to this Parliament a proposal to enact Article 210 of the Constitution is causing a lot of problems? We have cases where soldiers have gone on rampage, killing people, sometimes robbing them of their money, and at times getting involved in things that are really bad for this country. We would like to know whether he is aware that this delay is causing problems to this country. 

Two; can he explain to us, in a precise way, what he has done to control organisations like Kalangala Action Plan, which is terrorising people all over the country by use of guns? That is all. Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I wish to thank the colleagues who have raised these issues. It gives me an opportunity to explain in greater detail some of the things, which we have perhaps not explained sufficiently in the past. 

Hon. Awori correctly observes that the President recently launched the Defence Review process, which will lead to defence reform and this time we are talking about real reform. He goes on to ask the question, “is the draft bill, which we are talking about, consistent with the idea of reforming our defence policy, and will the bill await the resolution of that process?”  

Mr Speaker, I take this opportunity once again to inform my colleagues that indeed, we have launched the Defence Policy Review process. In fact, only this morning, I opened a seminar entitled “South to South Security Sector Transformations” in which we exchanged views about this process with our colleagues from South Africa, Mozambique, Botswana, Tanzania, and a number of other countries that had either reformed their militaries or are planning to do so. 

The process of reviewing the defence policy has started in earnest. Our expectation, as I said, - I think my colleague said in a statement here on the issue hon. Awori referred to - it is expected to last between 9 - 18 months. It is at the end of that process that we will be able to embark on a reform based on positions that we will have arrived at through this review process. It is my expectation that if we are to carry out reform, and very fundamental reform, we may need to look at the law because there is no way we can reform our defence policy without affecting the law.  

Of course, I can understand the logic of hon. Awori that we should wait for 18 months before we present this bill so that we see whether we need to take into account the results of the process we have started or not. Our view is different. We think we will present this bill to Parliament to pass the law, and if at the end of the 18 months there is need to amend the law, we will amend it. The two are not inconsistent. To say that I should not keep - this was a suggestion from hon. Aggrey Awori, that I should not keep Parliament updated on the process of making this bill, is taken note of. But I think I will not accept the proposal because I know Parliament, as everyone has clearly indicated, has very deep interest in this bill, and would like to keep pace with the preparations for it. 

Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba asked, ‘when will the bill come out, what framework do I have, and can I give at least a date? Well, he is asking a question which I answered in the statement I made today and the one I made last time. I am not in position to give you a date. The reason is that we have to go through the process of Cabinet going through it. We look at the principles first and then the Cabinet gives instructions to the Attorney General who in turn asks the First Parliamentary Counsel draftsman or woman to draft a bill. It goes back to the Cabinet to see that indeed it reflects the principles that were passed by Cabinet. After that stage, it is gazetted, and then I will present it here.

I can only assure you that we are very much interested in going through this process with speed as anyone else is. I have said today, and I said last time, that actually we are interested in bringing this law because there are lots of problems we are facing in managing our defence policy, which we need to tackle through legislation. So, we are very keen to present this bill to Parliament, and as soon as I have a date, I have no reason to hold back.

Hon. Wambuzi asked about GISO and ISO, whether they are covered under the bill. I think the Speaker, responded and clarified that point. I can only say that there is a Security Organisations Act passed by this Parliament, which handles ISO and other intelligence organisations. So, maybe if you look at it you will find the answer to the questions.

Hon. Lukyamuzi raised what others had raised and, of course, he presented a rumour, which he termed as news that UPDF is now illegally deployed in Kenya. Well, he was only repeating what the Monitor newspaper said in the headlines today. Can I take this opportunity to inform the House and the country that this is not true! No UPDF soldiers have crossed into Kenya at all. Therefore, the question of UPDF being deployed in Kenya or stealing cows from Kenya does not arise because it is not true. 

He also raised a point which has been raised by him and his few friends in the House about lack of an enabling law, and I think that is what hon. Okot Omodi was talking about too. But who said there is no law? There is a law that regulates the recruitment and management of UPDF. I have said this many times, but obviously I will need to say it each time I stand up so that those who raise it maybe will be satisfied that the law exist (Interruption).

MR LUKYAMUZI: Through you, Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the Minister of Defence that in accordance with Article 210(d), no one may deploy UPDF outside Uganda without the consent of Parliament. On a number of occasions, Parliament has expressed concern as to why the UPDF should be deployed in the Congo without its consent. We have never consented that UPDF be in Congo! So, it is in the Congo because Government is saying the enabling law has not come into force. When it comes into force Parliament should be able to pronounce itself accordingly. That is the information I am giving to the Minister.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, again as usual, the same question, the same answer. Article 210 says, “Parliament shall pass a law regulating the Uganda People’s Defence Forces, and in particular, providing for- (d) the deployment of troops outside Uganda.” Well, our level of understanding of English and interpretation, especially of the Constitution, of course, is different. So, I cannot hold my brother Ken Lukyamuzi - I should not make that comment (Laughter). But the Constitution is clear. 

“Parliament shall make laws regulating the Uganda People’s Defence Forces, and in particular, providing for- (d) the deployment of troops outside Uganda.” 

So, what we are trying to do is precisely to present a bill to do this. And I said in the statement that, that bill covers everything from (a) to (d) of Article 210 of the Constitution. But I was saying that, of course, there is a law. There is the NRA Statute, as you know, and this was saved by the same Constitution, and it is what applies.

Hon. Omodi Okot presents a theory that it is because of the delay in the presentation of this bill that soldiers have been killing people. Well, soldiers have been killing people whom we have authorised them to kill. We have authorised our soldiers to kill people whom they are meant to kill –(Interruptions)- ADF and other terrorists who have been terrorising the population.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the hon. Minister for Defence that in my district 10 days ago, UPDF - I do not know under what section of the law - killed somebody because he jumped a roadblock. That is not authority for UPDF to shoot an unarmed person!

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I had not received that information and I will seek further and better particulars from my colleague, hon. Aggrey Awori. But of course, when people jump a roadblock, you know exactly who they may be.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, with your permission, I would like to inform the hon. Minister on the Floor that the information I gave should have been known to him, that more than 25 soldiers ambushed this innocent fellow. When I say, he jumped a roadblock, actually it was purported to be a roadblock. There was no sign whatsoever. And after the murder of that particular person, the Ministry of Defence came up with a series of allegations against the person. So, it is murder aforethought.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, Mr Speaker, of course, we still have these elements that represent the old traditions -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Clarification.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I am simply saying to hon. Aggrey Awori that old habits die hard. I did not give him the Floor but nevertheless he seized it and spoke. 

Our soldiers have strictly been acting according to the law. If they have killed anyone like they have done in some places, it has been against those who have been bearing arms against the Constitution. That is all they have been doing. I am not aware that UPDF has been going around killing people at any rate. Of course, we have cases where some soldiers have acted in breach of the law and committed crimes. A case in point is what I presented and explained to you here. The question of the murder of Father O’toole in Karamoja. You remember that very well. As usual, consistent with the discipline of the UPDF, the leadership of the UPDF moved very fast against those who were alleged to have committed that crime and this was under the law, as it exists. I am saying this just to make the point to hon. Omodi Okot and others that actually we have a law in place, the NRA Statute, which controls and regulates the behaviour of the UPDF. The code of conduct is very well known and we act very firmly and swiftly whenever anyone acts in breach of it. 

There was another point raised by hon. Omodi Okot asking me how we propose to control Kalangala Action Plan. Well, Kalangala Action Plan is not part of Defence, and I am not even aware at all that there is a reason for linking it up with Defence. I know that Kalangala Action Plan is a pressure group that has come up to do some political work. Maybe I am not the one to answer this. But I have no doubt in my mind that there is no reason to link it up with Defence.

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr Speaker, I would like the Minister of Defence to clarify whether this Defence Bill has also accommodated the LDUs, because, apparently, there is no law regulating the functions of LDUs. So, I would like to know it from the Minister of Defence whether LDUs have been catered for and whether they belong to the Ministry of Defence or to the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I want to inform the House that the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Defence and other relevant departments of Government are in the process of consultation on how to harmonise and streamline the management of the various forces which exist including the LDUs, vigilantes, home guards and so on.  As soon as this process has been completed, I am sure the Minister of Internal Affairs will inform the House about the progress we have made and the proposals that we will come up with. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE, REGIONAL CO-OPERATION (COL. KAHINDA OTAFIIRE): Mr Speaker, hon. Members of this august House will recall the historic declaration adopted at the fourth extraordinary session of the OAU assembly in Sirte, the great socialist people’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, on 9th September 1999. 

By that declaration, the OAU heads of state and government decided to establish an African Union. This is in conformity with the ultimate objectives of the Charter of the Organisation of African Unity, and in order to accelerate the process of implementing the treaty establishing the African Economic Community, so as to rapidly promote the socio-economic development of Africa and to face more effectively the challenges posed by globalisation.  

Following the Sirte extraordinary session of the OAU assembly, the OAU summit held in Togo adopted a Constitutive Act of the African Union on 11 July 2000.  

The Constitutive Act spells inter-alia broad objectives of the African Union, principles of its functioning and its main organs.  

Subsequent to the Togo Summit, the Lusaka Summit of last year adopted another milestone decision on the establishment of the African Union during this year’s summit.

Since Lusaka, a series of inter-governmental expert and ministerial meetings have been held under the auspices of the OAU to elaborate further on structure, composition, powers and functions of the key organs of the African Union namely: the assembly, the executive council, the permanent representative committee and the commission.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs organised a seminar on the implementation of the Lusaka decision on the African Union on 28 February 2000 at the ministry boardroom. The chairman of the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee of Parliament was among the dignitaries invited to the seminar as a leading resource person.

This meeting elaborated Uganda’s position and contribution to the establishment of the African Union. The position adopted was articulated at the meeting of the OAU council of ministers, which took place in Addis-Ababa on 12 March 2002.  

The launching of the African Union by the assembly of heads of state and government is scheduled to take place in Durban, South Africa from 8 to 10 July 2002.  

Several meetings were scheduled to precede the Durban Summit namely: 

· The session of the committee of ambassadors: 28 - 30 June 2000. 

• The extra-ordinary session of the council of ministers: 1 - 3 July 2002. This was to discuss the draft rules of procedure of the four main organs of the AU, incorporation of the mechanism for conflict prevention, management and resolution in the AU, and establishment of a security organ of the union.  

• The ordinary session of the council: 4 - 6 July. Discussions will focus on the political issues on the continent, including the situation in the DRC, Madagascar, Comoro, Burundi and Sierra Leone as well as the question pertaining to Palestine.  

• The summit on 8  - 10 July 2002 will consider the report of the council of ministers. The launching of the African Union is scheduled for Tuesday, 9 July 2002.

The African Union that will be launched will be a much larger organisation in the content of its functions with 17 institutions against the current five for the OAU. It is, however, being envisaged that the union will become fully operational in phases. 

During the initial phase, only the following institutions will be established: the assembly of the union, the executive council, the commission and the permanent representative committee.  

The launching of the African Union is a major landmark in the evolution of the Pan African’s dream and visions of the African people. It is therefore very important that we in Uganda, and especially we as elected representatives of the people, not only celebrate the launch but also actively and positively participate in promoting the ideas for which it is being launched. 

I will soon make available to every Member of the House a copy of the Constitutive Act of the African Union. I strongly urge you to carefully study it and offer contributions to make this new union a reality, not only in spirit but also in content, for the benefit of the people of Africa. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You will forgive me if I do not seem to understand, but as a member of the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs, I am finding it very strange to appreciate the method of work that is becoming a standard practice in this House. I think my colleagues with who I serve with on the committee concur with me that we are also hearing about some of these things for the first time. 

The committee has been very keen in supporting the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in its various activities, but the method of work is consistently degenerating into just conversation. It is degenerating into conversation because we are not able to have an in-put into the matters that are being discussed. 

For all of us to be told that there was a seminar next door which was attended by the chairman on our behalf, as if the rest of the committee was not there! I believe there should be an expert team that knows what is happening in Government, at times that can defend what is being brought to the Floor. I begin to imagine that the Parliament of Uganda has no relevance whatsoever to the matters of the union that are going on in the continent. Whenever we ask for information, there is no information coming from there. 

I wonder about the purpose of the communication. If it is for our information, I want to thank the Minister. I want to thank him for giving us that information. But if it is for purposes of partnership between the two arms of Government, I think, Mr Speaker, you need to guide us in this session on how we will proceed to do justice in our oversight role.  

I know the rule is that we should not discuss what he has said, but then what? Why are we here? He should have sent it to the pigeonholes and we would have read it, if we can do nothing really (Applause). I feel cheated; I feel the people of Bugabula South are cheated because this information is not available. Money is being spent and I cannot explain of what benefit it will be.  

We have been talking about consultation. The people will be consulted on every small thing about their governance. I believe that if the people of Bugabula South were too far to be consulted, at least my colleagues in this House and I should have been told and consulted on the matter so that we are in the know. We are in the leadership together. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I am just responding to your call for guidance from the Chair. From your contribution, you identified yourself as a member of the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee. I imagine this subject falls under that particular committee, and this House expects the committee dealing with presidential and foreign affairs to deal with that matter and to come and brief us on this. 

If there is a problem with a sector falling under you, it is for the committee to come here and say it is having a problem in dealing with that sector and then the House will act on that report. Otherwise, this House cannot generally deal with sectors. It deals with reports from the committees.  

What we have been told is that the chairperson was in the know. I will say that this is a matter of the African Union, which we have not heard about from the committee. I received a letter recently from one of the Speakers, and I am surprised that the statement has not mentioned anything about the role of Parliament in this African Union (Applause).  

According to the Constitutive Act, which I have just seen because we have never been availed with this information, there will be organs of the African Union. There must be a change, we are not just changing a name from OAU to African Union; there must be a substantial change. 

One of the changes is to involve Parliament in the African Union. As a result, among the organs of the union, there is something called the Pan African Parliament. I received communication on that matter because a few Parliaments had ratified the protocol on Pan African Parliaments. I asked, “What is this, and who is supposed to move Parliaments to ratify?” 

I think this statement has been made to inform us of an important event in Africa, namely an African union, but how it has been handled here or elsewhere is the question. 

To respond again to what hon. Salaamu Musumba said, that the whole statement does not attract a debate, according to our new rules, you can debate a statement from a minister.  

MAJ. JOHN KAZOORA: Thank you, Sir, and I would like to appreciate your explanation and the contribution by hon. Salaamu Musumba because you have made me understand what the Minister was reading on the Floor of the House  (Laughter).  I even asked my hon. colleagues here and we were not following.  

As you rightly said, Mr Speaker, in our new rules we said that every ministerial statement would be debated. I would assume that these statements should be circulated to the members either before or during the time they are presenting. How do they expect us to follow? I cannot remember a paragraph, I cannot even remember a sentence on what he said, and yet I am supposed to contribute. Is it possible in future to have those statements circulated to us?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think that does not present any problem.

DR JAMES NSABA BUTURO (Bufumbira East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. May I take the opportunity to associate myself particularly with the remarks made by hon. Musumba, to the effect that it has to be the culture of this Government and our country as a whole to see to it that matters of importance of this nature are debated in the House.  I do recall the events surrounding the World Trade Organisation, which were not properly debated in this House. There are other events that the House should have participated in and that never happened. 

I cannot recall being a resource person - (Laughter)- as the minister has suggested. If I had been a resource person, I would have had the privilege to notify my colleagues on the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee that such an event took place.  

Having said that, I think the Minister is raising a very important matter of fundamental importance to our country. It is, therefore, essential that this House has sufficient time to debate the matter of the African Union.  My concern, as we prepare to debate it when you give us time, is that the lack of commitment in matters of this importance tends to weaken a very important subject as the African Union is meant to be.  

Can I, therefore, say that as my colleagues and I may have the opportunity to debate the matter, the House will also be given ample time to look at the subject so that together as Parliamentarians, we are able to support Government in what clearly is a very important matter. I hope the ministers concerned and all of us generally will commit ourselves to this. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Through a point of procedure, I wish to appeal to this House. What we have just seen happening now within the Committee of Presidential and Foreign Affairs is a symptom of a method of work that is creeping into our various sessional committees. Many chairpersons of committees have taken it upon themselves to transact business with Government organs on behalf of their committees without involving members of the committees. This not only –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, when you say that what you have seen today shows a problem in the sessional committees, what do you mean? The Minister made a statement and said that the chairperson of the committee was a resource person in a seminar. The chairperson has told you that it is not true. I do not think it will be a fair statement to say that what you have seen is evidence of what is happening in committees when nothing that you have to act on has happened.  

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, in the last session of Parliament, I was a member of the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee, and hon. Nsaba Buturo was my chairperson. Equally, hon. Otafire is a Minister of State in Foreign Affairs, within the jurisdiction of that committee. Today, hon. Otafire stated clearly on the Floor of the House that my former chairperson was a resource person. My chairperson has denied it. May I know who is telling the truth?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this will tantamount to having a trial to establish the truth. I do not think that at the moment we can be able to pronounce on that unless we set up other machinery to dig this up. Let us hear from the Minister, please.

COL OTAFIRE: Mr Speaker, I duly sympathise with sentiments expressed by hon. Salaamu Musumba, and I agree with Chairman, Nsaba Buturo. But we have a problem. We seem to try to invent the wheel when it was invented before by some other people.

Parliament has been an on-going institution. This matter has not just come up today or yesterday; it has been an on-going affair. It was handled by the Sixth Parliament, where hon. Nsaba Buturo was not chairman of any committee –(Interjections)- I am saying that there was a chairman, not necessarily hon. Nsaba Buturo (Laughter). The chairperson at that time was a resource person at this seminar. Government goes on; there is continuity! I cannot say this man was not a chairman. So, hon. Nsaba Buturo is correct in disclaiming responsibility, so is Salaamu Musumba.  

Our team at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has made it a habit to try to engage Parliament wherever we feel there is a matter we are handling that is of importance. We normally do it through the chairman of the committee, because we cannot relate to the whole committee. 

The current chairman, Dr Nsaba Buturo, will affirm that on many occasions he sought consultation, and we sought consultation with him. We have invited him for discussions and sometimes a friendly chat. I do not think we have a problem with hon. Nsaba Buturo, the session chairman.

Unfortunately, for the purpose of this statement, you do not have a sessional committee at the moment. You are in the process of forming the sessional committees, and the African Union is a matter that is going to take place very soon. I may not have an opportunity to come here to talk to you before this event. Therefore, I have had to do it without consulting the relevant chairman, not because I do not respect the chairman and the committee, but because the institution is not yet in place. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we really do not have much to say on this matter. I can only say that this is an important subject in respect of which Parliament should have been briefed long time ago, but it was not. 

Since we are setting up these committees, I request the Minister of Foreign Affairs to find some time to meet the committee and give necessary details about this matter. The committee will then come and give us a comprehensive report on all structures, including the Pan-African Parliament where you will be expected to send five members. So, we need a detailed briefing.  

We have only been served with this statement to inform us that on 9th OAU will cease to exist and we shall have an African Union. Let us end this issue here.

MR AWORI: I would like to seek your guidance, Mr Speaker, on a general matter of statements from the ministers, not necessarily the previous topic.  

In light of the changed Rules of Procedure whereby these statements are now debatable, wouldn’t it be proper that these statements are submitted to you in advance and only statements with an emergency nature come here directly, so that we do not have this issue coming up from time to time? Only emergency statements shall come to Parliament. Other than that, they should be submitted to your office.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see any objection to that. That is a proper way of handling issues. In the past, the Speaker has been getting a copy, but as you have said, since all of us will be participating in the debate, it is necessary that sufficient copies are available so that members can study the statement and be able to make useful contributions on the matter. Generally, this statement has ended.

MR KALULE SSENGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have my own fears, which I think the hon. Minister will assist me to allay. We are now talking of the African Union, but then we have not gone far with our East African Community. Are we not really trying to build a storeyed building when we have not even put the first brick? Can we be assured by the hon. Minister that this arrangement is not going to affect the East African Union? The Customs Union has not yet been effected, now we are talking of the African Union. I really shudder at the way we are doing things –(Interruption)
 
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the East African Community came after the OAU. This African Union is just coming to replace an organisation that has been in existence since 1964 or so. What you are talking about is a regional arrangement; this is a continental arrangement. It is just a replacement of something that has been in existence. There is no way we can really stop the other OAU functioning and replacement. I think that is what is happening.

MR MALINGA JOHNSON: Mr Speaker, I am rising to seek your guidance on an issue of national importance. This is the issue of illegal immigrants who have encroached on the wetlands and the forest reserves of Kaberamaido, Soroti and Kumi. 

You remember a week ago a meeting was held in Soroti Flying School between the leaders of Teso and the National Political Commissar. The people of Teso and the people of Uganda at large were promised that the Government would come up with a statement today on the position of these illegal settlers on the wetlands. You also remember very well that yesterday the Leader of Government Business, the Right hon. Prime Minister clearly stated that this august House would be informed on a Government position about the pastoralists today or tomorrow. 

You are aware, Mr Speaker, that in our normal programme, we do not transact business on Friday. This would give us another four or five days to come. As a peace lover and a concerned citizen of this country, I would like to appeal to you to re-consider the Order Paper so that this House is allowed to take a position on the issue of the encroachers on the wetlands of the mentioned areas. 

There are a number of threats that we shall be held responsible for if this issue is not treated urgently. For example, the pastoralists who are now in Agu have all promised to commit suicide if Government does not come up with an immediate position. I do not know what we shall tell the people of Uganda and the world at large if these people decided to commit suicide today because Government has decided to take a position – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: They will be arrested before they commit suicide. Hon. Members, if somebody threatens to commit suicide and you get to know of it, definitely you can arrest him so that he does not commit suicide. It is true, and I think hon. Malinga knows, that yesterday the leaders of the Teso group met me and discussed this matter and they wanted to make a statement. It was resolved that we have a subsequent meeting this morning to find out what is happening. 

This morning before I went for the meeting of Environmental Ministers I met one of the leaders. We discussed this matter and he was connected to the Prime Minister. He was informed and he left my office satisfied that some agreement had been reached. I did not want to give the details. The details I know about that are that the Rt. hon. First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Internal Affairs was supposed to make a statement today. What transpired between your leader and the Prime Minister was that this statement is going to be made on Tuesday. 

According to the rules, to have a motion of adjournment to discuss the matter provides that the Speaker will allow such a motion, but will have to consider whether the matter will be considered to have an immediate action taken. Now I am satisfied that on Tuesday, a statement will have to be made to deal with that particular issue. Therefore, I will ask the Prime Minister to confirm whether that is the position.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I confirm that on Tuesday the First Deputy Premier and Minister of Internal Affairs will make a comprehensive statement. May I also add that whereas this matter is very urgent, it is intricate. It is important that we take measured steps to tackle it comprehensively. 

As I told hon. Members, when I chaired Cabinet yesterday, we spent a lot of time on this matter, and today significant stakeholders have been met and it would have been imprudent to give you a statement which has not been well analysed and articulated. I thank you.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I confess that I consulted with you and the Prime Minister over the matter in question. The urgency of the matter is based on the threats of mass suicide. Even after consultations with you and the Prime Minister, I have continued to get overwhelming telephone calls about the deplorable situation of the settlers in my constituency. There are about 220 people who have settled in that wetland threatening mass suicide. May I know how far government has gone in trying to avert the situation? Otherwise, I would rise to move under rule 42, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I did not read the rule when I was explaining, but I was conversant with it. The probability of the matter being brought before the House within a reasonable time by other means, that is, if you want to move this one, I have to consider the other. And we have been told by other means that there will be a statement, which will attract our debate. So, with this condition here, that is why I think we have agreed. I did not want to mention you, but the impression you gave me was that we hold on, and I went away. You know that the Speaker should never be caught by surprise. If you have to move any motion, you have to inform him so that he is in the know, and this is the understanding I had with you. You discussed with the Prime Minister and you informed him that it was okay. So, I think let us wait until Tuesday when we will get a statement. 

For those who have threatened to commit suicide, I think the authorities have heard and they should take appropriate action.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARTLIAMENT ON TUESDAY 11TH JUNE 2002

(Debate Continued.)

THE SPEAKER: I think we shall follow the order of yesterday. The people who were on the Floor were hon. Lukyamuzi, hon. Ruhindi, hon. Nkuuhe, in that order. We will give you opportunity too. But that is the order of yesterday, and we agreed on seven minutes.  

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Rubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. If the Head of State gives a speech in the form of the state of the nation address, who am I to be negative about such a speech? So, on the strength of that, I would like to thank the President for giving a speech, which was precise, far from the speeches we have had in recent years.  

I would like to draw the attention of the hon. Members to page one of the presentation. The President expresses pleasure that Uganda is registering the economic growth of 5.6 per cent.  However, he laments that there is no cause for jubilation, ‘things are bad’. I repeat, ‘things are bad’. Why are things bad, Mr Speaker? Things are bad because there are no indicators of positivity to justify jubilation. People are very poor, as poor as a rat, which sleeps in a church. 

Noting that our good President has also observed that there is poverty on the ground much as the figures are showing some positivity, I would like to propose that we assist the President to implement his manifesto. When he was looking for votes he said the least graduated tax people should pay is Shs3,000. That tax is possible, and even hon. Bidandi Ssali has supported us. So the people who have no registered employment should pay Shs3,000 so that they are easily identified and survive the humiliation of being taken away in the panda gari arrangement. I am sure that this proposal should begin and that it will also begin from Rubaga South (Interruption). Mr Speaker, unless time is going to be taken into consideration, I do not entertain any -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Philip Byaruhanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you hon. Lukyamuzi for giving way. I just want to give you information that the statutory instruments in respect to the minimum for those not in gainful employment of Shs3,000 has been effected. It has been communicated to all local governments including Kampala City Council. Thank you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Now that you have talked through the Speaker, I would like to declare that from now onwards, this tax is authentic, it is legal and no body should be harassed, especially, if you have no registered employment you can not fail to go through relatives and pay the Shs3,000 so that you move freely. And starting from Rubaga South, those people stand warned that they should not harass my people.

Mr Speaker, I will not entertain information because –(Interjections)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, HOUSING (Capt. Francis Babu): Thank you very much, hon. Lukyamuzi, for giving way. As a man who has reached a level of appointing an LC I, hon. Lukyamuzi knows very well that the LC II are the ones who carry out evaluation for the graduated tax. And in his area there are people who are evaluating these taxes. If somebody qualify for that, you will get the evaluation of Shs3,000. Thank you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: I am surprised that the whole Minister for Housing does not know that LC II have not been constituted (Laughter).   

I am confining myself to two notions namely, security and good governance. The President said in his speech that the Political Organisations Act (POA) has already been assented to. I would like to pray upon the President to re-examine that decision. That law is as bad as the apartheid laws in South Africa. It is legal but lacks the legitimacy of society. If things are good, how come up to now the POA has not been gazetted? It is nearly two weeks since it was ratified, but people are reluctant to gazette it. Why?  -Because there is a question mark about that law. 

So, Mr Speaker, I would like to make some appeal -(Interruption)

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, hon. Lukyamuzi, for giving way. I would like to clarify that the delay in gazetting the Political Organisations Act is not because of sinister reasons. There are good reasons for it. Even if the Act were to have been gazetted, its implementation would be a problem. I think hon. Members know very well that there are certain things which must be in place before the Act is operationalised, and you are the ones who enacted that particular law. In other words, there are no sinister reasons for delaying the gazetting of the Act.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Obliged, Mr Speaker. The learned Attorney General has provoked me. If there are problems still in the offing, why do you not open political space so that we activate it? 

The other observation is about security. I am surprised that a whole President of this country, who I greatly respect and love joyously, –(Laughter)- could say openly that he cannot talk to Kony because Kony cuts off people’s noses and lips. When President Museveni was talking to Lutwa in 1985, he was also seen as Satan. So, I would like to know whether our President only talks to angels. 

When there is a crisis, you forget whether one has sanctity or not. There is need to make a sacrifice so that you talk to Satan in order to get a solution eventually. I would like to propose and to urge Government with humility that there is need to talk to Kony because he has submitted that he is willing to talk to the Government of Uganda. It is not sound for anyone to dismiss dialogue at a round table. Countries are in crises all over the world and whenever there is an opportunity for someone to be talked to, they have done so. You look a fool when you say you cannot talk to that fool. 

Above all, Mr Speaker, -(Interruption)- The bell has gone and I am about to wind up. Mr Speaker, is it by coincidence that when the President says that I am not talking to Kony, he is also reluctant to talk to the political party leaders? For 17 years, I have been making noise in Rubaga South that our good President finds time to collectively talk to the political party leaders. We are not satanic in our ways. We are a liberated people interested in talking and exploring opportunity of coming to a compromise. So, I urge the President to find time to talk to Kony and to the political parties.

Lastly, I am giving a very humble warning. It is derived from the Constitution of Uganda. As I speak now, we are talking about poverty and insecurity. There is nobody who can decisively move ahead under any circumstances for as long as we are still in the present quagmire of insecurity.  I submit that this quagmire of insecurity is state managed and inspired because of this quotation, and this is the quotation on which I am going to end. It is Article 107(1)(b)(ii) and Article 210(d). 

Government has completely failed to put in place a law, which can stop the UPDF from being deployed outside Uganda and it is using the opportunity of delay to ensure that they deploy unabated, and the Government has not given us any explanation. I am going to read these two quotations. 

One, UPDF may not be deployed outside Uganda without the consent of Parliament. We have never consented that you deploy the forces outside Uganda and you are using that opportunity to deploy in darkness so that we cannot check you. How much money we are spending, I cannot mention. Our Budget on Defence is so astronomical. How do you expect to get out of the poverty quagmire when you spend –(Laughter)- and spend without any controls?

The other quotation, Mr Speaker, is Article 107(1)(2)(b). This quotation, when I read it, you will be amazed. We have been very lenient. I am going to read it but before I do so, I want to say something. 

Parliament recently passed a resolution to stop Government from selling UCB. On the strength of the Presidency, Mutebile went ahead to sell the bank. We can use the Article I am going to quote to move a vote of no confidence in the Presidency –(Laughter)- because the President, according to our law, cannot be dragged to court. So the alternative is to use this and get rid of him (Laughter). The article says: 

“107. The President may be removed from office in accordance with this Article on any of the following grounds-

(b)(ii) that he or she has dishonestly done any act or omission which is prejudicial or inimical to the economy or security of Uganda.” 

There are two ingredients. One, deliberately delaying the defence law which deploys the Army and two, selling off all the parastatals so that people become poor and poorer. You can apply this and get rid of the man. Thank you very much (Laughter).

MR FRED RUHINDI (Nakawa, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Can I be protected?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, proceed, please.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I rise to support the motion moved by hon. Ruzindana, and also to thank him for a very good analysis of the speech made by the President on the state of the nation. It, indeed, gave us the springboard for this debate.

I would like to first talk about doing business then I talk about good governance. In terms of doing business in Uganda as elaborated in the speech by the President, there are key areas I would like to focus on. The first one is the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture (PMA). I stand to be guided and to seek clarification from the relevant Minister whether this plan adequately covers the marketing strategy for our agricultural produce. 

Secondly, I would also like to pinpoint the conflicting areas of our policies in a bid to modernise agriculture. We are all aware of the provisions of the Land Act as far as holding land is concerned. We know very well that a foreigner, for instance, cannot hold land in Uganda purely for agricultural purposes. A foreigner can own land in his home up to 99 years. I have never seen the magic about the years of 99, 49, but the key element I am trying to emphasise is, when you look at the Land Act in contrary distinction with the investment code. You will note that a foreigner can only own agricultural land if, for instance, he proves that he owns a procession plant which, say, produces tomato ketchup and he is not getting a steady supply of tomatoes from the peasants, then he can ask for land to grow his own tomatoes and feed the plant. But if we are talking about modernising agriculture, and you disallow foreigners from, for instance, owning land to produce at an extensive level say, beans, pineapples, mangoes, then certainly there is a contradiction. 

We need to review our policies to make sure that modernisation of agriculture takes full effect. The Government does not actually encourage even the out-growers schemes.

There is also an alarming level of outcry about micro-finance regulations and how micro-finance permeates in our society. You will agree with me -(Interruption)  

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to be clarified on the issue the hon. Member said about foreigners not owning land. There are four forms of land ownership, one of which is through leasing and people can lease land up to 99 or so years in Uganda. I know there are so many foreigners who have such leased land in Uganda and they are in the process of production. I seek clarification about which investor wishes to invest in Uganda and own land other than in the stated forms before he puts the investment. 

MR RUHINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do not think it is appropriate for me to go through all the systems of land holding in Uganda, and I do not actually have the relevant laws here with me. Whether you are a foreign investor or a foreigner, you cannot own land in freehold in Uganda, according to the Land Act, 1998. You get a lease, Mr Speaker. In terms of accessing that lease, you can only access if you only prove - and this is in the Investment Code - that you have failed to access the necessary raw materials from, say, peasants, and you want land to grow your own to feed your plant; that is the law. But this actually negates the basis of modernising agriculture. I am calling upon the relevant Ministry to review this position to make sure that better laws are put in place that will promote modernisation of agriculture.

I was, Mr Speaker, talking about micro-finance: I would like to urge the relevant Ministries to think about putting in place what we normally call equity funds. The problem we have with this Entandikwa and money obtained from micro-finance institutions is that the repayment periods are high. You find a person gets money, he is told to pay back within a week, and the interest rates are also exorbitant. 

The idea of having equity funds is to ensure that the lending terms are flexible. Sometimes you do not even charge the interest until that person has broken even. After the person has broken even, then you get whatever you want to get from him.

My last point is that we should aim high creating moral authority amongst our leaders. If you look back, in Tanzania, the biggest thing the late Mwalimu Nyerere did for Tanzania was to give it moral authority. Wealth came next.

I urge you as leaders to create that moral fibre amongst ourselves by particularly strengthening institutions that govern us. In this same vein, Mr Speaker, I am constrained to say that I was not quite happy about the President’s move to delegate powers of corruption censuring to two individuals. We should create institutions that transcend human and individual interest. 

In the same respect, I even wonder why, for instance, we have so many commissions of inquiry every now and then in everything that goes on when we have created institutions which are supposed to deal with corruption! If Justice Sebutinde is indeed a good person of repute, and we have admired her qualities, why move her around everywhere where there is corruption? Appoint her as the IGG -(Applause)- and then we strengthen these institutions.  Thank you ver much, Mr Speaker. 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am just seeking a clarification on how we are proceeding with the State of Nation Address in this particular instance. It seems to me that the number of interjections we get as we make our submissions is really high. You can have up to seven or ten Ministers running up on the little time that you have to make your submission. I am really wondering, Mr Speaker, if it is possible for the Clerk’s Office to arrange some paper for the Ministers so that they take notes, then after we have made our consistent submissions they can respond rather than having Ministers dashing to the microphones and distorting the submissions. Thank you.

MR JOHNSON NKUUHE (ISINGIRO COUNTY SOUTH, MBARARA): I stand to support the motion. I would like to thank the hon. Augustine Ruzindana for moving, and hon. Dr Steven Mallinga for seconding, the motion. Let me say also that the President’s speech was conciliatory and what I would call a win-win speech, delivered in an equally non-confrontation manner by Her Excellency, Vice President, Kazibwe.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, if we are to a build a nation, we shall need peace, reconciliation and economic development. Let us remember that building a nation is like building a house. To build a house, you have the person who draws the plan, bricklayers, carpenters, electricians, plumbers, landscape artists and interior designers, with specific roles - If those people who are talking could please give us a chance like hon. Bikwasizehi.

THE SPEAKER: Order, order!

DR NKUUHE: If a bricklayer tries to draw house plans, or if the architect tries to paint the house, the result might be a disaster. So, let us all, national leaders, local leaders, the Executive, Judiciary and the Legislature play our constitutional role. Let us work as partners remembering that a partnership needs three things to survive and thrive. 

One, equity; that is respect for each other. 

Two, transparency: we must trust one another and not undermine each other but we must operate in a transparent and open manner. 
Three, a partnership needs mutual benefit: you must respect each other for mutual benefit, because whoever comes into the partnership expects to get something from there.  

On page one of the State of Nation Address Speech, at the bottom, the President says: 

“We do not as yet have cause for jubilation. Threatening signals continue to appear on the horizon. We have to maintain our guard on all fronts: security, political, economic, social and organisational. We must watch especially developments on the international scene that could undermine our achievements.”  

So, what are these developments that could enhance or undermine our achievements referred to on page one of the speech? I interpret this speech in what I call the big picture consisting of: 

• The East African Community, the Great Lakes Region and African Union 

• NEPAD and AGOA 

• Globalisation and finally, 

•  Better co-ordination of Arms of Government for better service delivery to citizens and businesses, and better interaction with the media, civil society and development partners. 

So, the big picture has three cross cutting issues: 

1. Peace and security, 
2. Poverty to prosperity, and 
3. Democracy and good governance.  

On East African Community, Great Lakes Region and African Unity, all I can say is that peace and prosperity and less conflict should be promoted so that trade and commerce are possible in an expanded peaceful trading region. Unless you are an arms dealer, there is no good business in areas under conflict.  

On NEPAD, today’s New Vision carried an article by Tajudeen28@yahoo.com, which described NEPAD as “a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying nothing”. This is a quote directly quoted from Macbeth by Shakespeare – those who read Macbeth. But I tend to agree but disagree largely with a lot of his observation.  There are some aspects that are right and there are others that are wrong.  

On NEPAD, I would like to see Uganda embrace it with as much infectious enthusiasm as South Africa, Nigeria, Tunisia and Senegal. NEPAD emphasises good governance, financial and economic discipline so as to access what is supposed to be US$64 billion development finance. Of course it is not all that but the advantage of NEPAD is that there is self-discipline and it stresses good governance and good financial discipline. Therefore, if you implement those, even without accessing the external finance, you will find that there is development.  

Uganda should fight corruption and promote good democratic and tolerant governance so as to benefit from NEPAD. Otherwise, NEPAD will benefit only South Africa, Botswana, Ghana, Mali, Senegal and a handful of North Africa, maybe Tunisia. So, the question I have is, which Minister, Mr Prime Minister, is responsible for NEPAD?   Mr Speaker, which committee is responsible for NEPAD?  What have they done so far? What does Peer Review under NEPAD mean? In other words, what do legislators know about NEPAD that is so important, which we are supposed to have an in-put?  

On AGOA, I would like to see the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry co-ordinating AGOA, rather than one individual man and one housewife. 

On globalisation, all I can say in this limited time is that globalisation is a real threat or opportunity depending on how prepared a country is to compete in an unfair global economic system.

Mr Speaker, on globalisation, I highly recommend a book entitled, ‘The Lekus and the Olive Tree’ by Thomas Friedman. Two copies of this book are available in our library. The book talks of one super power, one global supermarket and super-empowered individuals. The super-empowered individuals are richer than many nations in some of these countries. They fall into two categories: the rich and happy such as Mr Bill Gates of Microsoft, who recently donated 11 satellite dishes to improve our education system in Uganda. The second category of super-empowered individuals are the rich and unhappy, such as Bin Laden who has enough knowledge and enough motivation to do havoc on a peaceful world.  

Mr Speaker, the poor and unhappy in our country are also a threat to regional and national peace.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, it is time. Really!

DR NKUUHE: Finally, I have two or three recommendations: We should strengthen the Ministry of Trade and Tourism so that it can co-ordinate. We should have a science and industry policy and an information and communication technology policy. We should promote policies that promote integration of agriculture and industrialisation to remove rural poverty. We should set up an agency to co-ordinate ICT in this country, and we should promote a well-informed and informatised central and local government that is able to inform its citizens and businesses.  

E-governance also promotes efficiency and effectiveness of government service delivery and revenue collection.  It also promotes transparency and accountability.  

Mr Speaker, hon. Members, I thank you for listening to me and I support this motion.

MR REAGAN OKUMU (Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the President for the speech. The reason for Members of Parliament getting elected from all constituencies and to debate such a motion is to look at the President’s State of the Nation Address from the perspective of their constituencies. Therefore, my argument on this matter will be from the perspective of Aswa County.

Mr Speaker, before I go to that, I want to briefly talk about what the situation in my constituency is like now. It is bad, and in as far as the state of the nation perspective from Aswa County is concerned, it is total disaster.  

I noted that when the President talked about good governance he hinted on a few issues on the security of this country. More specifically, he indirectly mentioned something on Operation Iron Fist. I think it is unacceptable for a government not to continuously protect her people. 

In the speech, the President noted on page five that security, which is a basic right of our people, is a responsibility of government. But for all these years our people have done a lot of things to support government to bring them security. Our people have recruited more than 18,000 home guards to support the Uganda armed forces to end the insurgency in the north. Unfortunately, government turned round and absorbed them into the UPDF. 

Today, these home guards are nowhere to be seen yet they remain in the UPDF being paid the peanut sum of Shs10,000 as basic salary per month, and Shs30,000 as allowances. Many of them were taken to the DRC, and they returned home as home guards. We have evidence of this; we can bring it out. I think this is total lack of responsibility by the state.

As we speak, my people are moving; people are running away from their homes, there is no protection for them. There is no security. What is happening? I expected the Minister of Defence to address this matter. I expected him to come here with an urgent response to the state of the nation address from the perspective of the Defence Ministry, and give us their position. 

What is taking place in the north is bad, yet it appears that people do not care; that they lack sensitiveness. They are not bothered because they can drive freely between here and Bombo Army Headquarters. And they come here and give a statement on something that is not very urgent. Human beings are suffering, human beings are dying for all these years and you do not care! You are in your positions not because you want to be there, but because you want to serve the people. If you cannot serve people, for what purpose are you in that position? 

That is why many of us in Acholi have adopted the saying that ‘if you keep on sending your dog to hunt and it does not catch anything all the time, next time round you deny it food so that when it goes out it will ensure to make a catch.’ And because of this, some of us are definitely not going to support the Defence budget. For many years we have supported the Defence budget on the Floor of the House. We supported the increments to the Defence budget on the grounds that government wanted more resources to end the war in the North. But because of arrogance, or perhaps because of lack of will, nothing has been accomplished.

I have here with me a paper written by African Rights, on Operation Iron Fist, which I know the Minister got hold of. It is entitled, “The price for peace in Northern Uganda.” When you read this paper, hon. Members of Parliament, it is sad. But that is what is taking place. The cost of Operation Iron Fist to the people of Acholi has now gone so far beyond what was expected. 

I also want to briefly quote a document written by the Catholic Church dated 25 May 2001. It says that because of Operation Iron Fist, the Catholic Church Archdiocese has been receiving scores of young people, most of them under age, who were forcefully recruited into the UPDF and sent for training at the Uganda-Sudan border. There have been trickles of some of them back into Lamwo County, coming back with lots of fear that they might fall into the hands of the military. 

Five boys, aged 15, 16, 17, 14 and 13, from Nebbi district, found their way into Balabel Catholic Mission on 22 May. Some villagers in the locality looked after the boys for about five days then the youngest of the lot were taken to Lubone, inside Sudan. One of them was assigned duties of a porter. He was brought to Waligo and met the others with whom they made plans to escape, after a junior officer from West Nile encouraged them to do so. On 7 May, they ran away and after walking in the bush for two days, one of their companions went missing. They fortunately found a good reception in the village where people kept them until 21 May. The Catholic Church of Gulu has helped them to reach their original homes, and this is what is taking place. Because of Operation Iron Fist many of our young children are being forcefully recruited into the UPDF to go and fight.

The hon. Minister knows very well that the Acholis have contributed tremendously to the bulk of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces. Yet many people always say that the Acholi as a people, have not contributed to this struggle. I, however, know, and the Minister of Defence knows it too, that the bulk of the forces fighting in Southern Sudan, the bulk of the UPDF there are Acholi. 

On top of that, the home guards have all been taken away. Why do we go and get these young people and forcefully recruit them into the UPDF? I think this is unacceptable. It is unfortunate and it should stop. This is pushing the Acholi people to the wall.

This morning I was hurt when I received a small document that was being circulated. It was written by Karusoke. He raised various concerns, and I was not bothered about him because he has his own opinions. He can talk any nonsense he wants to, I do not mind. What, however, surprised me is that before the paper was photocopied, a Member of Parliament got hold of it and wrote, in ink, on it. This Member of Parliament is hon. Lt Col Katirima. 

What he wrote on this paper, I want to read for the benefit of some Members who have not read it, says, “Acholi MPs are just cunning.” To this hon. Katirima added, “…treacherous, underestimating the intelligence of Ugandans, agents of the enemy. What do you think?” It is then copied to Acholi MPs, all MPs, civil society and the media. I think this is unfortunate. Why should someone hide behind somebody else’s statement? 

If my colleague wanted to make a statement, why did he not come up with one and sign it himself? I think this is extremely unfortunate. It is not surprising that the Army Commander, Maj. Gen. Kazini sacked him from being Army Spokesman (Laughter).

MR OTTO ODONGA: Thank you very much for giving way. Mr Speaker, your good office could have got hold of this unfortunate letter. I believe it was written to victimise Ugandans, including many others and myself who did not apply to belong where we belong, but have to accept it because we have no alternative.  

This letter states clearly that Acholi MPs support Kony. Then who is killing the Acholis? If Acholi MPs are supporting the Kony rebels, then who is killing the Acholis? Hon. Reagan Okumu, I beg you to guide the House on this.

Secondly, I want to make it clear, and also make a warning that those who claim to be presidential advisors are the ones giving the worst kind of advice the President can ever get on earth. And one of them happens to be Katirima, who made this malicious dark-hearted statement to implicate senior citizens. Mr Speaker, I beg your office to come up with disciplinary action against this particular Member of Parliament. 

A while ago, hon. Kazoora had to tender an apology to the House too, plainly, with all honesty.  

Allow me also, through the Member on the Floor, to inform you that the support that the Acholi have given this government should not be abused. The only sub-county where the President won elections in northern Uganda was Lamwo, where Hilary Onek worked day and night to ensure that, and this is what we get in the national Parliament? 

Hon. Dan Kidega survived an ambush by the LRA, and he was targeted because he was a National Youth Chairman for the President, and this is the thanks we get from the likes of Katirima! Anyway, life will always go on. Thank you.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I would like to conclude my submission on security, but that is the state of affairs in my constituency. And I think that such a letter is a very dangerous thing. It brings about a lot of hatred. I have interacted with some of my colleagues here who have very positive feelings about the people of Acholi, because they have worked with them. Though, I also know many more people who hate the Acholi, for what reason, I do not know. 

The Acholi have suffered in this country from 1968 when they started losing their very senior officers in the name of Col. Lumoya and Brig Okoya, who were killed under mysterious circumstances. In the 1970s Amin slaughtered the Acholi like chicken. This forced many to go into exile and they fought their way back. 

The current President lived in Acholi in 1970, and the Acholi people protected him. Amin soldiers killed a businessman called Okwera right in his shop, because he was protecting the current President, Yoweri Museveni. Museveni lived in Atiak and our people fed him. We fought, liberated this country, yet we continue suffering, and the Acholi have never led this country.

In 1985, when Tito Okello took over power, it was not by design of the Acholi people. Even then Tito Okello exhibited the highest degree of morality of an elder by talking to all rebels. Who in the world can agree to give territories to rebels in the capital city? If you do not have a genuine yearning for peace you cannot do that. Tito Okello did that. If he were not a stupid man, nobody would have thrown him out of power. 

In 1986 when the NRA came here to take over power, it was the same man who walked on the streets telling soldiers to leave. He told them, “leave, this is Uganda. If we continue fighting here there will be blood baths, let us leave. Let Museveni come and rule.” But again people turned around and talked against the Acholi. What have the Acholi done? 

I know that not all Members of Parliament subscribe to such talk, I know that not all Ugandans talk like that, and that still many more talk out of ignorance. But I want to tell you that we are all part of what is taking place in northern Uganda.

Finally, I want to inform you that it takes me a lot of time to convince my people in Aswa County that the Banyakore are not bad. It takes a lot of time because some of these are people who were born in 1986; they are now only 17 years old. I tell them that the Banyakore are not bad, and this is the reason some of us went to campaign for Besigye. It was to reconcile the West with the rest of the country –(Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I was reluctant to interrupt the hon. Reagan Okumu, but as you have heard, he has raised very grave statements, which I think deserve a response. I am wondering whether, in light of the seriousness of the matter and the gravity of the allegations, the Speaker and the House could allow me to respond to them now? 

Today is Thursday. I presume Parliament resumes next Tuesday. Hon. Reagan Okumu is making very serious allegations about a plot against the Acholi, against the people in his constituency. I think this is so serious that if possible – and I am ready now - I could be given an opportunity to respond to it immediately.

THE SPEAKER: By sitting down he has given you the opportunity to respond. He has allowed you to give the information that you want to.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Reagan Okumu has made his presentation based on Operation Iron Fist. I have had the occasion to inform this House before that ‘Operation Iron Fist’ is the code name for the on-going operation against Kony and his LRA terrorist activities against innocent people in northern Uganda. Lest someone has forgotten, ‘Operation Iron Fist’ is an operation on-going –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was under the impression that hon. Okumu was about to wind up and that he sat down to give way for either information or clarification. I now see the Minister proceeding to give a substantial statement on a wider matter. Would it not be procedurally correct for hon. Okumu to wind up and then the hon. Minister makes his statement after that?

THE SPEAKER: Well, it is not possible for me to know the details of the information one wants to give before they do so. It is, however, up to the person holding the Floor to allow for information to be given or clarification sought. When the Minister stood to give information, the hon. Member sat down. Let us get the information.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In fact, for the information of the House, before hon. Okumu stood to speak, he wrote a note to me, which reads as follows; “Good afternoon Sir, it is Operation Iron Fist, which is urgent and we expect a Statement from you.” 

I am responding to that, and I believe that is why he gave way, because he expected a statement from me. 

I want to make a point, and any effort to stop me from doing so will not succeed because in light of what hon. Okumu has said, it is very important. We should all remember, as I informed this House before, that Operation Iron Fist is the code name of the operations going on against Kony and LRA terrorists’ activities against innocent civilians in Aswa constituency and in northern Uganda as a whole. 

I simply do not have to remind this House about the activities of Kony or of his crimes against the population. The cutting off of lips or the breasts of women, all these things are surely known. So when someone stands up and speaks about a hidden agenda against the Acholi, presumably by this government, I really get surprised. People talk about what is happening in northern Uganda today as if, in fact, it is the UPDF that has been killing the Acholi. We are there to kill Kony, and I can tell you how many of his men we have killed. 

Members should note that we have fought against Kony since 1986. When we pushed him out of Uganda he ran into the Sudan and he managed to survive essentially because of the support he received from the Sudan government. I am glad to inform this House that the Sudan government has fortunately changed its mind. It has succumbed to pressure from the Government of Uganda and from the international community, to let the UPDF into Sudan. 

This time round the UPDF have a clear protocol and mission to go into Sudan to search for and destroy LRA terrorist groups from the camps there. They have to search for and rescue captives and abductees, like the Aboke girls, to get the whole of LRA from wherever they may be and set free all innocent civilians in internally displaced peoples’ camps, and enable them go back to their homes for development. 

The Protocol signed between the Republic of Uganda and Sudan on military operations started on 8 March 2002, in order to achieve that mission. I again inform this House that we sent a big force into Southern Sudan, and we did uproot the Kony terrorist groups from their traditional camps, which I mentioned to you. 

I met the Members of Parliament of Northern Uganda including Members of Parliament from Acholi, and gave them details about our operations. I gave them details of our plans against Kony, and all of them, including hon. Okumu, know very well that the operations the UPDF is carrying out against the LRA in Southern Sudan are according to the plans I gave to them. 

As a result of these activities, the LRA has been denied capacity to attack UPDF, as you very well know. That is why all along they resort to wreaking havoc by attacking soft targets mainly civilians in internally displaced peoples’ camps. The LRA has, of course, been denied public support in the northern districts of Gulu, Kitgum and the others. That is something I have said many times. Kony, however, still enjoys some publicity and support from a political class, people that I call his political commissars inside Uganda, who are exploiting the freedom of speech under the NRM administration to give Kony prominence. 

All the five LRA camps in Southern Sudan were overran; I gave you the list of arms that we were able to capture. As we speak now, we have killed more than 1,250 of these bandits.

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA: I am seeking clarification, Mr Speaker. I have been listening to the hon. Minister very keenly. I have just heard the hon. Minister say that there are some people he calls ‘Kony’s political commissars’, who are abusing freedom of speech and making a case for him among the public. 

We have just heard two colleagues claim that one member of the UPDF, hon. Katirima, has written a document accusing them of being treacherous, underestimating the intelligence of Ugandans and so on. I would like the hon. Minister to clarify this to us. Does he believe that our hon. Colleagues from Acholi are among those political commissars? If not, could he tell us very clearly and categorically, that he knows that our hon. Members of Parliament are not advocates of terror? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: He should, considering what has been read out by the Members.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I have not read the whole document, and I have only excerpts of it. I would like to read the whole document before I express an opinion on it. I do not know whether what is being alleged against hon. Katirima is true or not. I think that is a question of fact that needs to be established. 

I have however stated, and I will repeat it -(Interruption)

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, a categorical question was asked of the Minister. Are hon. Members of Parliament from Acholi amongst those he calls commissars for Kony, who are now making a point for him, or not?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I have answered it the way I want to answer it. I actually do not know why you should be restrictive about hon. Members of Parliament from Acholi. How about those from Apac? How about those from Kampala? How about from any other place? I said -(Interruption)

MR WACHA: Point of order, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: No. Hon. Minister, what is causing unease is that before you started giving information, there was an outcry from hon. Members from Acholi originating from a statement they said was made by hon. Katirima. The statement said that all the Acholi Members of Parliament are just cunning, treacherous and so forth and they consider themselves politicians. I think they want to know about the commissars that you are talking about.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Yes, Mr Speaker, I answered that.  First of all, I said I was not aware of that document nor of its contents, and I am certainly not answerable for the contents of that document. Absolutely not! If you give it to me and I read it and I find anything that I should talk about, I will happily do so, as you know me.

MR HILARY ONEK: Mr Speaker, I feel that the question asked was very, very, clear.  There is no beating about the bush. First of all, the Minister mentioned that there are political commissars of Kony among political leadership in this country. It is very clear that he has the list of those people; he knows them. He is being asked whether Acholi politicians in this Parliament are on that list? The question is straightforward. I think glossing about issues is what brings problems in this country. People want to cover up. 

Me, as Hilary Onek, Member of Parliament of Lamwo County, I campaigned for the President. I am a Movementist, the President won election in Luku and he got 31 per cent from Lamwo where he got only 2 per cent in 1996. Because of my effort, I convinced people that we are having a transparent Government, transparent Ministers. Now, what we are hearing is not –(Interjection)- no, I think I am disappointed. Mr Speaker, thank you (Laughter).

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I will repeat what I said. I said that the LRA has been denied public support in the districts of Gulu, Kitgum and other districts in the North. That Kony, however, still enjoys publicity and support from the political class, from his political commissars inside Uganda –(Interruption)

MS BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, the hon. Minister got on the Floor to respond to some issues being raised by hon. Okumu Reagan. Is it in order for him now to be reading from a well typed and prepared text? Could he have anticipated what hon. Okumu Reagan was going to say? And is it in order in our rules to read from a prepared text in response to a speech on the Floor?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. members, as I indicated to you before, the hon. Member stood to give information, and when a Member stands to give information, it is the right of a person holding the Floor to decline the information and proceed with his contribution. But when a Member wants to get that information, he resumes his seat and then the person gives the information. It may not be easy for me to know how detailed the information that Member is going to give is. What was happening is that he is giving information, but I apparently agree with you that it seems he has a prepared statement, which should have come in a form of a statement and maybe, which should have been part of the statement he made this afternoon. But he is saying he is giving information. He is using his notes to give the information. But what you have seen is what I have seen. It was the Member who gave him that opportunity to pass on the information.

MR KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, the issues raised by hon. Okumu and Onek and in response by the Minister of Defence, the reference about Banyakore, Bateso, Acholi - Mr Speaker, collective condemnation by association is characteristic of fascism and suicidal tendencies. We want to guide the House that continued reference of a collective condemnation of an Acholi or a Munyakore could provoke consequences beyond the control of these Members and it is a very serious matter (Applause). 

Let me also add that by accident of birth, people are born Bateso, Banyakore and so on. There is no Muteso or Munyakore or Acholi who has sat as a group to collectively send out any of these people who have been killing the citizens of this country.

Security is indeed a matter for collective concern of this House and it should not be seen as if it is insecurity inflicted on one part of the country and the rest of the country is enjoying it. The nation is like a human body. We might be different but definitely we unite to make the whole. When the foot is hurt, the head is hurt, when an Acholi is hurt, a Munyakole is hurt. The security of this country is a collective responsibility and we would not want it to be localised (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: I entirely agree with you that it is completely wrong to condemn the entire tribe because of one person having done this and the other.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you. I have notes, of course, because in my position you need to be always ready, always prepared and I am always ready. It is important in light of what is being said that I have a written record. Obviously, I know that the record of Parliament will accurately reflect what I have said. I talked about the political class; I talked about publicity and support from political commissars inside Uganda who are exploiting the freedom of speech under the NRM to give Kony the prominence he has received in the media. I certainly did not have hon. Hilary Onek in mind. I did not have hon. Reagan Okumu in mind. 

As I said, I met all these leaders. I sat with them and gave them, not only the plan, but I took them through the map, I took them through the positions of Kony, where Kony had gone, to show them that we knew where Kony was and we are going for him. Obviously, if I thought hon. Hilary Onek was a Kony Commissar, I would not have been giving him that free information.  

So, I do not know why this matter is coming up. At first I thought it was being brought up in order to stop me from giving this information. But anyway, UPDF has done very well. We have taken over those camps; we chased these people. They tried to hide in the mountains, but our forces followed them there. As we speak now, our tally of Kony’s dead are about 250, while obviously there are more causalities in Imatong and Acholi Mountains, Araget and Loky area where UPDF flashed them out, but we did not have time to go and count their dead there.

A number of captives have so far been received, 149 abducted women fighters, 45 children born in captivity and as a result of the abuse of women whom they were using as sex slaves, and 96 NRA fighters who have so far surrendered. As a result of the pressure, which the UPDF has been putting on Kony, Kony decided to divide his force into various groups. He led one group to Kitivale in Southern Sudan, which he has also divided into two. One is under a chap called Lakati. This same group came into Uganda under Vincent Otti (_Mr Eresu rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Which new procedure are you going to raise?

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, most Members of Parliament I have consulted on my side are expressing a concern on how we are proceeding in this House especially with respect to the debate on the State of the Nation Address. I feel, like most Members in this House, that a matter of pertinent concern in regard to the defence of this country should come under a substantial debate arising from a ministerial statement other than interjections which come in the course of a debate which is really not very relevant to it.

May I request that the Minister concerned be given ample time to prepare himself and give to the nation a well documented statement regarding how they are handling Kony, rather than coming in an ad hoc manner and giving us haphazard statements. So, may I request that the Minister be given his time and we proceed with the debate.

THE SPEAKER: Well, what I can say is that when debating the President’s address, we are having what they call a general debate. And with a general debate, people talk on many issues. So, you cannot say you will not talk about defence, you will not talk about education, wait for the Minister to make a statement on education. This is the same thing with a budget. 

But I think what you are complaining about is that he stood to give information and his information is so detailed and it is taking a lot of time. Otherwise, we were interested to know if we did not know, but I think what you are saying it has taken too long. Please, wind up.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought I should do this because hon. Reagan stood up here and said that Government does not care. He said because we safely drive between Kampala and Bombo – (Interruption)- Please, why would anyone be interested in stopping me from telling you what Government is doing?  Why?  I mean, why do you not have time to listen to this response. I did not hear anyone complaining about the allegations being made. 

So, Mr Speaker, thank you for the opportunity, I was saying it can take 10 hours. We have been fighting Kony since 1988. I think any serious person would give even 2 hours to hear what Government is doing in the North.

As I was saying, the other group, which came into Northern Uganda was under Vincent Otti, and they further sub-divided into three groups. One under Vincent Otti which is in Kilak Hills, the other one under Tabule which is in Pader, and one to the North of Gulu. These, as I said, have the intention of engaging in publicity generating activities. They have, therefore, been attacking soft targets. As you know, they have attacked some internally displaced people’s camps. In fact yesterday they attacked Alelo Camp, this is not in the news yet. They attacked Alelo Camp and have made some ambushes on the roads.

The second reason why they are coming out like this is hopefully to draw us out of Southern Sudan. The idea is to spread the UPDF team so that they can survive. But I would like to assure this House and assure hon. Reagan and other leaders from the North and Ugandans who may be interested in ending this problem, that the UPDF has been achieving its objectives in ‘Operation Iron Fist’.

One may ask, ‘why are you optimistic that this time round you will defeat Kony, you have tried many times before, you failed? The reason is that we had chased Kony out of Uganda, and even chased him out of Southern Sudan close to our border and he had hidden behind Sudanese military defences. That is why he survived. His staying power was the support the Sudanese Government gave him. 

So, with good relations between Uganda and Sudan, the declaration only a few days ago by President Bashir that the Sudan Government itself is fighting Kony - and indeed they have - last week Kony’s force attacked the Sudanese Government Force at a place called Magayer and overrun it. They also actually attacked an SPLA Camp and overrun it and the Government of Sudan responded with helicopter gunships and attacked Kony. They have sent a brigade chasing Kony in that valley. With this level of co-operation, I have no doubt that Kony’s end is coming because he no longer has supplies. He has no source of support that he has been getting for his guns.

We have these people who are in Northern Uganda who are causing havoc and terrorising the population. We have deployed enough force, they are on their heels and I have no doubt in my mind that these people -(Interruption)- of Aswa and other places will soon see the end of this problem.

THE SPEAKER: Please, complete your statement and avail the Members with a copy of that statement you have been reading (Applause).

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I was actually concluding by saying that since the operation started, the UPDF has had an upper hand. We are very optimistic that we are going to defeat these bandit forces. I will be going to the North myself. Actually, the whole of next week I am going to be in Northern Uganda. We have done everything possible to bring enough forces, even in areas where there were gaps, including areas where we should have had home-guards so that we actually can bring an end to the menace this terrorist group has been bringing on our people. Thank you.

MR OKUMU REAGAN: Mr Speaker, I know the information has taken longer than the time allocated to me. 

I would not like to go on and answer him one by one, but my hon. colleagues can see the underhand method of doing work. I would especially urge the Movement leadership to do something. He was saying that the Acholi people do not support the Movement, but it is because of this kind of method of work. You know a statement was written, it was never presented, and then now because the question is raised, he comes out to read it.  

I urge my colleagues in the Movement to prune yourselves if you want to bring more people onto your side. If you want to bring some of us to your side, clean your house.  We shall come because we want people who are serious about this nation. We want people who will work for this nation; we want people who will work for the betterment of this country.   

I want to say that the Minister started by saying that he thought what I raised was serious. This means that before he came here, he never thought it was serious. But he came with a written statement to give us this information! I think this is lack of seriousness. We sometimes blame the President partly because the people below him misinform him that things are okay; this is the state of things.  

He was telling us rebels moved into Alero yesterday. It is a protected village, but they evicted people and burnt over 1,000 huts. If even people who are in camps are now not safe, then where do you expect the people to go? This is where I was raising the question when the President said, “is the question of security a responsibility of Government?” 

If people are put in camps to get protection from Government, and a rebel group comes and overruns and burns this camp, what do you expect the people to do? Do you expect us, the Acholi Members of Parliament, to come and keep quiet and say things are okay because we support Government? No! When we come here to raise this, we are urging Government to respond, and this is really the concern. 

I want to challenge all Members of Parliament to have the responsibility to unite this country. We have the opportunity to unite this country, and we can only unite this country by improving the method of work of Government, by improving the manner in which some ministers mishandle state matters.  

These are not private things, these are not personal things; security belongs to the people of Uganda! It is sad that we all sit here, we pass time, and we listen. If the Minister had come earlier with that statement, perhaps I wouldn’t have even raised this. I would have responded to the statement he would have read, but he came up and kept it unknown.  

I would really petition the President to sack hon. Amama Mbabazi from the Ministry of Defence because he is failing! (Laughter) A Minister of Defence must be somebody who is sensitive, but now here is a person who comes to deceive the whole Parliament. You have a document there! 

When I saw what was on the order paper, I did not know what statement he was going to present; maybe he had so many statements. Now he comes out to say, ‘Oh, the other statement was also ready’. I think this is unfortunate, and this is not fair to this country.  

I want to conclude by giving you this example. In the Sixth Parliament in 1996 when hon. Amama Mbabazi was the State Minister of Defence, we called him and met outside here in the lobby with the Acholi Parliamentary Group. I remember I raised a concern and gave him an example of one incident in my constituency in Paicho Sub-county. 

My complaint was that the soldiers were not responding. I told him about an incident where a civilian came and reported to the army unit that there were rebels cooking about one mile away. The army told this man to go and check if they were still there. This man went back, checked and came back and reported to the army that they were still cooking. The army said, “okay, sit and wait for us and we prepare”. When the army prepared and they were ready, they sent this man and said, “you go back and check if the rebels are still there”. 

I told hon. Amama Mbabazi at that time that the rebels had to notice the movement of this gentleman. So when he went for the third time, they got hold of him and killed him, and I told him that this was the price we are paying. I said that there could also be a problem in the army. I was raising this question as a genuine Member of Parliament reporting to my Minister responsible for Defence. 

Hon. Members, the response hon. Amama Mbabazi gave me was that he fought a guerrilla war and that is a way of luring Government forces into a rebel ambush. So, when you receive reports from civilians like that, it is a way of luring Government forces into a rebel ambush. So, perhaps that man who was killed was luring Government forces into a rebel ambush.  

I conclude by urging Members of Parliament and the Government of Uganda to think about the question of national integration and reconciliation. I gave you just a simple example that the children who were born in 1986 have grown in these camps, with all kinds of thoughts.  We all need to have this responsibility collectively to reach out to these people. Government should reach out to these people.  

I am very grateful to the ministers in this government who have endeavoured to fulfil their constitutional responsibilities and reached out to the countryside, including Gulu and Kitgum districts. I am very grateful, and I encourage those who have not had the opportunity for the last few years to take up this opportunity. You have a constitutional obligation to reach out into Uganda. We urge government to support the Police more so that they can also reach out to the North and be able to support us. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, this debate will also continue next week for two days. But we have an item, which has been on for sometime namely, the setting up of the sessional committees. I think this debate should end here for today. I have noted those who are interested in making contributions. I will start with you on Tuesday. 

Now let us constitute the sessional committees so that the committees can start working on the Budget. I will ask the clerk to read out the names of various committees.

SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES

1. Hon. Edward Wesonga 
2. Hon. Kasule Lumumba 
3. Hon. Mehangye Idah 
4. Hon. Akwero Odwong 
5. Hon. Alisemera Babiha 
6. Hon. Aanimu Angupale 
7. Hon. Juliet Rainer 
8. Hon. Wadri Kassiano 
9. Hon. Margaret Baba Diri 
10. Hon. Hyuha Dorothy 
11. Hon. Malinga Johnson 
12. Hon. James Kubeketerya  
13. Hon. Dan Kidega 
14. Hon. Elioda Tumwesigye 
15. Hon. Yeri Ofwono 
16. Hon. Magoola Zirabamuzale
17. Hon. Munyira Rose
18. Hon. Wandera Martin
19. Hon. Tibarimbasa Avitus
20. Hon. Sekitoleko Juliet
21. Hon. Katuramu Hood
22. Hon. Lwanga Herbert
23. Hon. Kiwanda Godfrey
24. Hon. Bulamu Jonny
25. Hon. Kibale Wambi

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed.)

SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS

1. Hon. Mukabera Annette
2. Hon. Nathan Byanyima
3. Hon. Patrick Amuriat
4. Hon. Twarebireho Tungwako
5. Hon. Wakikona David
6. Hon. Vincent Nyanzi
7. Hon. John Arumadri
8. Hon. Otada Amooti
9. Hon. Mulengani Bernard
10.Hon. Kiwagama William
11.Hon. John Byabagambi
12.Hon. Mbabazi Hamlet 
13.Hon. Wambuzi Gagawala
14.Hon. Akisoferi Ogola
15.Hon. Lolem Micah
16.Hon. Gole Nicholas
17.Hon. Yekko Arapkissa
18.Hon. Byamukama Nulu
19.Hon. Ssebaggala Latif
20.Hon. Lubyayi Iddi
21.Hon. Nathan Nabeta
22.Hon. Okulo Epak
23.Hon. Akwero Odwong
24.Hon. Musisi Patrick

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

1. Hon. Anifa Kawoya
2. Hon. Kagaba Harriet
3. Hon. Nantume Janet 
4. Hon. Basaliza Steven
5. Hon. Epetait Francis
6. Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi 
7. Hon. Bigirwa Bernadette 
8. Hon. Bwambale Loyce
9. Hon. Mallinga Stephen
10.Hon. Ndawula Kaweesi
11.Hon. Umar Lule
12.Hon. Onek Hilary
13.Hon. Bakaluba Mukasa
14.Hon. D’Ujanga Simon
15.Hon. Tubbo Christine
16.Hon. Tomson Kyahurwenda
17.Hon. Kulany Gertrude
18.Hon. Kiwalabye Musoke
19.Hon. Rukundo Serapio
20.Hon. Bagalana Tom
21.Hon. Nsubuga Nsambu
22.Hon. Mwondha Patrick
23.Hon. Ochieng Patrick
24.Hon. Nvumetta Ruth
25.Hon. Dombo Emmanuel

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS

1. Hon. Adolf Mwesige
2. Hon. Ben Wacha
3. Hon. Basaliza Araali
4. Hon. Byaruhanga Charles
5. Hon. Dora Byamukama
6. Hon. Omara Atubo
7. Hon. Kabakumba Masiko
8. Hon. Winnie Masiko
9. Hon. Wagonda Muguli
10.Hon. Hope Mwesigye
11.Hon. Mulindwa Birimumaaso
12.Hon. Mbalibulha Christopher
13.Hon. Ruhindi Fred
14.Hon. Nshimye Augustine
15.Hon. Kinobe James
16.Hon. Katuntu Abdu
17.Hon. Mao Nobert
18.Hon. Oulanyah Jacob
19.Hon. Byanyima Winnie
20.Hon. Ndeezi Alex

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS

1. Hon. Ogwel Loote
2. Hon. Moses Kizige
3. Hon. Mike Sebalu
4. Hon. Bintu Jalia
5. Hon. Nsaba Buturo 
6. Hon. Eresu John
7. Hon. Okumu Reagan
8. Hon. Okupa Elijah
9. Hon. Salaamu Musumba 
10.Hon. Mabikke Michael
11.Hon. Margaret Zziwa
12.Hon. Kabwegyere Tarsis
13.Hon. Namayanja Rose
14.Hon. Sitenda Sebalu
15.Hon. Ruth Tuma 
16.Hon. Sinabulya Sylvia
17.Hon. Okot Alex
18.Hon. Amongi Betty
19.Hon. Cecilia Ogwal 
20.Hon. Alintuma Nsambu
21.Hon. Aggrey Awori
22.Hon. Opange Louis
23.Hon. Kazoora John
24.Hon. Mutuluza Peter
25.Hon. Odonga Otto

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

1. Hon. Seninde Rosemary
2. Hon. Nansubuga Nyombi
3. Hon. Rwamirama Bright
4. Hon. Kamuntu Ephraim 
5. Hon. Mwandha James
6. Hon. Omach Fred
7. Hon. Kiraso Beatrice
8. Hon. Guma David
9. Hon. Ruzindana Augustine
10.Hon. Nsubuga William
11.Hon. Eriyo Jessica
12.Hon. Jack Sabiiti
13.Hon. Kaddunabbi Ibrahim
14.Hon. Mary Amajo
15.Hon. Bakkabulindi Charles
16.Hon. Kakooza James
17.Hon. Kithende Apolinaris
18.Hon. Matte Rogers
19.Hon. Komuhangi Margaret
20.Hon. Koluo Charles
21.Hon. Basajjabalaba Nassar
22.Hon. Tiperu Nusura
23.Hon. Kalule Ssengo
24.Hon. Nandala Mafabi
25.Hon. Kikungwe Issa

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

1. Hon. Odit John
2. Hon. Victoria Mwaka
3. Hon. Nabwiso Francis
4. Hon. Namuyangu Jenipher
5. Hon. Herbert Nuwagaba
6. Hon. Bikwasizehi Deusdedit
7. Hon. Esele Peter
8. Hon. Kasamba Mathias
9. Hon. Isanga Nakadama
10.Hon. Lochiam Miligan Rose 
11.Hon. Woneka Oliver
12.Hon. Lokeris Paul
13.Hon. Badda Fred
14.Hon. Kityo Mutebi
15.Hon. Nkuuhe Johnson
16.Hon. Kasirivu Atwooki
17.Hon. Sebagereka Victoria
18.Hon. Kefa Sempangi
19.Hon. Alonga Othman Harun
20.Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba
21.Hon. Latigo Ogenga
22.Hon. Anang-Odur
23.Hon. Kapkwomu Ndiwa
24.Hon. Pajobo Bruno
25.Hon. Mukama Francis

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

1. Hon. Aachilla Rex
2. Hon. Mindra Joyo
3. Hon. Besisira Ignatius
4. Hon. Okot Santa
5. Hon. Madada Kyebakoze
6. Hon. Byenkya Beatrice
7. Hon. Lyomoki Sam
8. Hon. Alaso Alice
9. Hon. Rwakimari Beatrice
10.Hon. Yiga Anthony
11.Hon. Wananzofu Simon
12.Hon. Orech Martin
13.Hon. Tom Kayongo 
14.Hon. Kyatuheire Jacqueline
15.Hon. Lubowa Moses
16.Hon. Bogere Fred
17.Hon. Ekanya Geofrey
18.Hon. Mukasa Anthony
19.Hon. Mukula Richard
20.Hon. Balemezi Lydia
21.Hon. Omodi Okot
22.Hon. Nyeko Michael

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY

1. Hon. Bamwanga Steven
2. Hon. Ssentongo Nabulya 
3. Hon. Nyendwoha  Mutiti
4. Hon. Sauda Mugerwa
5. Hon. Anyolo Samuel
6. Hon. Olum Zachary
7. Hon. Byatike Matovu 
8. Hon. Ntacyotugira Philip
9. Hon. Mugambe Joseph
10.Hon. Mallinga Stephen
11.Hon. Tumukunde Henry
12.Hon. Ateng Otim Margaret
13.Hon. Kawanga John
14.Hon. Angiro Charles
15.Hon. Sekikubo Theodore

DR EPETAIT: I have heard hon. Mallinga Stephen twice but I am aware that we have two hon. Mallingas in the House. Could he clarify which hon. Mallinga is on Natural Resources and who is in this Committee.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Malinga Johnson is on the Committee on Social Services. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I advised that hon. Dr Mallinga is appearing on two lists: on Trade and on Natural Resources. He has to be on one, but he is not here. So, we will make an option.

COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS

1. Hon. Capt. Matovu David 
2. Hon. Katongole Badru
3. Hon. Abura Samuel 
4. Hon. Kayizzi Asanasio 
5. Hon. Mayende Simon 
6. Hon. Onzima Alex 
7. Hon. Mujuzi Pius
8. Hon. Elly Tumwine 
9. Hon. Elly Kayanja
10.Hon. Noble Mayombo 
11.Hon. Phenhas Katirima 
12.Hon. Udongo Betty 
13.Hon. Caleb Akandwanaho 
14.Hon. David Tinyefuza 
15.Hon. Kabareebe Muzoora 
16.Hon. Pakati Amasi
17.Hon. Kajeke Wilfred 
18.Hon. Kasigwa Harry 
19.Hon. Kule Muranga 
20.Hon. Mumia Michael 
21.Hon. Apuun Patrick 
22.Hon. Okuti Nasur
23.Hon. Etonu Benedict 
24.Hon. Kabayo John
25.Hon. Imumet Isaiah

THE SPEAKER: I put the question – (Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, the Sessional Committees by our Rules of Procedure are expected to oversee certain sectors. This Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, which they have just read, has got that component of defence. But most of the names are of members of the UPDF. I would like to ask a very genuine question because as the Chairperson of the Budget Committee I am finding a problem with Members who belong to an institution sitting on committee to oversee the same institution. I see a conflict of interest (Applause). 

So, in light of that, and I would like Members to take this very genuinely. In light of the fact that there are ten Members of Parliament – I respect them as Members of Parliament but who have come here not only to listen but also to debate. They have come with the mandate of a specific institution, which is the Ministry of Defence. Now you are putting them on a committee where they will sit and summon their minister and start overseeing the institution to which they belong and which they represent here in Parliament! That is one. 

Number two, the attendance of the UPDF Members in this House. Actually the other day somebody was coming up with how many of them come regularly and those who do not. I am not against them as individuals but in principle, do you think we are doing a credible thing for this institution? I questioned the chairmanship, Lt. Gen. – is it Lt General David Tinyefuza – I am sorry I do not know the titles very well, but this is a senior Army officer. I respect him very much. But then I was not comfortable that he would chair a committee to which the ministry where he is employed is appearing. He is supposed to quiz how its money was used, how that programme is going on. I am finding that a very big problem. I urge my colleagues to see this issue in that light. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Members, I think we have to be guided by the rules as these issues come before us. I will ask the chairperson of the Rules and Privilege Committee what happened to this issue. I think it might have come during the debate when we were amending the rules. Can we be assisted on that?

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON RULES AND PRIVILEGES (Mr Ben Wacha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of Membership of these committees being manned by people from the same institution did not come up. However, the issue of chairmanship of the committee came up and I recollect that we made a provision for that.

THE SPEAKER: You see in a procedure like this, the rules of the game should be set before you proceed, and the rules were set when we started this exercise. When I announced that people should go and register to the committees of their interests, this was never raised. But of course you are entitled to raise this question. You have done so, and you have especially talked about the chairperson. 

Before the adjournment I was going to ask you whether you were going to the exercise of setting the leadership or after. This is one of the matters that may be considered.  But now to say these are members of Ministry of Defence, really how shall we do it? In the register it was open, now do you want to remove all of them from the Committee because they belong to the ministry? Under what rule are you doing that? I think we should leave it to the wisdom of the members that are going to set the leadership to consider this matter rather than prejudicing them. We should not be seen to be prejudicing our membership here. Let us leave it to their wisdom; they will consider all matters and decide.

MR RUZINDANA: The purpose of voting on the membership of these committees gives Parliament the opportunity to say yes or no. That yes can be for all the names proposed for approval or some of the names. If Parliament deems it right that a certain person should not serve on a particular committee, I think Parliament can pronounce itself on that one. However – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But it must be on principle.

MR RUZINDANA: Yes, Mr Speaker. The principle of membership in committees is by election by Parliament. But over the time a practice has developed that sessional committees are approved en mass; we do not vote on them individually. Now that a matter has cropped up which caused discipline in normal administration because here a Minister has to be summoned by his or her subordinates and he becomes answerable. They question him and he goes back and he is maybe attending the Army Council and the minister is chairing, or whoever it is. I think it causes specific problems In order to allow the Rules Committee to study the problem associated with the matters raised, we may stand over this particular committee, and the Rules Committee advises us.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, our colleagues who represent UPDF are the only category of Members who are also employees of one of the government institutions, and that is the Ministry of Defence. You do not find any other Member here who is employed in government. No, they should be here if they are there, but it is only the UPDF. I would like to agree with hon. Ruzindana that in case of those hon. Members, we should vote on them individually because we have a right to say yes or no rather than vote them en mass. This is because for them to go to the sector committee yet they are responsible for oversight of this sector will be difficult. It will be a conflict of interest for them to begin asking the Minister of Defence, the Minister of State, the Commander of the Armed Forces and so forth, when they are the people who are paying them or giving them orders; it will be very awkward. 

Therefore, I would like to propose that, if we cannot do it today, we should actually vote on each one of them later on.

THE SPEAKER: I am just going to ask you one question. We have set a Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.  It is with other bodies adjudicating on matters where some of the members sitting on that committee appear before the Judiciary. Are you going to say that because they are going to do so - You see -(Interjections)- Hold on, hold on, hold on. 

You see the problem is fairness in dealing with the issue. I think if you wanted to raise this matter before the names were read, because you were aware that the members of the armed forces were on the committee, we should have debated it as a principle and each name on the other committees should have been dealt with individually. You cannot come at the end of the exercise and start changing the rules of the game for only one committee. This is not fair at all. The Members are entitled to register where they are supposed to register. I think we should follow the procedure we have been following rather than being discriminative when we come to one particular committee. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: We have finished constituting the committees. It is now up to the committee members to go to their respective committee rooms I do not know whether you want to do it today or tomorrow and then set up your leadership. 

With this we come to the end of today’s business. House is adjourned.  

(The House rose at 5.18p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 9 July 2002 at 2.00p.m.)

