Tuesday, 7 July 2009

Parliament met at 2.44 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting. I would like you to join me in welcoming pupils and teachers from Morulem Girls’ Primary School, Abim District. They are represented by hon. Okori-Moe. They have come to observe our proceedings. You are welcome. (Applause)

Secondly, hon. Members, last week we adjourned debate on the loan request for the sustainable management of the environmental resources. We agreed that we shall set up a committee composed of members of the Government side and members of the Opposition to review the loan request and report back to this House before we can complete that process. Now I want to inform you about the members we have agreed upon. The members are:

1. 	Mr Emmanuel Dombo, Chairperson
2. 	Mr Achia Remigio, Member
3. 	Ms Sarah Nyombi Nansubuga, Member
4. 	Mr Oboi Amuriat, Member 
5. 	Mr Simon Toolit, Member

Thirdly, the Minister for Disaster Preparedness had requested for time to present a statement on the Floor of this House on the famine situation. However, taking into account that last week I gave him an opportunity to speak about this matter, also considering that the Business Committee had already set a programme for the work we are going to do I have agreed with the minister that he does not go to Cabinet tomorrow morning. We instead agreed that he calls a meeting of the members of those areas where there is famine and they discuss so that Parliament can proceed with other work. Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for that consideration. I am ready to meet the Members of Parliament at 10 o’clock tomorrow in the Members’ Lounge.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, the meeting will take place in the Members’ Lounge tomorrow at 10 o’clock.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Members from the greater north have been having a meeting with the donor community on PRDP. In fact right now they are in Hotel Africana. So, if you do not see any of the members from that part of the country it is for that reason. I think they are about to end and they will come in.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, they are not boycotting my House? (Laughter)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: No. Not yet, I think. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Since you are here I am sure they are not boycotting. (Laughter)

MR OKECHO: I wanted to inform the Leader of the Opposition that the meeting ended at 2.00 p.m. We even had lunch there and we are coming back to attend this meeting. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FINANCE BILL, 2009

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, the Minister of Finance is on the way from Entebbe. We had a Cabinet meeting this morning. It must be the heavy traffic that is causing problems. We would like to beg -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Minister, I think you can move for the first reading of these Bills - the Finance Bill, the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill and the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill.

MR MIGEREKO: I do not have the certificates, maybe if I could be exempted. It is better that the Minister of Finance comes and moves for the first reading.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ok. 

MR NATHAN BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker and hon. colleagues, we have about five ministers in the Ministry of Finance. Much as we want consistency by having a particular minister take us through the budget and the rest, these are five ministers laying papers on Table. They do not take this Parliament -(Interjection)- I think we should not be giving that time to them. We should respect each other. 

You remember when Her Majesty the Queen came here, she told us, “Treat other people the way you want to be treated.” The Minister of Finance should treat this Parliament as an important House that represents a number of people. So to have the Chief Whip give those lame excuses is not acceptable. Madam Speaker, it is up to you now to make a statement. The point of order must be that the Minister of Finance must respect this Parliament so that we can move together. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Move to the next item.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON THURSDAY, 4TH JUNE 2009.

(Debate continues)

2.52
MR YAHAYA GUDOI (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I join the rest of the House to debate the State of the Nation Address, which was presented to us by His Excellency the President of Uganda on 4 June this year. I thank the President for being focussed because that address captured all sectors, which make our government run properly. 

I will talk about a few sectors beginning with foreign investment. Foreigners have invested a lot in our country and as such the economy has been boosted. My worry, however, is that although the investors have come out to put up factories, at the grassroots there are investors who are doing business meant for small business people. They have opened up supermarkets and so on and this has left small scale business people crying a lot. I therefore call upon government to design policies that will control investors – they are the producers and sellers at the same time.

On the road sector, I would like to say that I thank government for the work done. I am saying this because since independence, my constituency, Bungokho North, had been forgotten but recently some roads were taken over by the central government. My appeal to government is to implement that take over. Let me hope serious work will be done on those roads beginning 1 July 2009. This will confirm my message to the people there that we implement what we say here. 

Let me also say something about the education sector, especially on UPE and USE. My sense is that things are moving on well, except on the UPE side where the feeding bit still perturbs us as representatives of the people. I know that the government has its role to play and the parents also have a role to play. However, there has been a tendency for government to interrupt with the roles of the parents and dictate the terms. My suggestion is for us to leave these people play their roles independent of each other. Government should play its role of building schools, training and paying teachers and providing scholastic materials. When it comes to parents, they should make sure children are fed.

On USE, I would like to say that there is a lot left to be desired. Monies are being pushed there but they are not enough. Teachers are sweeping almost whatever little money that goes there. I notice that buildings and scholastic materials like text books are still lacking. 

There are schools that were started by communities. When a school is community-based, there is no other source of funding apart from government. My suggestion is that we should fulfil the pledge to have each sub-county get a community school being taken over by government to solve the issue of teachers’ payments.

Lastly, allow me say that I am very happy with what has been done in the energy sector. I can report that people in my constituency, which is about three kilometres away from Mbale, had never seen an electric pole since the Owen Falls Dam was opened in 1954. It was only recently that a line was constructed along the main road that connects the four sub-counties in my constituency. I remember the President told the people there, while on a visit, that in the last financial year –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are fulfilling a constitutional obligation in responding to the State of the Nation Address as presented to Parliament and the nation. I would like to point out that it has been the procedure of this House that when we are winding up, the ministers respond to some of the issues raised. Right now, we are raising very important issues that may require policy follow-up or answers to harmonise on the way we operate. I wanted to seek your guidance on whether the minister present is the substantive Leader of Government Business and whether he is taking notes to be passed over to his colleagues.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I would like to say that I am not the new Prime Minister nor do I intend to become one; that is the mandate of the President. Anyway, allow me say that each ministry has a technical representative supposed to be following the proceedings of Parliament. I am very much sure that those representatives are listening and noting all the issues concerning their respective ministries.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, there is a reason technical people who come here sit where they sit. We should, as Parliament, be taken seriously. It is not the technical people that come to respond to these issues. They are not the ones you direct; you direct the ministers to respond. So, is the Minister of State for Works and Transport in order to reduce your Chair to that level of giving instructions to imaginary technical people who we do not even see here?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Government Chief Whip, you know that this debate is one of the most important functions of this House annually. It is the time when Members speak about the issues in their constituencies and when they influence policy decisions. I want to say that we adjourned to today with government’s knowledge. So, let me suspend the House for 15 minutes. We shall resume at a quarter passed three on the dot and I want all the ministers here.

(The House was suspended at 3.01 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.14 p.m, the Deputy Speaker, presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Contributions will move as follows: hon. Tubwita, hon. Kiryapawo, hon. Tuunde. Each one will take only five minutes. Maybe before you speak, let me ask the Government Chief Whip to say something.

3.14
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to apologise to the House over the lack of sufficient numbers of ministers on the Front Bench. The ministers are in touch with the Leader of Government Business. It is true that they had a very important Cabinet meeting this morning but efforts are being made to ensure that we have ministers here so that they can be in a position to take note of the critical matters that Members will be raising on the Floor of this House as contribution to the State of the Nation Address. 

In the meantime, I would like to assure honourable members that my colleagues and I who are here will be taking charge and will be taking note of whatever issues will be raised by the Members. We shall then be in a position to communicate these to the relevant ministers so that pertinent responses can be provided. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Members, join me in welcoming student interns from Pepperdime University. I believe they are up. You are welcome. (Applause) They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. 

3.16
MS LOI KIRYAPAWO (NRM, Budaka County, Budaka):  I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to thank His Excellency for the State of the Nation Address. I would also like to thank the mover of the motion, which is allowing us to the address. 

I have just a few observations, which I want to make on the State of the Nation Address. If His Excellency is able to control the speed at which his drivers move at, I do not think that we will have many Ugandans who own vehicles that can control their drivers the way the President does. So, I want to find out from the minister or from the Executive what happened to the speed governors. This is the only way we can make sure that every driver on the roads of Uganda can have their speed controlled. If it means all of us having speed governors, I would support that. 

Accidents do not have a level or they do not affect particular vehicles. We may say public vehicles which people use, like buses and taxis, but even our own vehicles are involved in road accidents. So these are things that we, as a nation and in this august House, should be firm about so that we see to it that we have these speed governors in place. 

Another thing that I want to comment on as I thank His Excellency the President is these rituals of human sacrifice. He talked about what happened in Kiboga and I know there have been some arrests of people who sacrifice others, especially children, but then you wonder why those people are set free.  We talk but we do not have people who have been incriminated or sentenced. I do not know what sentence we can really give. I think we have the sentence there but how to implement it is the problem. How do we make our –(Interruption) 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank hon. Kiryapawo for accepting this information. I would like to say that yes, it is true His Excellency the President has come out very clearly to condemn child sacrifice, which is part of witchcraft. The information I want to give you is that even His Excellency the President admitted having participated in witchcraft during the Luwero Triangle War and it was in the newspapers. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable Opposition Chief Whip to allege that His Excellency the President had any connection with child sacrifice? Hon. Member, you said “witchcraft” but it was in connection with child sacrifice. So is he in order to say that he had any slight association?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Hon. Members, I am not aware of His Excellency the President engaging in sacrifice of people, children or adult. No. (Applause)

MS KIRYAPAWO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have also not heard about it. However, can we define witchcraft? Maybe we can come up with a definition of witchcraft. Otherwise, if you want to say that witchcraft is human or child sacrifice, than we have a problem. Well, we have to ask the legal professionals to help us in defining witchcraft. 

Madam Speaker, what I was saying was that those who are arrested should be charged so that they work as a deterrent in case others might have the intention to sacrifice children and other human beings. We should not just arrest and people do not know what has happened to the one arrested, and the story is endless. It is then that the practice will continue. 

I would also like to ask the minister in charge of culture to come out and find out who these people are. They say children are being sacrificed but we do not see the minister in charge coming up vigorously to tackle that issue, which is also a responsibility of the Executive. What is culture?  We have entangled everything under the disguise of culture. I am sure if it is culture, then people would be sacrificing animals. I do not think that there is a culture where they say that –(Member timed out_)

3.23
MRS MARION TUUNDE (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to say something about His Excellency the President’s State of the Nation Address. Let me also thank my comrades for having come up with a resolution of Parliament to thank the President for his speech, which was so eloquent. I would like to thank the President. He is a member and leader on a strategic level and he came up with policies, which are so good that the leaders on the organisational and production level find very easy to implement.

Secondly, I would like to say that the President did not only look at human security but he looked at Uganda as a country, which has to move from being a developing country to a developed country. This he did by coming up with very good priorities as far as emergencies are concerned for example energy, human development, employment and so on. 

I would like to talk about two things, one of which is investment. Investment is very important. When you talk of creating 100,000 jobs, it is very good because unemployment is a state of denial. If somebody has no employment, obviously you expect that person to do a lot of things and indulge in conflict, go to other countries and so many other things.

I would also like to talk about oil exploration. This is very important because many countries, which have moved from developing to developed countries, have done so because of the mineral resources and good economic policies which they make. Countries like Thailand and Hong Kong have moved from the cluster of developing countries because of the policies that they make. So his speech was so important. 

I would like to say that the creation of employment is also very important. We rejoice that jobs have been created but are they for the indigenous people? We are seeing foreigners coming in. Look at the hotels and casinos and the people who go there. They are not Ugandans. Look at road construction; the Chinese even bring in people to do jobs, which can be done by fellow Ugandans. So as we celebrate, this celebration is limited.

We have also seen that even though we are creating jobs, retention of workers at work places is also very important. Investors come in and exploit workers so they are not able to stay at their work places and they go away. There is also no minimum wage and since the inception of structural adjustment programmes, we said let us go and leave others who have stayed to enjoy but it is not happening. The workers at work places are not being catered for in the best way. In addition, we should not just look at salary increments as motivating factors as there are many other factors like training and promotions. In any case, when salary increments come, Pay As You Earn (PAYE) takes it all.

Another thing is that when we talk of modernisation of agriculture, we should also mention irrigation and water harvesting. These are two important things, which must be done. 

Another thing is that as government, we should not look at implementing policies alone. Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) should come in to help in policy formulation, implementing and motivation. I would like to add that good policies, strategic plans and decisions minus good implementation tools will not create an impact but good policies with good implementation tools obviously create change.

I would also like to say that as we look at many policy frames, political frames, symbols, structural and timeframes should be very important. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before hon. Sabano comes in, I just wanted to inform the House that recently I was in Egypt and I met our Uganda-Egypt Coffee Manufacturing Company. They informed me that the condition for investors there is that for every foreigner you employ, you must employ nine Egyptians. That is the condition in Egypt. It is one times nine. So, maybe the government may wish to pick this up.

3.38
MS PHERRY KABANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to join others in thanking the President for a well thought-out State of the Nation Address. I would like to start with agriculture, which is on page 15 of the address: agriculture and rural development. Although Budaka has only recently received NAADS, I want to thank government for this well thought-out plan. NAADS is a very good plan for us to develop our areas. Although in some places it is a bit gabbled, I believe that with constant monitoring of this programme, it can improve.

I would also like to thank the development partners. Although many times we feel they are not doing as much as they could, they have done quite a lot, at least in my case. I also know that Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO) has helped many districts in improving nutrition and food security. This is done in consultation with the Ministry of Agriculture, and I would like to thank the Minister of Agriculture for a job well done.

On SACCOs, page 18, again I feel that a lot has to be done, but it is a very good programme as well, which I thank the government for introducing. It was meant to cover the whole country and we realise that about 56 sub-counties I think, which are called local government authorities, may not have benefited to date. My suggestion to government would be that it may not be possible until 2011 for all these districts to get SACCOs but something else could be done for them. I know that some of these fall within my district, Budaka. 

Some of the things that I suggest government could do is include universal health for those people who may not be able to get SACCOs in time. You can imagine that some are getting while others are not. So why don’t we get health for all, improve the health centres as well as maternal and child health and this would also be a pilot project for the country. 

I would also like to appreciate government for constructing roads. The Leader of the Opposition, in his speech, suggested that if all the roads are constructed at once, they will depreciate at once and that will be a problem. Surely, why should we wait? I remember from Kampala to Budaka would take us five hours but now it only takes us two and a half hours and this is because of a well thought-out plan by the government and I really appreciate this. The State of the Nation Address tells us that Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi and Pallisa-Mbale will be constructed in the next financial year which I appreciate and my people also appreciate very much.

On energy, I feel a bit uncomfortable about Umeme although government has done very well in this area but I think we failed in one area. We should not have privatised management. We should have created alternative service providers in the energy sector because when you privatise management, you are probably bringing another failure and putting them somewhere else. Umeme has actually caused a lot of havoc in Mbale where I have a small facility. They will come and pick -(Interjections)- and take it and then come back and tell you, “Well, you made a bypass or you did something wrong,” and they will fine you Shs 300,000. They will then bring it back and fine you Shs 1,000,000 and say, “You disconnected this and the other.” This is not good –(Member timed out_)

3.34
MS GRACE TUBWITA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by hon. Najjemba in support of the State of the Nation Address. I would like to thank the President for the analytical speech that he made to this nation. 

The President mentioned something concerning the increasing number of accidents on the road and the construction sector. I would like to agree with the President. First of all, most of the drivers we have nowadays are not well trained and I feel this is a very bad thing. They need to go to good driving schools. I would like to request the government, and maybe the Police, to take this up and open up a driving school where some of our drivers can be trained so that we can have good drivers. 

When you look at the building sector, most of the buildings that are collapsing do not follow the plans which they submit. You find that the plans that are submitted and what is put on ground are different. Most of these buildings submit plans that have a provision for parking, for example, but at the time of construction, the parking is left out. 

You wonder where the problem is, but I feel the problem is with the city law enforcement officers. They are failing to play their role. You find that when the plan is submitted and the building inspectors go to site, they do not scrutinise the plans or even look at what is taking place in order to advise these constructors. I feel that with this Kampala Bill which we are going to debate, maybe we shall handle some of these things. 

Also, at times some of these people occupy these buildings before getting the occupational permits and then you find the enforcement officers just passing by the building. At the end of the day when the buildings collapse, I feel we have to blame the city authorities also. So, I want to agree with the President on this issue which I feel should be handled urgently because we are losing our people. 

The President went ahead to highlight the export sector and he said there was growth in the export sector, which has contributed to the growth of the economy. This is true because if you were staying along the Juba road like me - I stay in Nakasongola and the trucks pass me by - you would see that there is a lot of business going on between Uganda and Juba. However, I have a problem with the 55 percent increase in maize export because we are exporting maize without value addition. I feel that as a country, we need to take the issue of value addition seriously because it makes our farmers suffer. Let me give you an example. Some of our farmers are in the poultry business, which is one of the businesses we are promoting with our. If you export this maize without value addition, that means the value of the feeds of the chicks will go so high and this will affect the farmers because they will not be in a position to feed these chicks -(Interruption) 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable colleague for giving way. The brief information I wanted to give you is that we are actually at more risk because of exporting grain which is the main source of chicken feed. Chicken feed now is very expensive but in this case we are addressing poultry as an enterprise. So the information I want to give her is that we should think of subsidising poultry farmers in particular because of chicken feeds and also regulate the much exportation of grain. Thank you.

MS TUBWITA: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, allow me to talk about Prosperity-for-All or Bonna Bagaggawale. When the President mentioned the interventions that are going to take place in the implementation of this programme, the Leader of the Opposition said that the President was accepting that it had failed and he referred to it as an un-kept promise. 

I want to say that whenever we are implementing a project, there are reviews. So, when you put something on paper, you have to look at the time of implementation what should be included in order for that programme to succeed. I would like to call upon my colleagues to support this programme because if we do not support it, it is our people who will be affected. A lot of money has been put into this programme; let us monitor NAADS because a lot of money has been put into it. 

We should not politicise it because at the beginning, NAADS was not covering the whole country. As I speak, NAADS covers the whole country. In Nakasongola, we were among the last people to benefit from NAADS and we are doing well. My people have started benefiting from it. If we start politicising it, I want to tell you, my colleagues, we shall not benefit from it. A lot of money has been put in so let us monitor and ensure that this project is a success for the benefit of our people so that they can be in position – (Member timed out_)

3.40
MR STEPHEN BAKKA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion that thanks of Parliament be extended to the President for a well thought-out and well delivered State of the Nation Address. 

I want to first of all start by making a general statement that my people and I are very happy with everything that is contained in this State of the Nation Address. (Laughter) I visited my constituency last Sunday and I had a talk show and I tried to give the highlights of this speech together with the budget to my people, and I can tell you that I was overwhelmed by the number of calls I received thanking the government for the continued commitment to the programmes that were highlighted in this speech. 

Allow me to briefly highlight the few programmes on which I want to contribute. I will start with the universal secondary education. It was explicitly put in this State of the Nation Address that government will continue to support universal secondary education and recently, a loan was passed to reconstruct and add classrooms on to the USE schools in districts. I checked the list and I have already benefited; about four schools in my constituency will be constructed to raise the pupil to classroom ratio to 60 students per classroom. Bukooli College, a school in my constituency, is the biggest beneficiary in this programme because we are going to have 24 classrooms constructed at once and my people are very happy and I must put this to Parliament.

Madam Speaker, if the President stood here and recommitted himself to the continued support of universal primary education, you could think it is a simple statement but let the President stand here and make a policy reversal and say, “We are now done with UPE; no more grants”, there will be a revolt in this country. My people are very happy with the continued support of government to UPE. 

I am extremely happy with the President on the issue of energy. He addressed the National Executive Council of the NRM and at length talked about the energy problem in this country. He again took time off in the State of the Nation Address to explain that this country cannot talk of development unless we address the issue of energy. He went ahead to give us the comparative figures by measurement of kilowatt hours per person of the different countries. I am very excited that government has taken a decision to tackle the construction of Karuma Dam, which is going to give us 700 Megawatts. In his statement, the Leader of the Opposition said that finally government has accepted to take on their idea of building a big dam. I think this is not right. This has been the idea of government. We are going to implement it and I thank the President for it.

I can give testimony that the government position to give a lot of money to the road sector in the previous financial year and again its continued commitment this financial year to give more money to the road sector has eased the problem of roads in the country. I can now travel to Bugiri in less than two hours time. I was in Nebbi recently; I went to check on my wife who works in Nebbi and I travelled without any problem. The country is now moving very well on the issue of the road sector.

Finally, Madam Speaker, allow me comment briefly on the speech of the Leader of the Opposition. In his conclusion he talked about software and referred to it as “The real non-material issues that afflict our nation.” He went ahead to talk about corruption, the false arrests in the country, tribal sentiments and the rosy economic figures. He said that these figures of six percent, the enrolment has increased from this to that; he called it rosy economic figures that do not mean anything to our people on the ground. I want to disagree with this statement. The figures that are reflected in the State of the Nation Address and in the Budget mean real issues to our people. As I speak, our people are happy benefiting from NAADS, UPE and the good roads. So, what is this software that the Leader of the Opposition is talking – (Member timed out_)

3.46 
MR PETER NYOMBI (Independent, Buruli County, Nakasongola): Madam Speaker, I want to applaud the President for the burden he has for the livelihood of the people of this country. If we caught the vision the President has for eradicating poverty in this country, in my view, we would be able to eradicate poverty in this country. 

On page 17 of the President’s statement, he stated that the goal of the NRM Government was to achieve Prosperity-for-All. In my view this is one of the most important programmes of this government because it aims at eradicating poverty from among our people. The policy should not be partisan. It is a policy that should be embraced by everybody because it intends to achieve good livelihood for everybody in this country. One would like to see everybody live a decent life.

Madam Speaker, we should all support this policy. We should catch the vision for Uganda to prosper. Uganda has very good climate and very good soils. Whereas in other countries they have one harvesting season, in Uganda we can plant and harvest three times a year unlike in Europe where they may have one harvesting season. We have natural resources from which we can tap a lot of wealth. We have lakes and I think we have not tapped all the wealth that we could have tapped from the natural resources that God gave us. I believe if these resources were sufficiently exploited, this country would move a long way in eradicating poverty. We have a very strong army here of over 300 Members of Parliament; if we caught the vision that the President has of fighting poverty, if we joined him irrespective of our partisan differences, this country could prosper. I am saying so because God gave us very good climate; we have rain in the morning, we have sunshine in the afternoon and at times we have both. We have very good soils and therefore we can exploit the resources that God gave us. So, Uganda can actually become a shopping basket for the entire continent. 

I, therefore, applaud the President for his vision, for the burden he has in fighting poverty; the desire he has to make sure that everybody in this country can have a litre of milk; that everybody in this country can have a kilo of meat, and that everybody in this country can live in a decent house. I believe if we caught that vision, we would be able to eradicate poverty. Thank you. 

3.49 
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Madam Speaker, allow me to thank the President for delivering the speech as required by the Constitution and the Leader of the Opposition for responding accordingly.

Since I do not have enough time for the preamble, allow me to start right with the point of the President where he said, “Provisional data by the Uganda Bureau of Statistics indicate that the Ugandan economy has continued to grow at a robust rate of 7.0 percent” and he says this is despite the economic crisis in the world.

I want Members and Uganda to look at this kind of implied growth in terms of their lives in their homes; whether it is actually true that Uganda is growing at a robust rate. I was very attentive to the President when he was speaking, he said for those who think this government is not performing, they should go and hang. I would want to call on the President to have a heart for those who feel this government is not delivering to their expectations and by this I will give you an example of a primary school teacher who earns a salary of Shs 200,000. He has got to feed his family; he has a wife perhaps two or three - I understand the Basoga lead in polygamy. Imagine a primary school teacher who has four wives and he earns a salary of Shs 200,000, how do you think this teacher will look at this seven percent growth in terms of his household development? I would like to call on the President to revise such statements and please think about those who feel things can be made better through making better statements especially on the state of the nation.

Secondly, while talking about the growth in terms of agriculture, the President went on to say – (Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you. I know quite often when we have an opportunity to make statements and at times the leaders also do that, they make some off-the- cuff statements which do not necessarily constitute part of the speech on the statement that they are making. The Member is in possession of the State of the Nation Address as presented by the President. Can she quote verbatim from what page the President said, “Go and hang” so that we can officially respond to it if it is part of the statement?

MS AKELLO: I thought you were rising on a matter that matters. (Laughter) Unfortunately, since I have limited time, allow me to proceed. I was saying the President on page 7 was giving us evidence and information in terms of the growth in agriculture. Much as he recognises the fact that there is a decline in agricultural production, but in quick succession of his words, he forgets that the majority of Ugandans especially in Northern Uganda lost their livestock in the early NRA wars and up to now they have not recovered them. He talks of agriculture in terms of livestock only whereas to some of us agriculture is not just about livestock, it is also about crop husbandry. I would have expected him to give us some information about that.

And in quick succession, he forgets to talk about the most important thing that is affecting this agriculture sector - climate change. You will all agree with me that the country and the world is experiencing climate change and this has affected agricultural production and you are all aware that the majority of Ugandans are employed in agriculture. But the President has not taken concern to talk in terms of how we can address these problems to do with climate change. We should be talking in terms of having irrigation schemes and providing water for production -(Member timed out_)

3.56
MR ISSA KIKUNGWE (DP, Kyaddondo County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not want to appear like I want to quarrel but I will first of all register my disappointment at the length of the speech. As I downloaded this speech, I got 52 pages. This is too much! I think those doing the work of drafting these speeches, in one hour and in a few pages, the President can put his message across and it will be clearly understood.

MS MUGERWA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Kikungwe to confuse the House by indicating the number of pages that were written - because these days with technology the size of the speech depends on the font used? Maybe he should just look at the font. Is he in order to question the number of pages instead of the content and the size of the font that was used?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I actually do not know how he was calculating. The text I have has only 41 pages.

MR KIKUNGWE: I downloaded this speech this morning and it has 52 pages. This is a document that was presented by the Media Centre and if you do not believe in it, just tell us that the Media Centre is confusing us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kikungwe, my Office distributed text of this speech to all the Members. This is what I know and this is what my Office distributed. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I stand on a matter of procedure and to seek your indulgence. When hon. Franca was on the Floor, the hon. Dombo did make reference and challenged her to show which page of the State of the Nation Address she was drawing her example from and again it is coming up. But on the 4th of June, when the President gave the State of the Nation Address, all that he talked was recorded in the Hansard and I have a copy of it here. Whatever was written and said off-the-cuff is all recorded and the copies that have been given to us are edited copies. I wish to seek some guidance. When a person makes reference to what is contained in the official record of Parliament containing all that the President talked and the one which is edited, which one do we now believe?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wadri, how many pages does the Hansard of that day have?

MR WADRI: Well, I have a copy of the Hansard here but I think what determines –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, how many pages is the Hansard?

MR WADRI: You see, the size of a copy depends on the font. The font and the manner in which the Hansard is printed talks for itself. We cannot compare that with any other text. But it still has got all the information that is required.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are wasting hon. Kikungwe’s time because we have the Hansard and you have failed to tell me how many pages it has. But I have the text here which I distributed myself.

MR KIKUNGWE: Madam Speaker, 41 pages is big enough. The President did say something about Uganda’s economy being highly insulated against the global financial crisis. You may recall that many Ugandans abroad are losing their jobs and even the money that used to come from abroad has almost been reduced by 50 percent. This calls for strategies to either maintain the level or even increase. Otherwise, if this continues, we may end up having the effect being too much on our economy.

That the economy has grown ten times since NRM took over power. This is only true with tax collections because as in 1985/86, Shs 5.0 billion was being collected and today trillions are being collected - here we have made some good progress. But I want to know, has the same thing happened in the employment sector that Ugandans getting jobs have increased ten times? Is it the same thing with production? Is it the same thing with exports for this country and if not, then we need to critically look at this situation. 

The business community is at a loss. Bank of Uganda has continued to encourage commercial banks to trade in treasury bills and this has had an adverse effect of making loanable funds very scarce. While it is good for purposes of controlling inflation, as a business community, we have run short of loanable funds and as a result interest rates have remained so high. I have heard the Minister of Finance appeal to commercial banks to reduce the lending rates but I have known Uganda’s economy to be a liberalised economy where the forces of supply and demand determine the price. I do not think that the minister’s directive of lowering the interest rates will be taken seriously.

4.04
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start by refreshing our minds on the previous State of the Nation Addresses. In 2007, the following roads were stated as those to be constructed: Soroti-Dokolo-Lira, Kabale-Kisoro–Bunagana–Kyanika, Fort Portal–Bundibugyo–Lamia, Jinja–Kamuli, and Kampala Northern Bypass. The same roads were repeated in 2007/08, 2008/09, 2009/10. 

The same repetition in the state of the nation is on energy; in 2006/07, the President said, “Mr Speaker, it may be recalled that last year, although our economy was doing quite well, the energy challenge that was being faced was likely to put some check on the country’s economic growth. The mid-term measures include, construction of Bujagali Hydro Plant, construction of Karuma Hydro Plant and the long-term measures include development of two large hydro-power sites namely; Ayago North, Ayago South.” That was in 2006/07, 2007/08, 2008/09 and 2009/10. (Laughter)

On Prosperity-for-All, the President in 2006/07 stated in his address [HON. MEMBERS: “What did he say?”] The problem if I quote is that my time is very limited. He stated that Prosperity-for-All would be a priority in the government budget. The same was repeated in 2007/08, 2008/09 and 2009/10. The question is: is the State of the Nation about accountability or about statements?

On growth over the years, the President consistently talked about how this economy is growing. But this repetition, this Parliament should not sweep under the carpet. We cannot keep stamping our feet when the President is talking. We cannot be telling the President, “Thank you” when we cannot question what he has done with the money we have allocated to him in five years. That is not right for this Parliament. It is our duty and a commitment as the people’s representatives, to question the President’s accountability. (Applause)

The other time when the Leader of the Opposition was talking, the Minister of State for Works shouted, “Northern Bypass is for EU”. What is your role as government? Northern Bypass has been there for how long? For how many years are we going to say, “This road is for EU, this road is for government” and you cannot -(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, when the Leader of the Opposition was giving his response, I remember I was seated there, at the extreme end. I am not known to be somebody who shouts. I have never shouted at the Leader of Opposition and I do not intend and it will never happen that I will shout at anybody. I was brought up in a very good manner. Is it in order therefore for somebody to allege that I shouted? And on the Hansard, even when you shout, it is recorded; when you laugh, it is recorded. Is it in order for somebody to allege that a person of my calibre can shout at somebody?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know there are two ministers of state for works. I do not know which one she meant that shouted. She did not say the name because I know there are two of you. (Laughter and Applause) 

MS AMONGI: Madam Speaker, I want us to analyse the issue of growth. As the President was making his State of the Nation address, some two days after, there was a statement from Bank of Uganda that this economy is being affected by the global economic crunch. The URA also came with a statement that revenue collection had gone down.

However, the President insisted that there is no effect of international economic credit crunch on this economy. The growth we are talking about being measured by the President about how many phones someone owns cannot tell how the rural poor are doing because the reality of the economy is that this economy is being run by the global agents and the state agents who get commission. They eat it; some of them siphon it out of the country and when they get investments here they employ their own people. You go to Nakumatt -(Member timed out_)

4.12
MR JULIUS EMIGU (FDC, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to go straight to pages 39 and 40 where the President is talking about war on corruption. He laboured to explain that we are going to fight corruption. But the people of Kaberamaido County were actually impressed by this statement because they now think that after 23 years the President at least has woken up to begin fighting a very dangerous cancer in our country.

Recently, when the President was in Teso, some NRM youth who were disappointed with the failures of government - because they even stated before the President that dams were silted, NAADS was not operating well, head teachers were charging fees in UPE schools - decided to cross from NRM. At the end of it all, envelopes actually exchanged hands. So, my people were really wondering what the President was doing in appreciation of the people who have already crossed. Isn’t that corruption of a kind that should be explained?

They doubt the President’s will in fighting corruption. Even if you look at the issue of giving districts – I come from Kaberamaido District which was given sometime in 2000. Because the President did not get votes from there, people are asking, “Even after being given a district, you did not give the President votes!” Which means the trading of districts is also corruption of a kind. So when I hear that the President is going to fight corruption, I begin doubting it. Why should I give the President votes because he has given me a district, which is a normal responsibility of Parliament and I know it is Parliament that really gives us that kind of thing? So, I feel there is no seriousness in fighting corruption. But at least it is a sign of waking up, on his part.

On page 32, the President talks of education demanding dual responsibility between the state and the parents to contribute to the education of children. Parents have not yet taken their responsibility of providing their children with meals to ensure that children do not go through the school day hungry. 

I am happy with this U-turn of the President. I remember in 2007 in this Parliament, the Minister of Education had it rough from the Members of the House here when she was trying to defend that the President does not want children to be charged anything, yet we were arguing that it is the responsibility of parents to give food to their children. It was not until hon. Butime came in that the minister cannot deviate from the position of the President that the minister was saved. But I am happy about this U-turn. It means our argument in the House here ended up educating the President fundamentally and I am happy about it.

Still on page 32, the President jubilates about giving Shs 200,000 as salary. I think this is really a shame! Honestly, how can somebody run a whole family of say 20 people with Shs 200,000? Imagine, a teacher in Kampala who does not even have a garden where he is going to dig; he must buy everything using the Shs 200,000. Now, the President threatens by saying, “Teacher absenteeism must be stamped out decisively and I have directed the Minister of Education to ensure the Education Standards Agency ….” Can you imagine on Shs 200,000! Actually the teachers will even prefer to go to private institutions that will pay them more money than that other than waiting and being taken to task on Shs 200,000 -(Member timed out_) 

4.17
MR PETER OMOLO (FDC, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will refer you to where it says that initiatives to fight corruption need support from all stakeholders including Members of Parliament.

I grew up in a fishing community and they used to tell me that fish begins rotting from the head. Now, I would like to be guided as to how MPs can help in fighting corruption. It is on record that Members of this Parliament, I think during the Sixth Parliament, censured some ministers. However, in the Seventh Parliament the same ministers were recycled to become ministers of bigger ministries. It is on record that committees of this Parliament have made reports and made recommendations but their reports are always sat on. It is also on record that some Members on the government side have always spoken their minds in support of fighting corruption but they have been called “rebels.” Now, I would like to be told, at what point are MPs going to help in fighting corruption? 

I have a belief that as long as we still have the untouchables and the issue of historicals, we shall not stop corruption. The only way we can fight corruption is by strengthening our institutions. If the institution of Parliament is not respected then how do you expect Parliament to fight corruption? So, short of that we shall always have corruption among us.

Let me refer to the President’s conclusion when he said that all leaders, political or otherwise, should guide their people to refrain from mixing politics with development programmes. I will also refer you to the motion where the mover said, “Government has had to revisit the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) Programme. The revised NAADS programme, if well implemented, provides a window of hope to our people.” 

I wish to be told what the role of the Movement chairman at the sub-county in the NAADS programme is. The Movement chairman is a political head of the sub-county and so what role does he have to play in the NAADS programme at the sub-county? Madam Speaker, I would like to bring it to your attention that NAADS has been derailed. It is no longer an advisory body; it is now a body that gives handouts.

I will cite a few examples. My belief is that NAADS should be able to educate somebody to look after whatever he intends to grow or keep from the initial stage up to the time he sells it. But it is unfortunate that in my county, they are giving chicks of one month, especially broilers, which are supposed to be looked after for one and a half months only and you sell them. Now if a farmer is going to look after these chicks for only two weeks before he sells them, what knowledge does he have about looking after poultry? At the end of it all he is going to get the money but he does not know how to keep the chicks and therefore he will sell them once and never keep chicks again because there is nobody who is going to look after chicks for three weeks to sell to him.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. You remember very well that about two years ago this Parliament complained that NAADS was only giving advice, capacity building seminars and swindling a lot of money and so government decided and changed. Actually, a Member of Parliament is the chairman of NAADS in his constituency and hon. Omolo must know that. So, is he in order to make us drive in reverse gear that we should only give advice without giving inputs like most Members were urging? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, I did not want to interrupt hon. Omolo. This House expressed frustration that we were spending money on capacity building and we were not allowed to participate in decision making or monitoring and so it was reversed. Now I do not know where you want us to go. I did not want to interrupt but I do not know what you want us to do. 

MR OMOLO: Madam Speaker, it is proper to give the inputs but it depends at what stage you give the inputs. If you are giving the inputs at the stage when somebody is about to sell them have you helped him to know how to keep those things? I believe you will not have done so.

And then, I do not think we shall be able to achieve this Bonna Bagaggawale. The Minister of State for Agriculture can bear me witness that prices have been inflated. I know of an example in one of my sub-counties where a pesticide was given at Shs 200,000 for one litre. A thing which costs about Shs 10,000 on the open market was given at Shs 200,000. Now, where is this farmer going to get money to pay for that thing when it is going to help him for only one month and yet he needs about five years to start selling oranges? So you find that this man is bound to sell some of his property which he already has before he is given these things and therefore he will not be benefit at all -(Member timed out_) 

4.23
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion that thanks be given to His Excellency for the precise State of the Nation Address that hinted on most of the issues that affect our community. 

On page 3, I agree entirely with the President that to a large extent some of the accidents which we are experiencing would have been avoided if we had policies which were in place and were being implemented. Most of these accidents which are going unnoticed are caused by boda bodas. They will not follow traffic rules and even when they do, if they overtake, a motor vehicle will just make a u-turn in reverse gear and in most cases they end up causing accidents.

In developed countries, the pedestrians have got their separate lanes as well as the motorcyclists and the cyclists. I want to propose that as we plan for our country, especially as we are going to look at the Kampala City Bill, we need to start planning for some of these aspects before we run into problems. 

Madam Speaker, the President talked about the accidents being caused by collapsing buildings. I would like to say that, in the Seventh Parliament when the Bwebajja building collapsed and killed so many people; there was a commission of inquiry that was instituted. Can the minister tell us what the results were? Where is that report? What came out? We would be helping this country if the report had been published. And possibly, we would have addressed some of these incidents that are occurring.

I want to thank government for procuring more ferries – if I can remember, in my early days we used to have a ferry on Lake Albert, which moved from Butiaba through Wanseko to Panyimuru in Nebbi and Mahgipot, in DRC. This ferry used to save people, who use boats, from water accidents. I want to find out from the minister, as we move towards the East African Federation, what plans he has to rejuvenate, especially water transport on Lake Albert. 

Anyway, I would like to commend government for trying to bring back the MV Kabalega that sunk. And, I would like to urge government that while construction goes on, we should not lose the name, Kabalega, because it has a historical background to the Bunyoro region.

I would like - on page 65 the President talked about education – to say that I am happy that we have made tremendous achievements in USE and UPE enrolments compared to previous years. However, I notice and also bring it to the attention of government that as we help the education sector, government should come up with a deliberate programme to help our girls from dropping out of schools because of early marriages and FGM as practiced in Karamoja. Government should develop a thorough programme of introducing boarding schools in the regions that have the highest girl-child school drop-out rate.

Lastly, I would like to commend government – we have started developing a culture of renovating our institutions and the infrastructure, and I know that most of us do not renovate even our houses. And, I know the President talked about rehabilitating referral hospitals. 

My appeal, however, is that as we renovate these hospitals, we should consider hospitals like Kiryandongo, which are in a sorry state. That hospital is in a sorry state. The theatre that would be helping the so many Ugandans who use that route to Sudan and DRC is in a dilapidated state. We should think about the referral hospitals on the highways -(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us have hon. Namabidde, hon. Lokii, and hon. Muwulize in that order.

4.28
MRS SYLVIA SSINABULYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to start by appreciating the President on his commitment to the Prosperity-for-All programme. I believe that as Ugandans, we agree that prosperity for Ugandans is very important. So, whatever challenges we are experiencing, we need to give it a lot of support.

The President mentioned NAADS and SACCOs as one of the ways of increasing household incomes for Ugandans and I entirely agree with him on that. However, allow me say that although I believe that the two programmes can help alleviate poverty and increase household incomes, we need to increase resources given to NAADS. 

Today, many Ugandans are demanding access to NAADS programmes - when you look at the number of households that were picked, they cannot help us quickly achieve the ambition for Prosperity for All.

We also need to look at the amount of money given to sub-counties for this purpose. This is important because the same amount is given to every sub-county, yet some of them have got bigger populations than others.

On the issue of SACCOs, I would like to say that although many of them have been created, most of them are weak. So, their capacity needs to be built. What is happening in the country is that people are forming SACCOs while expecting Government to just give them money; they think Bonna Bagaggawale means distributing money. We need to ensure that people are sensitised about the purpose of SACCOs.

The President also talked about government’s focus on the roads. I would like to say this is a welcome venture. However, I would like to note that a number of roads have been mentioned year in; year out. I will give an example of the Busega-Mityana Road, which has been concurrently getting mentioned in policy statements and budget speeches – actually in his address on page 20, His Excellency the President said work on the Busega-Mityana Road had commenced. 

I use that road many times in a week and what I see on the ground is only the patching of potholes. It is good the Minister of State for Works is in this House – I do not know whether patching of potholes is the same as reconstruction. Maybe, the President was misinformed about the work having started, when it hadn’t.

The President also talked about the issue of energy in terms of achievements in power generation. Although that is a welcome initiative, I must point out that the cost of electricity in this country is unaffordable to even people who earn some good salary. I am informed that our electricity tariffs are among the highest in the East African region. So, something must be done to make electricity affordable to the majority of Ugandans. 

In that same vein, I would also like to urge Government to invest in cheaper power production sources like solar. I am saying this because Uganda is blessed with sunlight 12 hours a day. I think this can be a cheaper way of extending electricity to areas, which highly need it.

Finally, let me say something about the health sector. I would like to say that we have a very big problem in the health sector. When the President talked about the need to construct Health Centre IIIs and IVs I said, “Government must be applauded for that”. However, when you look at the equipment – these health centres are not equipped; they are understaffed; and there are constant drug stock-outs. 

Recently, the Committee on Social Services visited many Health Centre IIIs, and I would like to inform the House that the committee found out that many of these centres do not have basic drugs like Coartem for children. This is a very serious issue – (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from hon. Lokii, hon. Muwulize, hon. Nyakaisiki, hon. Oleru, hon. Tashobya and hon. Kagwera in that order.

4.34
MR ABRAHAM PETER LOKII (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to contribute to the motion of thanking the President for his precise exposition in the State of the Nation Address.

I would like to address myself to point No. 67, which talks about health – to continue from where my colleague stopped.

Madam Speaker, there is information relating to the fact that the Ministry of Health or Ministry of Education trained people called comprehensive nurses, to a number of over 5,000, two or three years ago, and yet my colleague has just said that there is inadequacy in the  provision of health services.  

I would like to know from the Minister of Health why the 5,000 trained medical personnel - comprehensive nurses have not been absorbed into the service, in order for us to be able to achieve the Millennium Development Goals in the health sector? 

Secondly, I would also like to get an understanding of what goes on with the training; the scholarships in the medical field? I would like, Madam Speaker, to refer to the fact that in Kotido District last year, interviews were carried out and 15 students qualified to go on Government scholarship to the medical training institutions, but unfortunately the names of these students disappeared. 

They have become a menace to us the leaders; they are asking why they have not been taken to train and yet we all know that Karamoja is a region that doesn’t even have the basic personnel in terms of nurses and mid wives to provide the services.  It is important that an explanation is given.

There is also the issue of a conflict. I have learnt that as a result of change of policy, the medical training institutions were removed from the Ministry of Health and brought to the Ministry of Education. But of recent, there seems to be hidden animosity that is arising between the two ministries, where the Ministry of Health is saying they would like to take back the schools. What does this mean in terms of the training of our personnel? Because some are of the view that if there is anything in terms of quality control, then the technical people in the Ministry of Health go and strengthen that aspect in these training institutions. It is important that the ministry comes out clearly on this, because it seems also to have a bearing on the relationship between the students trained and the Nurses’ Council.  

The Nurses’ Council has certain levels of policies as an association, where they register against the fact that there have been a lot of shifts. I think an explanation needs to be given. 

I would also like to address myself to the issue of Prosperity-for-All. Madam Speaker, last year, tractors were given out, and each of the Karamoja districts got one tractor, but this has created a problem. 

In Kotido District, we have got one tractor which is supposed to plough for every family, but when you look at our rainfall pattern, we only have 30 days; like for this year, we only had rain at the beginning of April to the end of May. But there are gardens that have not been ploughed up to now.  

I am just getting scared as to what we are doing as government, because one tractor is totally going to have no effect. In fact, it is confusing people, since everybody has sat back to wait for the tractor that is going to plough for them. 

It is important that government gets organised. If we are talking about increased production, than let us target big farms so that there is an impact. What meaning is there in going to plough a garden of 2 acres and yet you could put people in farms?   

I organised some youth this year to open up farms, but they were no tractors to plough them because massive production would help to produce food for others who have no capacity to produce that amount. And, therefore, we would then be dealing with the issue of income at the household level, to enable them to be access produce. 

Madam Speaker, I think this is very defeating. I would like to ask the Minister of Agriculture to think of giving us a more comprehensive way in which they intend to boost production in these districts, because with the global warming now, we are under threat, and the way to move is not the six households. We must get very strategic ways of ensuring that our people go into production. 

4.39
MR IBRAHIM MUWULIZE (Independent, Buikwe County West, Mukono): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to add my voice to support the motion thanking His Excellency for his very thorough speech on the State of the Nation, and indeed,  as it was followed by a very pro-people budget a couple of  days thereafter. 

I want to focus on the area of foreign direct investment in this country; I think this is a very welcome development and it is where Uganda has done very well. However, government must look into this investment, making sure that our locals sincerely get employment, because this is what is going to give a respective per capita income to our people, and it is what will give us the joy our people deserve. Otherwise, the investment is there but the foreigners are still benefiting a little bit more, and are happier than the locals. We want the locals to be happier; to promote and also be very supportive. 

In the area of infrastructure, sincerely the will is okay and it is very welcome, but the implementation needs to be a little more balanced. Because, like in my area, that is Mukono-Buikwe area, the road from Mukono to Katosi or to Nyenga; it was mentioned in the last financial year, but to date, there are no signs that it is on the ground. 

And, recently I joined the implementing agency, UNRA; I was really perturbed when the Executive Director himself actually failed to locate where they are going to address this road.  I really felt that the ministry revisits this and gets into progress; otherwise, the balancing of implementation is what is lacking. But the will is really there and we see it.

In the area of energy and other related services that are supporting the development; I think Government is taking a very good trend. We must have all the energy production, the power production as much as we want. 

But there is what is disturbing; the government institutions themselves are getting overwhelmed by the bills for power and water. So, the policy should address this to ensure that the common person gets a reflection of what the policy is really intended for.

The education policy; actually it is welcome that we have this USE in the Central region where we don’t have seed schools, which were actually mentioned, but now seem to be no more.  It is good that the private run schools were allowed access to USE.  But I will request that the ministry looks into offering them services, like laboratories, libraries and other services because the children that go there are our very children and we need them. 

I think that it is very important that we get the Jinja reserves revamped. This is very welcome as alluded to by His Excellency the President, because the crisis of 2008 is very much alive in our hearts. We want to actually avoid it, and so, since the government is looking into it, we urge the implementing ministry to ensure that we have it. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.43
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute and also join my colleagues in thanking the President for his State of the Nation Address that addresses a number of issues. Allow me to comment on a few matters. 

It is true that the President and government’s efforts in addressing prosperity should be supported, and in this regard, I do support the NAADS programme that has contributed, to some extent, to alleviating people’s aspirations to get out of poverty. But NAADS has a problem in its conception, because NAADS’ organisations are membership organisations. One has to subscribe and pay money in order to become a member of NAADS, and that money is used for co-funding the money that comes from the centre. 

The result of this is that a number of people, especially the poor who cannot afford to pay the subscription fees, cannot participate in the NAADS programme. This means that the people who are least able and do not have money are actually not participating in NAADS programmes. 

I, therefore, propose that membership fees required to be paid by the people should be abolished so that NAADS becomes open to all the people; so that all the people can participate in this important programme.

On page 16, the President reports that one of the channels in which Prosperity for All is going to be delivered is through the cooperatives, and I support this. However, we seem to have taken SACCOs a little more seriously than production. 

There is a very big push by the leaders to go for SACCOs or savings institutions instead of going for production. I think we should now try to balance the two so that people can go into producer cooperatives where they can get inputs; where they can collect their produce and access markets. Otherwise, if we over concentrate on SACCOs, I think we may miss the point. 

SACCOs, as the name goes, are basically savings and credit institutions. So, one must first of all save and then get credit. But now we seem to be setting up institutions to wait for government grants, and that is why some of the SACCOs - if we take an audit of the SACCOs that have been formed in the last two years - I am sure a number of them have not had the time to celebrate their first anniversary. 

It is important to go back to the drawing board and see how we can match production with savings. Otherwise, SACCOs are good, but they must support production.

Still, on the matter of SACCOs, government is giving grants to SACCOs; start-up kits and safes, and encouraging them to go and borrow money. But I was very surprised when I went upcountry over the weekend, and found that actually, URA is on the door of the SACCOs that are trying to come up, and asking them to pay tax. Yes, actually my SACCO was given 45 days to pay, otherwise it would be closed. 

Isn’t it contradictory that we are giving grants and asking people to form SACCOs, and we are following the list of the able and taxing them instead of supporting them? Isn’t it better to give them time; a grace period so that they can come up and then we can look at the matter of taxes later?

Lastly, is the matter of roads. I would like to thank the President on his commitment to construct roads, most especially the Ishaka-Ntungamo-Kagamba Road, though it has taken a bit of time. We would like to see some work done but at the same time, we would also like to see the ministry take up the roads which were promised. 

Last year the government took up some roads for maintenance and when they took up these roads, the district authorities just left them. So, some of the roads are actually impassable –(Member timed out_)

4.49
MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues in thanking the President for the good work done. The President gave us so many figures concerning the growth of the economy. It is true that this economy is growing and we thank him for that. However, the problem is that much as the economy is growing, it is leaving out many other people and we may not blame the President for this because growth - I heard colleagues talk of the figures not being reflected on the ground - this is because growth takes into account the quantitative; so we are waiting for development generally, which takes time and takes into account quantitative and qualitative aspects. 

This is why you cannot see these things. Otherwise, growth is there because you can see so many people with cars, but when you go to Karamoja, people do not have what to eat. You need a bit of economics to understand the whole thing. We are waiting for development because people are still suffering, much as many others have even what to throw away.

The President downplayed the issue of the global crisis. This was not good because the fact is that there is a crisis even in this country. The micro and macro indicators show that there is a problem, but he downplayed it somehow. But admittedly and politely, he put it there because he admits that the economy was projected to perform at a certain level, which it did not. I believe that as a father, he did not want to alarm the nation, which is good.

The other unfortunate thing is that we are investing money where we don’t have a lot of advantage. For instance, we are talking of industrialisation and the service sector. It is true that these are very important, but we are forgetting the agricultural sector, which is the backbone, as well as tourism, where we have comparative advantage, and putting in little money. 

I believe that we should put much money where we have comparative advantage; then we can later come to industrialisation because we cannot compete favourably with other countries that have developed in the industrial sector.

The other issue is about inflation. It is true that most of the inflation today is imported from other countries because our economy mainly depends on other economies. But there are those types of inflation that we have that are being caused by our own indiscipline like some people not following the budget correctly, which later causes inflation. 

There is also inflation that comes about due to high food prices. It is true that high food prices are an advantage to this country, but because we had not prepared adequately, now the demand is higher than supply. That is why we are experiencing problems. And with the new markets in Southern Sudan and Rwanda – we did not prepare, yet we knew that wars in these countries were bound to end. 

My understanding is that much as our economy is moving on very well –(Interjections)– I believe we are doing very well compared to other economies in the region, but we have messed up somewhere; we need to style up.

On the issue of SACCOs, I would like to note that it is true they are a good thing. However, we need to plan. We just asked the people to form SACCOs without planning. That is why many of them have collapsed, save for those that existed before.

The other issue I would like to comment on is education. True, government has done well as far as UPE and USE are concerned. However, I notice that the parents have abandoned their responsibilities. They have politicised the issue insisting that government has to cater for everything. I think we need to come in and tell the parents what their responsibilities are. 

On corruption, Madam Speaker, I would like to say that government is doing very well because it has put in place institutions to fight it. However, we still need more political will – we have not seen people go to prison for 20 years; we have not seen people being put on firing squad; yet this is what we need in this country. Otherwise, people will take it for granted – we need to be more serious when handling issues of corruption. I am not saying that we are not doing much. I know both government and the President are trying so much, but we need more –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us have hon. Bako, hon. Ogwal, hon. Okello and hon. B’Leo later.

4.54
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr President has never failed to amaze me. Apart from this very beautiful picture where you and Rt Hon. Ssekandi are looking very good, I still wonder what the content of this document means to Ugandans.

Since you love statistics, I also love statistics. The President talked about agriculture, mentioning that for every Ugandan there are 0.3 cows or bulls; for every Ugandan, there are 0.1 sheep; and that for every Ugandan, there are 1.7 chicken. 

This is a State of the Nation Address that is globally read and understood. In the 21 Century, if Ugandans, I inclusive, have 0.1 sheep, it means I either have the nose of the sheep or only the tail. (Laughter) The simple implication is that we actually have none – if we have to talk about improving our livelihoods where we need Shs 20 million per household, and we are having such disturbing statistics of less than half an animal per Ugandan; then we have got a great problem.

When you talk about investing in agriculture, and we go on to say that the ultimate goal of agriculture is to ensure that rural households in Uganda earn an income of at least Shs 20 million per year, yet we are also talking about less than half a chicken per Ugandan, then this is very unrealistic on the part of the Head of State.

When you go to the cooperatives that they are talking about, 900 cooperatives; since the resumption of the restructured NAADS, agricultural extension service delivery, Madam Speaker, is a public good or service; it is not delivered in singular pronouncements. For example, you cannot talk about six households per parish yet in one household there are possibly seven adults who own this kind of asset, but whose landholding has reduced fundamentally, and you expect an income of Shs 20million per annum. That is a joke and a lie to the nation.

In 2006, when the President promised this nation in his election manifesto Shs 20 million –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Actually, it is more than information to her; I would like to seek her guidance. The President describes a situation of poverty where as an honourable member, you do not even have a whole sheep; you have less than a sheep. So, how would you want to guide this country to move away from a quarter of a sheep to having at least a whole sheep? (Laughter)

MS BAKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will be presenting to this House the alternative policy position of the Opposition, and consequently, I will be informing the professor on how to generate a full sheep from the tail of a sheep.

When I look at the 900 cooperatives that have been formed since the resumption of the NAADS – I have stated clearly that you cannot give a public good selectively. You must have a proper strategy of trying to educate the farmers on how they can utilise the minimum resources they have, in form of half chickens and half sheep, to transform the small landholdings into meaningful livelihoods for themselves. Unfortunately, there is no reflection of that in this document. What I see here is the rhetoric that has persisted for the last years I have been in the House.

I always wonder when the President goes to sleep and contemplates to come here on the 4th of June to address the nation, is he dreaming? Does he just manipulate his Executive as to what to say? I am saying this because nothing in this document is absolutely new –(Member timed out_)

5.00
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate His Excellency, the President, for fulfilling the constitutional obligation of addressing the nation at the beginning of each Session of Parliament.

I rose with the Constitution in my hand because I read the President’s speech. Okay, I was in the House when he delivered his speech but it was riddled with so many jokes. That is why I went to read it again; it was more useful to me. And after reading it, I realised that what I had anticipated had not appeared in it. 

The Constitution clearly says that he must address the nation on the state of the nation. But what I saw – I may be wrong, and I must be forgiven – is that he only addressed the nation on the budget. He actually just gave us a pre-empted Budget Speech.

But the same Constitution also allows him to come from time to time to talk to the nation through Parliament. So, I think the President should have been given time to come back to address us on issues of the budget after the Budget Speech. That is when he would deliver his contribution on the budget.

I do not want to say that I am lamenting; I want to say that I am disappointed because His Excellency the President happens to be the Head of State; he is a brother of mine and I have known him for a long time. But for the President to take to the Floor on the 4th day of June and make no mention of the hunger-stricken country, and instead says that the economy is doing well, paralyses me! 

By the time he delivered the speech, the media had already informed the nation that people were dying in West Nile. People were already dying in Acholi, Karamoja, Lango and in other places. That is where he should have begun from, but he just told us be calm; that the economy is doing well and that even the global financial crisis is not affecting us; that all is well. There is something lacking somewhere. If I misunderstood the President, then I am sorry; but I really think, as the father of the nation, that should have been the focus of his address. 

MR KUBEKETERYA: Information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will you take it?

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, unless you will give me more time. I want to say that the issue that concerns the nation across the board – whether South, East, West, North or wherever - is child sacrifice. It is all over the place and it is depressing for the nation; but for the President to make a 3-hour speech of 41 pages and make no mention of it, is alarming! -(Interjection)- I don’t mind; you can stop me because I don’t have much to say.

Finally, this State of the Nation Address is a confirmation of what the President said in 1992; that he would rather rule two million Ugandans. At that time, they were 22 to 23 million Ugandans, and today this speech has shown that he is more concerned with the 20 percent of the population that falls under industrialisation and service, and that he is not concerned about addressing the serious issue of agriculture, which concerns or touches the lives of 20 percent of the population. 

The president is right; he is not concerned about the poverty in this country and there is no method or mechanism he has come up with to address poverty. If you talk about Prosperity for All, it is prosperity for State House but not for all –(Member timed out_)

5.05 
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the President for giving us another opportunity to talk about him -(Laughter)- I am going to be very brief, because the Leader of the Opposition has done his best. I thank the Leader of the Opposition for his response, which in my view is much better than the State of the Nation Address. 

I want to begin with a very serious matter, which in my view, the President deliberately omitted. This is the question of national unity. For the last 23 years, there has been a practice, if not a policy, of one nation, two countries and I did not expect the Head of State to fail to address this matter. 

Today we had a workshop on PRDP. PRDP, NUSAF and NAADS are a glaring admission by Government that we have one nation but two countries. If we did not, we would not have special programmes for one half of the country every year in, year out. This is a very serious matter. The stability of this country depends on having one nation and one country -(Interjection)– yes, one people, one Constitution, one Parliament. (Laughter) As long as we have in charge, people who enjoy seeing one half of the country lagging behind, we shall never have stability in this country. It is a very serious matter which the nation must address.

My next point concerns security. On page 35 of the State of the Nation Address, the President described the security of this nation as excellent. Over the last two weeks, we have been treated to news in the media, of people being arrested in Northern Uganda as suspects for another rebellion. How can we at the same time describe the security as excellent, while we are busy arresting our own people? 

I demand that these people are set free forthwith, because there are people who are trying to create an imaginary situation of insecurity. That is why we have been getting contradictory statements. The military spokesman says one thing and the coordinator of the security agencies says another. Now, what is the truth? We are sick and tired of using our people to make money. People are trying to create imaginary rebellion situations to make money – those who have not made it yet – because the insurgency in Northern Uganda has created many millionaires here. The ghost soldiers started from the North, and now they have spread and covered the entire country. We now have ghost teachers, ghost pupils, ghost workers, -(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, I have listened to hon. Okello-Okello very attentively. First, he says one nation, two countries and I want him to help me see how we can create unity. I have listened and listened, but now I hear that people are creating rebels to be rich. I want to know whether the honourable member is in order to say that people created Kony in order to be rich and that the current issue of rebels is a way of creating wealth for some people, which excludes Okello-Okello. Is he in order to say that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe the honourable member can explain how wealth was created out of Kony.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The idea of ghost soldiers started in the North and that is where the bulk of our money has been going; you pay for soldiers who do not exist. If any division commander that was in Gulu over those years is not a millionaire, then he was not there. All of them got rich from ghost soldiers. That is why those that have not made it yet are trying to recreate the situation and become rich. 

My last point is that we are talking about the state of our nation but on page 38, the President is telling us of what Parliament did in the last session - the number of Bills and resolutions passed. What has that got to do with the state of our nation? That should be reported by you, Madam Speaker -(Laughter)- it has got nothing to do with the state of the nation. It seems to me that our President believes in the length of his speech and not in its quality and content. I thank you. 

5.13 
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Madam Speaker, like many of my colleagues have stated, I want to thank the President for this State of the Nation Address. Most of us have been wondering whether the President meant well in tackling the issues that affect our state but I think he has been correctly and carefully advised. In analysing the economic performance, they dwelt much more on economic growth and nothing else – not consumption or improvement of the welfare of our people. 

Economic growth refers to the increasing ability of a nation to produce more goods and services, and this is happening. We have been told that a few years ago we had seven million head of cattle and now we have 11 million. If it is true, that is an increase in terms of quantity of the goods that we have. In some parts of the country, we had fewer and fewer primary schools but now we have many of them. In some parts of the country, we never had community roads and feeder roads and some of the local government roads have been upgraded to central government supported roads. These are there. This is a fact, and I believe those who are convinced are being made to believe that this is an economic performance which is very healthy and robust. 

My concern, however, is to what extent are we accessing these quantitative goods and services as a rural community in this country? How do we make use of these roads and schools? The schools in our countryside are literally empty. If they are full, they are full of quantity of school children and quantity of teachers. They are not tackling the issue of quality of services and therefore one should not be surprised that upcountry children cannot perform well at all. There is a high dropout rate in secondary schools and even in primary schools but in terms of quantity, those schools exist. 

Some of the reasons have been expressed here but I want to dwell on one key element. In my sub-region, up to 370 head of cattle have been removed from Lango alone and this was their economic base. The people have been reduced to depending on crops and crops are controlled by weather and weather is in the hands of God. Now if you have been depending on two options as a source of income for your livelihood, when one fails you resort to the other. Now the animals are not there and the weather has failed us. There is rampant food insecurity and there is shortage of cash because we cannot produce cash crops to earn a living. 

How can we harness this economic growth? That is a question that our economist here or the Minister of Finance and government should be able to answer from the State of the Nation Address.

In terms of health services, certainly we have these health units which have been established in nearly all parishes in one way or another. However, some of the staff there have just left school after training and they lack experience. Unfortunately, we have ill-intentioned pharmacists in this country who have always imported or recommended for the importation of either poorly produced or expired drugs –(Member timed out_)

5.17 
MR OJOK B’LEO (Independent, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. My intervention will begin from where hon. Odit has stopped. 

The President noted that the economic growth has continued to come from the industrial and services sector while the agricultural sector has shown significant signs of activation. My question is: how can this be when all banana plantations in this country are under the attack of Banana Wilt? How can this be when Coffee Wilt is destroying coffee without any intervention from government? How can this be when many animals which are being quoted as sick are not being treated and when we ask for money to intervene, government does not release money? How can this be when the fish sector is dwindling? There has been over fishing, the factories of fish are closing and the catches are declining. How can this be when the flower sector, which should have earned money, is closing down?

We pray that the government starts strategically intervening in the agricultural sector, which employs over 80 percent of Ugandans. We would have been happy if the President had talked about irrigation to sustain the crops. We would have been happy if the President talked about increasing funding in the research sector to do more research for new technologies that can withstand weather and can be adapted to weather stress. We would be happy if the government invested in the weather forecast units to give farmers timely information. However, when you go through the State of the Nation Address, you do not see anything on all this. The government is relaxed and has surrendered the future of this country, especially the agricultural sector, to the hands of God. 

I want now to make a comment on the water transport system in this country. The government talked briefly about revitalising the water transport. Last year, I asked the Minister of State for Transport about transport connecting the greater north through Lake Kyoga to Kampala and I was promised in your presence, Madam Speaker, that things would be done, that this financial year we would see the ferry in place. I am afraid that again reading through the State of the Nation Address, I have seen a promise which I am now beginning to highly doubt, a promise that there will be a ferry from Bukungu to Kagwara to Muntu. 

It was mentioned in the last State of the Nation Address that there will be a ferry from Lwampanga to Namasale. This is a very important ferry because it opens up a third route to the northern corridor of this country. The first route is Kampala to Busia, then Kampala to Karuma up to West Nile, and the third one, which is from here to Nakasongola via Kibeli, which has never been provided, is the route I am talking about.   

5.23
MR FRANCIS KIYONGA (Independent, Upe County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank you for this opportunity and for reaching Amudat the other day while campaigning against FGM. (Applause) The people appreciated your participation and the President’s too.

I would like to limit my contribution to the meaning of a state of nation address because I think that is where the problem lies. It is important for this House and the entire country to know that the day of the State of the Nation Address is the only day in the year – the whole 365 days – for the President to behave and conduct himself as the President of Uganda not the president of a party. We need to advise our President to secure at least that one day to come here and not begin politicking, condemning others and calling others names. That is going to encourage a lot of groupings. 

I beg those who prepare the speeches for the President to advise him on what to present that day. Let him just be nationalistic on that day and behave as our President. That is why some stood in ovation while others sat down and pitied those who were standing and sympathising (Laughter). It is the President who created that situation. It is also a day when the President should accept that our state, Uganda, is a neutral arena where all of us contribute ideas if we believe in pluralism. That is why it is important that he should try to be neutral on that day. 

As regards the substance of his speech, he did not accept the failures realised in previous years. He did not mention any challenges and even future plans that I was able to note. Unless the President stops conducting himself on that day in that manner, we shall continue to encourage tribalism and groupings instead of having a unified state and being nationalistic. 

It is also important that we inform our President that Uganda is part of the international community, and so the way he presents himself here on the State of the Nation Address will compare him with other Presidents -(Interjections)– Please, I am not taking any information because the time is not enough –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I have been listening attentively to my OB, hon. Kiyonga –(Interjections)– He is my OB and I was his head prefect. I have been listening attentively and the hon. Kiyonga has consistently talked about the President’s attitude and behaviour and he says that he lacked plans. When you look at page 19 and 20, there are development plans that the President mentioned. Also, according to me, the President was friendlier to the other side. He was really cracking many jokes with the Opposition. Therefore, is the honourable member in order to mislead this house to say that the President was not conducting himself well, when he was very jovial with the Opposition? Is he really in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think he tried to be friendly to all sides. (Laughter)

MR KIYONGA: Maybe I did not see that because he was telling some to go and hang. I do not know who are supposed to hang; is it the Kubeketerya’s who are supposed to hang? 

Lastly, I also see this country as the only country in the world where milk is the cheapest. It is the only country where milk is being poured in some parts of the country because of lack of market, and it is the only country where some cannot afford a glass of milk. If those who are starving in Karamoja got that milk which you are pouring in Mbarara, they would not die -(Member timed out_)

5.30
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to associate myself with the motion that was moved by hon. Najjemba and also thank the President for fulfilling his constitutional obligation. 

I will straight away begin with the page that deals with peace, security and good governance in Uganda. I would like to agree with the President and thank him for pacifying Uganda and having fulltime commitment to having a peaceful country. I need to agree with him about Operation Lightening Thunder that was launched in DRC by the Sudanese Government, the Congolese Government and the UPDF. I feel this Parliament should continue supporting operations of this nature if Uganda is to continue being peaceful. 

In the 1970’s when President Idi Amin held Israelites hostage at Entebbe, I want to remind the honourable members that they had to invade Uganda and ensure that they redeem their people who had been captured. Even in the USA when they realised that their security was at stake, they had to make establishments in Iraq and Afghanistan, and that is why they have managed to contain the security situation in their country. So, I entirely agree with him and implore the honourable members that we should always support such operations to keep our country secure.

As far as energy is concerned, I want to thank the President and government in general. When we increase energy production in the country, I think the industrialisation that we have been talking of and the employment opportunities will be enhanced.

It is my considered opinion also that we begin exploring opportunities of uranium and nuclear energy, because I think this is the most viable source of energy that we can begin looking at. I feel that by 2015, we may have exhausted all the hydro energy sources. So, if we began exploring opportunities of uranium, I think it is the right way to go.

As far as distribution is concerned, allow me to refer the honourable members to page 25 and 26 of the State of the Nation address. I am not comfortable with the way these schemes were outlined. There is none from my region. I do not want to appear sectarian and segregative, but for the last three years I have been giving reminders following solid power projects in my constituents.

Under rural electrification, there are schemes that were begun as far back as 2001 but up to now they are not complete. The lines are being vandalised. I see no economics in establishing new schemes, new lines, without completing the old ones. Therefore, I want to request the honourable ministers responsible to address this concern with due diligence.

When it comes to agriculture, specifically NAADS, we need to commend government for the review of the NAADS policy that was emphasising workshops and seminars. As we talk, there are new technologies and farm implements that our farmers are accessing. We feel this is the way to go and they need to be supported, but as we do that the Ministry of Agriculture should ensure that local governments, the key implementers of this programme, that are interested are brought on board to ensure that they appreciate the tenets of why NAADS was put in place.

I got an opportunity to move with the State Minister for Agriculture, hon. Bagire, to Busoga. In Namutumba, we got one chick being sold at Shs 9,000 yet a pullet, an old chicken that is about to lay eggs, was also at Shs 9,000. So you see no economics in a chick costing Shs 9,000 yet a mature one goes for the same price. There is need to interest and assure our people that we need to have value for money as far as our country is concerned.

5.35
MS HUDA OLERU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the President for his State of the Nation Address, and at the same time I also want to thank the Leader of the Opposition for the alternative State of the Nation address. (Applause) I know as government we shall pick the positive ideas and include them in whatever we are doing to improve the standard of living of our people, and those concentrated words we shall leave them out.

The President talked about education especially the increase in enrolment of pupils in primary schools and even now USE. Indeed, that is real and appreciated. However, when you talk of quality you ask the question: what about after seven years, from P.1 to P.7 when the pupil sits for PLE and he comes out without any grade; can he go to secondary school or O’ Level if he has failed? So, the question of quality is very important because the number alone without the quality might not be useful. We need the quality so that all those who have gone through the process should be able to access employment wherever they go, not only within the country.

We talked about packing of food for pupils. In West Nile, specifically in Yumbe District, this is impossible. And now with the famine, there is nothing which can be packed for these pupils. So I do not know what we are going to do to implement the law that we have established ourselves. This is a question we need to answer in this House.

During the State of the Nation Address, the President talked about petroleum in this country and he really emphasised it. He also talked about sending Ugandans to study abroad. This was my interest because it is already in the papers that there could possibly be petroleum in West Nile. Although the first attempt at finding it has failed, we have the hope that we are going to have the oil even in my district Yumbe. However, for the sponsorship, there was none from Yumbe District. You know there will be a lot of rumours when you do not have -(Interjection)- I do not have the time hon. Minister. Please, excuse me. 

You know we have the quota system going on where we get students from each district. The problem with these quota systems is that we do not have these students being admitted for those courses where they can go and work on being engineers and because I have the list and they have been admitted for SWASA and Human Resource but we want people who will be engineers to work in that area. These are some of the things that will stop the rumours. 

I am not segregative and I am not saying that the people of Yumbe have not been included. I am now requesting that since the process is continuing; let us get one so that when the time of mining in Yumbe District comes, we shall give to him what is there. Because when it is other people we may think that a lot has been done and we are benefiting nothing which might not even be right.

5.41
MR ROBERT SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I congratulate this House for having received the State of the Nation Address, the third in the multi-party dispensation. I also thank the President for recognising the men and women who have fallen during the course of duty like Dr Kibirige Sebunya and hon. Kyaaka. May their souls rest in peace!

This is a speech among many that have been delivered to Parliament but one of a kind because it did not have a budget for war. The guns, we hope, have fallen silent for good and we pray that the people of Northern Uganda will even afford to miss Parliament to go and look for investors to go and invest in their areas. That is my prayer; that you can afford to miss Parliament to go and look for investors for your area because I have now been to Amuru, Pader and Kitgum and those areas are lacking investment. That is my prayer. 

I am happy with the President’s speech for one thing, that is, he has concentrated on reconstruction, especially of roads. My constituency is perhaps one of the rare ones that currently have four to five roads being constructed. We have waited for a long time for those roads, as much as many areas are waiting for the roads. They have passed through like seven budgets but finally they have come. 

My only worry is that as these roads are being constructed precious time is being wasted on compensation or delayed compensation. We want these roads to be done very fast and we are asking government or the Ministry of Works especially to follow the projects to the field. If there is a woman who is refusing a road to go on because of her cultural stones -(Interjections)- or some kind of witch - they should be talked to and compensated within the shortest time possible, like in Mailye where the Gayaza-Zirobwe Road is passing, such that precious time is not wasted by the contractors and the local people. 

We also ask the Ministry of Works to go to the ground and sensitise people on AIDS and HIV related problems because these contractors and the porters have too much money and our women and men are falling prey to these loaded individuals to the extent that counseling is needed in those areas such that many of our people are saved from the AIDS carnage. 

And also the people they are compensating should be educated on financial literacy. This is a payment which comes once and it will never come again but those who have received payment go on to spend the money like there is no tomorrow. 

So, I still congratulate this House. This was my first State of the Nation Address and maybe maiden speech -(Interjection)– this is not my maiden speech; I have made many -(Laughter)- so I thank you Members. When you are out there and you see people debate you may think that when they go out everybody starts fighting the other. But I still believe that Members are behaving in the multi-party dispensation and I thank you, hon. Members.

5.45
MR SANTOS PIRO (Independent, East Moyo County, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address which is very clear, a typical sign of good governance and –(Laughter)- and rightful direction of thinking of the NRM Government. 

My first point is on investment. I would like to draw the attention of government towards the investment trend in this country. The President said something about the massive investments by foreigners in this country, but this investment is taking place in only one region, which is Central Uganda. I would like to request the Government of Uganda to redirect the thinking of the Uganda Investment Authority in drawing the attention of foreign investor to places like Northern Uganda where there is a lot of virgin agricultural land. I am saying this because there is peace in Uganda and Northern Uganda has –(Interjections)– fertile land with the people there being ready to receive foreign investors. However, government must also provide enough capital to help the local investors in that area engage in investment activities in this country. I can now take the information of the Government Chief Whip.

MR MIGEREKO: I would like to thank Ndugu Santos, for giving way. All I want to say is that yes, the Uganda Investment Authority would like to make sure that investments reach every part of the country more so if the stringent attachments to land in some of those parts get relaxed a bit. This will permit investors from outside to invest in projects such as sugar production for example in Amuru. I thank you.

MR SANTOS: Thank you very much for the information. Uganda Investment Authority recently advertised for the acquisition of industrial, agricultural and livestock land. However, I noticed that the authority did not pick applicants from the North who would wish to see foreign investors acquire their land. The people of Northern Uganda are ready to co-operate with foreign investors in those sectors to have services brought nearer to the people in terms of employment opportunities.

My second point relates to agricultural and rural development. I know the President talked about agricultural development in this country for example the restructuring of the NAADS Programme. But I would like to point out that government has not addressed the issue of irrigation in this country. Instead of giving Shs 10 billion to the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness to fight famine, why not allocate such money to the irrigation sector every year? And we should not look at expensive irrigation systems because we have plenty of water in this country. Adoption of simple technology like sprinklers hooked on tractors to sprinkle water over the crops - we would not again talk of famine in this country. The country is endowed with a lot of water, good weather and the people with the goodwill to work. Government should look at the irrigation issue very seriously. If it is happening in other countries like Egypt, Tanzania, South Africa where water is even recycled, why not in Uganda? South Africa for example does not have much water; it imports water, but they produce more food than Uganda. The reason is government here pays less attention to irrigation.

The third issue concerns development and maintenance of the infrastructure. The President talked of so many roads to be tarmacked – I want to talk about the road from Atiak to Kajokej via Moyo, which has appeared in the public investment plans for a long time with money in billions being budgeted for it. I wonder why this road was deleted from the MTEF plan list. Where did the money for this plan go?

My appeal to government is to reinstate this project to make the people of Adjumani and Moyo feel they are part of this country –(Member timed out_)

5.51
MR STEPHEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to add my voice to those other voices that have thanked His Excellency, the President for the clear and precise exposition of government policy as contained in the State of the Nation Address.

First of all, I would like to start by thanking the President for recognising the great work that this Parliament is doing in the country. In fact, let me say that I was particularly very happy because the people out there think Members just come here to be paid a lot of money with no work done. So, for the President to acknowledge and quantify the work we have done in the last Session – we should really be very grateful to him for that gesture.

Let me also say something about Prosperity-for-All, which was the theme of the election manifesto of the NRM. And in the State of Nation Address the President talked very elaborately about the progress towards achieving Prosperity-for-All. In fact he clarifies – people have perceived Prosperity-for-All in a narrow point of view. It is good he gave the holistic perspective of this programme especially when he brought in the issue of restructuring NAADS and its performance currently.

On progress in respect of human development, I would like to say that I got happy with the President’s comments. He really pointed out where we are as far as USE and UPE is concerned. He even went ahead to point out the challenges and way forward. In this respect, Madam Speaker, I would like to also thank the Leader of Opposition for his positive response to this as indicated on page 6 of his response. In fact I have read this document and realised that it is not as bad as some people have been saying. To quote, the Leader of the Opposition on that page 6 says: “… we also welcome and fully support current efforts by Government to rehabilitate the various secondary schools in the country as this will vastly improve the performance of our upcountry schools.” It is on the basis of this that I am thanking the Leader of Opposition. So, hon. Okello-Okello, I think you can see that your Leader of Opposition really did very well on this. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, my caution to government is to reinforce our vocational institutions – we have got high enrolment in UPE and USE, but we should bear in mind that not all these people will go to universities and other institutions of higher learning. We really need to refocus and pay more attention to vocational training institutions so that really our graduates from UPE and USE have something to do should they fail to continue with their higher education. 

I want also to comment on the dropout rate of 7.8 percent and the completion rate of 52.2 percent. I think these can be worked on because the statistics have been coming down and I am sure with more government interventions, these statistics will continue to improve. 

Lastly, on regional and international matters, I am very happy that the President really resolved that we should resolve the Migingo matter peacefully so that it does not really jeopardise our East African Community Common Market Protocol. I was really very happy for that and also for his statement on the Tripartite Committee of the East African Community SADCA and COMESA; I was really very impressed and very happy as vice-chairperson of Foreign Affairs Committee of Parliament.  

But I expected His Excellency the President also to talk about the sorry state of our Missions abroad. And I am sure at an appropriate time I will move a motion urging government to really pay attention to our Missions abroad because with this world exposure now, all the eyes in the world are focusing on Uganda. But we really need to put things right in our Missions abroad.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.57
MR HENRY BALIKOWA (NRM, Budiope County, Kamuli):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank His Excellency the President for fulfilling his constitutional obligation. 

First of all I want to thank the President in the area of education. When you look at page 12, this government has done a lot as far as education is concerned especially in UPE and USE. However, infrastructure and quality of education still remain a challenge, which I will request the government to take keen interest in. 

I want to thank the government for the efforts made in terms of increasing resource allocation especially in road infrastructure. Last year the government provided 1.1 trillion and many roads were mentioned; we thanked the government and actually when you look at this year’s State of the Nation Address, what worries me is that the same roads that were mentioned in the last financial year are the same roads being mentioned in this State of the Nation Address. And that makes us worried.

On Prosperity-for-All, I want to thank government for the NAADS Programme. However, a lot of money has been eaten especially by technical people. This Parliament has appropriated a lot of money under NAADS but what is on the ground leaves a lot to be desired. When you visit say sub-counties, you will find that the sub-county chiefs, the NAADS coordinators and sub-accountants have become suppliers and this is how money is getting lost.

When you read the State of the Nation Address, the President clearly stated that 65 billion has been disbursed to SACCOs. But I recall, Madam Speaker, one time you went to Iganga to officiate and the minister was there but up to now no money has reached our districts. I wonder which district got the 65 billion.

We have been thanking this government for the last ten years especially as far as water transport is concerned. Madam Speaker, I don’t know whether we shall continue thanking government or we should stop thanking it? The issue of water transport especially linking Busoga and the Northern Region has remained a nightmare. Bukungu-Kagwera-Muntu ferry has been promised ever since the NRM came to power; this ferry has been promised year in year out. (Applause) And I hope this time around there will be no monkey tricks.

Lastly, I want to thank His Excellency the President for thanking and appreciating the work of Parliament, for the first time, unlike when we have been meeting him and he has been condemning the Sixth and Seventh Parliaments. But I think the Eighth Parliament is doing a very good job and I would like to request my colleagues that we continue supporting His Excellency the President to see that things move on. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.01
DR WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for giving me the opportunity. Let me start by thanking His Excellency the President for his State of the Nation Address, which he delivered and thereby fulfilling his constitutional responsibility. The President dealt extensively with progress towards Prosperity-for-All; it is a concept; a concept which I think the government is working towards fulfilling.

My comments will be restricted to a few issues raised by the President in a similar statement during the 2007 State of the Nation Address. His Excellency the President said, “Adherence to constitutionalism and the rule of law is the cornerstone for a democratic society, which Uganda is trying to build.” Madam Speaker, the President is stating that one of the interventions by government is to put in place good governance, including "the fight against corruption and the rule of law". I don’t know whether this statement is correct or is a misplacement of the "rule of law". 

Under human resource development, I will say something about UPE. As I always say on several occasions, UPE is a novel concept in the context of Uganda. Everybody appreciates and accepts the concept. But I am distressed to say that there have been a lot of hiccups in the implementation of UPE. 

The most important factor affecting the quality outcome of UPE is the appalling situation in classrooms. The pupil ratio in some cases is over 100 pupils per teacher, and in my constituency, unfortunately, this is the trend. Most teachers are confronted with over 100 pupils. What can a teacher in such a situation do? I wonder what plans Government is putting in place to address this in primary schools.

Madam Speaker, pupils who are not in schools are loitering on the streets of our towns begging for survival. The street children phenomenon has been mentioned in this august House and it is the lack of responsibility of the government in office, and lack of a moral backbone towards children. In the early stages of development children are innocent people and tender, and they should be kept as such. It is unfortunate that in our context, this is not being done.

There have been statements on zero tolerance on corruption. These utterances have been going on for some time, but there has not been any impact on the trend of corruption. Laws have been put in place against corruption, but if these laws are not implemented, they remain useless. Special courts have been put in place to fight corruption, but if these courts are not well facilitated, they remain toothless. People may be trained to fight corruption, but if they are not given the right tools, these people remain inept. 

Fighting corruption should involve everybody, but my contention is that the government in office should lead the way with all its apparatus, and appendages; and by appendages, I mean LC systems; and the government should be seen to be leading the way and to be actually working against corruption, otherwise, is there any intention of Government to fight against corruption? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.08
MS CAROLINE AMALI (Independent, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the President for the State of the Nation Address that was delivered. I would like to address myself to page 15, which talks about agriculture and rural development.

As I read through this statement, I expected to find an issue concerning fisheries development. Unfortunately, as I went through it, I only saw issues concerning agriculture and plants development. On page 10, there is a statement that there was a slight decline of US $30 million mainly because of fish. While the demand for fish and the price has shot up, the stocks in our lakes have declined, and they are addressing this by regulation. 

Most times we talk, but we don’t do things on the ground. In this case, I expected the President to come out with a resolution concerning fish stocking, due to the depletion of fish stocks in our lakes. I would like to give an example of Lake Kyoga, where the fish stock has really been depleted due to what they are now calling illegal fishing gears. People are being bundled up and taken to prisons, and they have no alternative, just because they depend on the lake. I would like to call upon the Ministry of Fisheries to do something concerning the fish stock on the lakes. 

Secondly, I would like to address myself to page 34, which talks about health. It says that there are three health centres in every sub-county and that the government is planning to build more health centres. These health centres that the government is talking about are just standing there as structures. For example, in my district, when I visit these health centres, they are quite empty; the staff is not in and there are no drugs. 

I would like to propose that instead of building more health centres, the government extends maternal health services in the structures, or as part of the health centres, and stocks them, so that our mothers stop dying during child birth and from other related maternal mortality issues.

On page 23, I would like to talk about transport. I am finding difficulty in commenting on the ferry at Rwampamba connecting to Namasale. This is because I had the privilege of meeting His Excellency one time in 2007, and he honoured what I asked of him about the ferry. In that very year, not more than three months from then, he wrote instructing the Minister of Transport to issue the ferry in the financial year 2008/09, but up to now it is nowhere. 

So, it is quite difficult to know whether the ministers are the ones letting us down. The Minister of Works, hon. Byabagambi, you remember formally telling me that the ferry was being procured last financial year? So, I don’t really know what happened. It is right here and I am reading: “It is to be procured next financial year.” (Laughter) So, you are going to make us think that His Excellency is a liar or he does not fulfil whatever he talks about. So I want to put you to task: unless it is not our right to have that ferry; if at all it is not, you had better inform us. Otherwise, people will soon rise against Government, thinking that Government is just a liar. (Laughter)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our colleagues from the Teso sub-region are out of the House protesting the famine that is killing people in their area. But even in spite of this, for the first time, Members of the Opposition are more in the House than on the Government side. Is it procedurally right when we are debating a very important subject, the State of the Nation Address delivered by the President, to really have the Government side almost empty?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, first of all, the Members from Teso are not boycotting the House; they asked for my permission to go for consultations and I allowed them to go; they were here earlier. 

But also, I said every Member has got five minutes; I am trying to give everybody their five minutes as long as there are some ministers to record the problems. Why don’t we allow people to complete what they are doing? 

6.15
MR WILLY EKEMU (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address, and also thank the mover of the motion. I would want to make a few remarks, first of all, on the general presentation of the State of the Nation Address by the President.  

I did observe that for once, there was humility; there was some acceptance that honestly there can be failure and sometimes it is good to accept failure. It will not be the first time and it will not be the last time you fail. Indeed, there was the impression that you cannot always reinvent the wheel, much as you would always want to. Because usually, it will cost you more time; it will cost you more resources and more suffering for the people. 

But in his presentation, for instance, I heard the Members cite the Leader of Opposition’s statement, but generally, the Opposition has been citing some of these issues. And the President with respect I think bowed to the appeals from the Opposition. 

For instance, the policy framework on Prosperity-for-All; the Opposition I do remember in last year’s State of the Nation Address, and later on in the Budget Speech that was presented by the Minister of Finance, the Opposition pointed out that there was simply no policy framework and there was no way Prosperity-for-All was going to succeed. This time round, I see that there is a similar policy in place, which I think is an acknowledgement; it is an acceptance that there can actually be failure in policy and reviewing it is not abnormal. So I would want to applaud him for that.

Then, about cooperative societies; only two days ago I saw the big ladies from the government side on television struggling very hard, and I think making a headway, but saying that cooperatives might be the only way through which Government is going to deliver Prosperity-for-All (PFA) and SACCOs. 

The question that arises is: why did we, for instance, in the first place kill cooperatives? So this is what I am talking about. I am saying that now cooperative societies have become vehicles for delivering SACCOs and Prosperity-for-All. And that of course implies that there was first of all a deliberate attempt to try and ignore or to reinvent the wheel, which has failed, and the President with all humility has accepted that there was failure and now cooperative societies can come back on board. (Applause) Of course we regret the time that has been wasted; the resources that have been wasted, and the suffering that the people had to go through. 

And then the tone of the State of the Nation Address; the tone of the State of the Nation Address was generally calculated to have the message passed on. But at the same time, I was able to read into it and attempt to patronise each and every inch or sector that he was talking about. 

For instance, the listing of this entire infrastructure: the roads, the water, et cetera I did not see the rationale for this, if it was not to build or mislead whoever was listening to that State of the Nation Address. That without toeing the President’s line, you will not get a road; you will not get water -(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, so far 34 Members have been able to make their contributions. We shall continue with the contributions tomorrow. But I want to really urge the government that tomorrow we start at 2 o’clock. I will not wish to suspend the House for any reason. So the ministers who have business tomorrow must be here at 1.45 p.m. so that we start at 2.00 p.m.

Secondly, hon. Members, last week I had informed you of the African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM). The team was here this morning and wanted to brief you on the APRM and get your views, but they were disappointed that few of us turned up. We have now pushed it to the 14th of July. So, please keep that day open. The team was really angry that we were not available. The Bishop of Kampala was really very angry. He is a nice person, but he was really angry today. So the 14th of July at 10.00 O’clock, in the conference hall; I will remind you again tomorrow. The House is adjourned to 2.00 O’clock tomorrow. 

(The House rose at 6.22 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 8 July 2009 at 2.00 p.m.) 

