




Thursday, 09 July 2020

Parliament met at 3.01 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I apologise for the late start. We were still trying to work out how to complete the work for this week. In the usual way, we will try to move fast so that we can cover what we had planned.

Secondly, I will amend the Order Paper to permit the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to report on two items, which were tasked to them by this House, namely; the revised roadmap for the general elections and the report on the Political Parties Regulations. 

Otherwise, there are two matters of national concern. I hope the Minister of Health is here because they are both COVID-19 related. I will ask hon. Namukhula to raise her issue and after that, we will have hon. Waluswaka. I hope today, the Minister of Health will come and present the weekly COVID-19 updates and also answer these questions.

3.04
MS GRACE NAMUKHULA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have gone around the country as a committee and I have also consulted the Ministry of Local Government. COVID-19 had an effect in our country starting from March while we were still in the budgeting process. I expected the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and other relevant ministries to provide indicative planning figures for COVID-19 for the local governments and schools as we prepare to open. 

This has, however, not been done and the local governments do not have any vote or plan to manage COVID-19 this financial year. My prayer is that the relevant ministry should provide an indicative planning figure for local governments so that they are able to budget for COVID-19 as a crosscutting issue. Remember they have construction and they are going to put people together. Local governments have a number of activities that bring people together. 

If we look back at the HIV planning, we usually provide for condoms during construction so that when we gather people together, we are able to give the people condoms and sensitize them on their use. 

I pray that the relevant ministries, especially the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, provide the indicative planning figure so that local governments can review their budget and include COVID-19 as a crosscutting issue. 

The other one is on the secondary schools. We are planning to open schools anytime but the schools also have budgets which they prepare and submit to the Ministry of Education and Sports. This has not been provided and therefore, the learners will go back to unprepared schools.

I pray that the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provide for this in the budgets of the schools so that the face masks can be procured by the schools. This will enable the local governments or schools to procure the hand-washing equipment. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I am glad the Minister of Health is here. Please note that and give us a response. 

3.08
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Today, when we were interfacing with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, the Accounting Officer revealed a very sad story for this nation. 

You will recall that we appropriated money here through a supplementary budget for issues related to COVID-19. As usual, however, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – just the way it did not release money to the Uganda Virus Research Institute despite this Parliament having given it money - did not release money to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and yet money was appropriated by this Parliament specifically to move the street children from the street during this pandemic. However, to our dismay and disgrace, the ministry did not release the money.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Prime Minister – since they may listen to your higher office – tell the country why Parliament appropriated money for COVID-19 and yet the 2019/2020 Financial Year ended without them releasing money to this institute. I do not know where the accountability will come from. That is my humble request. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is required to come to this House and explain – Is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development here? Hon. Bahati, are you ready?

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, I can repeat my submission for him. Honourable minister, this Parliament appropriated money to different entities in the supplementary budget especially in relation to COVID-19. Among the entities which were supposed to receive the supplementary funding were the Uganda Virus Research Institute and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

It has, however, come to the notice of Parliament, especially the Public Accounts Committee that - because whenever we call entities, we tell them to brief us about COVID-19 – the Uganda Virus Research Institute has not received any single coin related to COVID-19 despite the supplementary budget. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has, as well, not received any money because you have not given them. 

The Permanent Secretary said that they got the paper but there was no money. The 2019/2020 Financial Year has ended and yet the supplementary budget was for that financial year. 

Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, why haven’t you given these entities money despite Parliament’s authority to give them money? Thank you.

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank  hon. Waluswaka for raising that important question. Today, we had a meeting to plan for this quarter’s release and tomorrow we shall be releasing cash for different ministries, where those issues of the supplementaries that were approved by this House are included. Therefore, by next week, those people will get the resources that were approved.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this is the second or third agency; first it was the police that said that they had not got their money, then the Uganda Virus Research Institute yet this money was appropriated in April. Therefore, we need more serious answers when you come to report.

MR BAHATI: As I said, that is going to be part of this first quarter release and it is going to happen tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: After you have released, please come and tell us here.

MR BAHATI: Okay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, under rule 26 (4) of our Rules of Procedure, on the days when we used to have five hours of sitting, the first two hours would be for back bench members’ business. However, because of the curfew, we cannot take two hours. We shall just give one hour to the private member’s business that is why on the Order Paper, most of it is private members business. If it can be finished earlier, I will appreciate.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE ANTI-SLAVERY BILL,2020

3.14
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-slavery Bill, 2020” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, it has been seconded.

MR ARIKO: Thank you, honourable colleagues. Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: No, you do not speak to it now.

MR ARIKO: I would like to justify the issue of the certificate of financial implication.

THE SPEAKER: Oh! 

MR ARIKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You will recall that on 20 January 2019, Parliament granted me leave to introduce a Bill titled, “The Anti-slavery Bill, 2020.” 

On 12 December 2019, the Clerk to Parliament, in accordance with section 76 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, requested for issuance of a certificate of financial implications to the Anti-slavery Bill, 2020 from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who has to date not responded to that request inspite having received the letter in good time. 

In light of the above, guided by the provisions of Public Finance Management Act, 2015 specifically section 76(4), which requires that where a certificate of financial implication is not issued within the requisite 60 days, then by operation of the law, the same is taken as having been granted.

Madam Speaker, I, therefore, lay on the Table a letter dated 12 December 2019 addressed to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requesting for the Anti-slavery Bill, 2020 to be read for the first time.

Madam Speaker, I also request that this Bill be read for the first time before the House. I beg to request.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I am satisfied that the honourable member, duly requested for permission for the certificate of financial implication and it is more than 60 days since he made the request.

Therefore, within the provision of section 76 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, the certificate is deemed to have been issued. The Bill is now forwarded to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back.

MR ARIKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED, “THE PUBLIC ENTERPRISE REFORM AND DIVESTITURE  REPEAL BILL, 2020”

3.17
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara East County, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to move a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Public Enterprise Reform and Divestiture  Repeal Act, 2020.” The motion is moved under Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 and rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, the motion reads thus:
“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for peace, order, development and good governance; 

AND WHEREAS rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure grants every member the right to move a Private Member’s Bill;

NOTING that in 1993, the Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture  Act was passed with its main objective clearly outlined as to give effect to the Government Policy for Public Enterprise Reform and Divestiture  published in Gazette No.48 of 1 November, 1991 as well as the Action Plan for Public Enterprise Reform and Divestiture ;

AWARE that the Government Policy for Public Enterprise Reform and Divestiture aimed at reducing the direct role of Government in the Uganda economy, developing a correspondingly greater role for the private sector and improving the efficiency and overall performance of those public enterprises that remained in Government possession and control;

FURTHER AWARE that on 3 March 2016, the report of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises on the audited accounts for public enterprises was tabled in Parliament in which it was recommended that the Privitisation Unit be wound up and that the unfinished business under the Privitisation Unit be performed by the Parastatal Monitoring Unit, the said report was considered and adopted by Parliament on 15 March 2016;

CONSIDERING that the purpose of the law has been served and the continued existence of the Act is not justifiable; as such, the law should be repealed to save Government funds that continue to be utilised under the Act; discontinuation of expenditure on the structures established under the Act will further minimize the cost of public administration;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that the House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill, for on Act entitled, “The Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture (Repeal) Act, 2020” a draft of which is hereto attached and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for the first reading.” I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It has been seconded. Can you justify?

MR MAWANDA: Madam Speaker, the justification is that Uganda started implementing a programme of macroeconomic adjustments and structural reforms since 1987, commonly referred to as the structural adjustment programme, with the aim of improving the fiscal and monetary policies. As part of the programme, the Government embarked on the liberalisation of the economy that included reforms in the public enterprise as well as divesture. 

The goal of the public enterprise reform programme was to reduce on the flow of subsidies in public enterprises while improving the coverage and quality of infrastructure services for the population at large. This goal was majorly achieved through privatisation and restructuring of key public enterprises targeting some key sectors like telecommunications, water, rail, power, aviation and post services. 

The Government strategy was to introduce the private sector participation and competition in the infrastructure sectors, divest some of the public enterprises that provide these services and regulate utilities independently and cost effectively. 

Madam Speaker, while that was done and the actors are in place, the remaining companies have faced various challenges that led to the rise of wanting to repeal this Act. The first one is double reporting. 

As I was doing my research on this Act – (Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Is it procedurally right to allow a Member to bring another Bill yet we gave him an opportunity to bring one, which he failed to do earlier? Is it procedurally right, Madam Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the Member should be congratulated for being very active. He has brought many proposals. Please proceed. (Laughter)

MR MAWANDA: Madam Speaker, for his information - because most of time he is never in Parliament - my Bill is before the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for processing. I think that is why Gen. Mugisha Muntu sacked him as the Leader of the Opposition.

As I was doing research on this matter, I noticed that there is double reporting – (Interruption) 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Mawanda has alleged that the former party President of the FDC sacked hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I am speaking as a leader within the FDC Party. I sit in the management working committee of the FDC as well as the National Executive Council (NEC) and the National Council. 

I have not and I did not see the action that hon. Mawanda talked about, except that it is in a practise of FDC that every after two and a half years, they change leadership. Is the honourable member in order to insinuate that hon. Nandala-Mafabi was sacked yet he voluntarily respected the two and a half years and gave another candidate a chance to come in? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the Speaker should not be dragged into party issues here. Let us focus on national issues. Please conclude. 

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the wise ruling. I was talking about double reporting. These institutions that were retained by Government are reporting the respective line ministries and at the same time, reporting under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

A case in point is the Housing Finance Bank, Pride Microfinance Bank and Post Bank; these are institutions that were retained by Government. They are regulated by the Bank of Uganda and at every end of year, under the Financial Institutions Act, they are supposed to submit their audited accounts, which of course, they spent on producing those audited accounts, to the Bank of Uganda for renewal of their licenses. 

Every end of the financial year, they are also subjected to produce audited accounts or be audited by the Auditor-General. These are institutions that are in the market and are competing with banks, which are subjected to only one regulator. It is against that, that this Act be repealed so that we can reduce on the double reporting.  

Secondly, Madam Speaker, when the Auditor-General carried out his audit in 2017, he reported significant poor financial management by the divesture and the reform implementation committee – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you are now going into the Bill itself. You were just asking for permission to bring the Bill; so, do not go into the details. You will do that when you come for the first reading.

MR MAWANDA: Madam Speaker, it is against that background that I now move that Parliament gives me leave to introduce a private Members’ Bill entitled, “The Public Enterprise Reform and Divesture Repeal Act, 2020.” I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is hon. Kasule here? You are the seconder. Please speak to this very briefly.

3.28
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I second the motion that it is high time that the Public Enterprise Reform and Divesture Act be repealed. The Act is now 27 years old and we can say that it has outlived its usefulness. It was meant to eliminate Government equity holding in public enterprises, rehabilitate some and mentor others into management, which most of the organisations are already doing. 

In as far as we are concerned, this double reporting is no longer required. Let us save some money for Government. At least COVID-19 has taught us many things; that we should spend every penny when it is exactly needed. 

Many times, this process has unsettled workers. I remember when I used to work with National Water and Sewerage Corporation, every year, they would come and say, “I think in two years, you will be disbanded. You will be reformed and then Government sells you off as a private enterprise.” Therefore, we were always be on tenterhooks thinking that maybe the other year or in five years – so it has wasted both resources and unsettled workers. 

We have institutions that have so far lived on. For example, the Uganda Electricity Board (UEB) was now turned into Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited (UETCL) and Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited (UEGCL) but they report to the ministries and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. That kind of double reporting confuses and it is high time that sector ministries supervise these industries and agencies where Government has no intention of divesture. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is just a motion asking for leave for the honourable member to present the Bill for first reading. I now put the question that a question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put a question that this House do permit hon. Mawanda to draft a Bill and present it for first reading. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE PRIVATE MEMBERS BILL ENTITLED, “THE HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS PROTECTION BILL, 2020”

3.31
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I rise to seek leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member's Bill entitled, “The Human Rights Defenders Protection Bill, 2020.” (Moved under Rule 55, 120 and l2l of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament):

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda;
 
AND WHEREAS Article 94 (4) (b) of the Constitution and rules l20 and l2l of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament recognises the right of a Member to move a Private Member's Bill;

AWARE THAT Chapter Four of the l995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides a Bill of rights which guarantees various rights and freedoms for persons in Uganda, including recognising the existence and work of Human Rights Defenders under Article 50(2) of the Constitution and empowering them to bring action against the violation of human rights and freedoms;

RECOGNISING that human rights defenders are persons or organisations that undertake to defend the rights of other people or group of persons and may include registered organisations, lawyers, human rights activists, who usually perform a number of roles including;

    a) Pursuing legal avenues for seeking justice through casework, advice and legal representation;
    b) Bringing public interest litigation against matters of general public interest;
    c) Offering practical support to victims of human rights violations;
    d) Documenting human rights abuse by collecting evidence of human rights violations; and
    e) Raising awareness of human rights abuse through public campaigns in the media, online and in their communities;

CONCERNED that by the nature of their work, human rights defenders are often the target of coercive measures by government, security forces, businesses, armed forces and at times, members of the community through misinformation, fabricated criminal charges, forced disappearance, imprisonment, torture, intrusion, intimidation and unlawful restrictions from the state and state organs and are not recognised as a critical body of persons in the field of human rights protection to warrant special legal protection themselves;

FURTHER CONCERNED that Article 50(2) of the Constitution which would have protected human rights defenders from abuse has never been fully operationalised through the enactment of a specific legislation prescribing and guaranteeing the rights and freedoms of human rights defenders, including regulating their activities and providing them with an effective remedy and clear enforcement mechanisms to seek redress and protect their work;

ACKNOWLEDGING THAT whereas Parliament enacted the Human Rights
(Enforcement) Act, 20l9 to give effect to Article 50(4) of the Constitution and to provide for the procedure of enforcing human rights under Chapter Four of the Constitution, the Human Rights (Enforcement) Act, 2019 does not apply to human rights defenders since the rights in Chapter Four do not apply to legal persons;

COGNISANT of the growing significance of the role of human rights defenders and the growing cases of human rights violations, there is need to recognise the work of human rights defenders as an essential part and element in the protection of human rights in Uganda through the enactment of a specific legislation to effectively deal with the challenges they face;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that, this House grants me leave to introduce a Private Members’ Bill, for on Act entitled, “The Human Rights Defender's Protection Bill” a draft of which is hereto attached and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Are there seconders to the Bill? Okay, give the justification very quickly. Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Members, I put the question that hon. Komakech be granted leave of this House to go produce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Human Rights Defender's Protection Bill, 2020” and we order the publication for first reading.

(Question put and agreed to.)

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER ON THE DEPLORABLE CONDITION OF BUSIA COVID-19 QUARANTINE CENTRE

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Health? Go to item 5(2)

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER ON THE PLIGHT OF VOLUNTEER HEALTH WORKERS AT BUSIA HEALTH CENTRE IV AND THE PLANS TO AVAIL AN AMBULANCE FOR THE HOSPITAL

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Health? Go to the next item.

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER ON THE ALLEGED USE OF GOVERNMENT PROPERTY ON THE DISPUTED LAND AT KIULA CENTRAL FOREST RESERVE IN KAYUNGA DISTRICT

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Agriculture - 

3.38
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. At the 11th Sitting of the First Meeting of the Fifth Session of the Tenth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda held on Wednesday, 2 July 2020, a statement on the alleged use of Government property on the disputed land in Kiula Forest Reserve was presented to Parliament by hon. Ida Nantaba.

Resulting from this statement, the Rt. Hon. Speaker directed the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to expeditiously establish the type of equipment that is being used to degrade the forest, identify the owners, take action and report to Parliament on Tuesday, 7 July 2020.

Madam Speaker, this information paper provides an update on the directive given by the Rt. Hon. Speaker. The purpose of this information paper is to:

    1) Notify the honourable members on the alleged use of Government property in the disputed land in Kiula Forest Reserve, Kayunga District.
    2) Notify the Speaker and the Members on the type of heavy equipment units that are being used to degrade the forest and its owners.
    3) To notify the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries heavy equipment units’ utilisation, which is guided by the operational guidelines and regulations thus.

Before any deployment is carried out, the engineers visit the field to carry out detailed technical assessment and verification of the requested applied works or activities based on the approved application forms duly filled, signed and approved by the Sub-county Chief and Chief Administrative Officer of the respective district, where the works are required thus clears the issues of land ownership and also alerts the district of the Government equipment presence and deployment in the area or locality. 

The Government of Uganda through the Agricultural Mechanisation Project, has five sets of heavy equipment units deployed to districts for bush clearing, land opening, road rehabilitation and construction of dams, valley dams and fish ponds construction and development, and other on farm activities. 

Also, through the NAADS secretariat, 320 tractors and matching implements were provided to farming communities across the country under the initiative to promote agricultural mechanisation. This is to ensure effective and sustainable utilisation of the tractors and implements by the beneficiaries. Government has developed operational guidelines for access, use and management of the tractors. 

Tripartite Memorandum of Understanding (MOUs) are signed between NAADS on behalf of Government, district local governments and the beneficiaries, before tractors and implements are issued to the target beneficiaries. The MOUs also make reference to the operational guidelines to follow to ensure effective utilisation of the tractors and accompanying implements. 

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries heavy equipment units are accessed through operational guidelines on cost sharing and subsidy basis.
In December 2019, Kayunga District Local Government received three tractors, which were distributed to the following farmers’ organisations:

    1) Kwagala Garilaya Agricultural Marketing Cooperative.
    2) Kayunga Farmers’ Savings and Credit Cooperative; and
    3) Ntenjeru North Master Multipurpose. 

It is however, alleged that the ministry heavy equipment units and tractors given to Kayunga District Local Government have been used for purpose of bush clearing, opening land and ploughing for planting sugarcane and in the process, destroyed forests cover in the district. The forest reserve in question is located in Galiraya Subcounty, where Modern Agriculture Infra Ltd commonly known as GM Sugar Ltd is establishing a sugarcane plantation. 

These are the investigations that we undertook.
On Thursday, 2 July 2020, the NAADS secretariat sent two officers; the Head of Communication and Public Relations and the Assistant Value Chain Development Officer, to carry out a fact finding mission on the raised allegations. The team visited Kayunga District Local Government Officials and made field visits in the area in question.
So, the ministry also sent the officer, an engineering assistant based in Kayunga District, to visit the stated forest reserve and provide facts. 

At the district headquarters, the investigating team interacted with the district production officer and the district Agricultural Engineer, Kayunga District Local Government. The two officers confirmed that they too had heard about the allegations. The district local government officers further emphasised to the investigating team that the tractors provided by Government through the NAADS secretariat, to the three beneficiary farmers’ groups in the district were not involved in opening up land for sugarcane planting in the forest reserve as alleged. 

They reiterated that activities of the three beneficiary farmers’ groups, are closely supervised by the District Agricultural Engineer. The District Agricultural Engineer thereafter accompanied the team from NAADS secretariat and travelled to the site in question. The site visited was a sugarcane plantation in Galiraya Sub-county being established by GM Sugar (U) Ltd. 

Also, the engineering assistant from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries visited the same site on 7 July 2020 and established that the activities being undertaken did not involve government equipment. 

Key findings
Madam Speaker, during the fact finding mission at the site, the investigating team interacted with the supervisor GM Sugar (U) Limited, Mr Juma Nswa, and the head of security Mr Robert Kawiso. The team also interacted with the Secretary of Kwagala Galiraya Agricultural Marketing Cooperative Society, Mr Dhikusoka Olar Godfrey, one of the beneficiaries of the tractors from NAADS operating in the affected sub county. In addition, the engineering assistant from the ministry, Mr Tibagamwaine, also interacted with the following and they provided their contacts:

The owner, Mr Musa Sekamate the property manager for the company with telephone contacts: 0700892367 and 0787465447.
The O/C station Galiraya Police Station and his contacts: 0782928576 and 0703102407. The Chairman, area land committee, Mr Shaban Sajjabi and his contact is 0782091408.

The team established the following:

    1) The area visited is sugarcane plantation under establishment by GM Sugar (U) Ltd.

    2) There are wrangles on the land being cleared between NFA and the above mentioned company or person currently using and bush clearing the land but the court order was issued clearing the investor to continue utilising the land, and this statement was similar to the statement from the OC Galilaya Police Post, where our engineer first reported on his arrival to Galilaya, and then it was confirmed by the current property or land manager of the company called Mr Musa Sekamate. 

    3) A total of 12 heavy equipment units (bull dozers and chain loaders) and three tractors were found at the site. The supervisor and head of security, GM Sugar (U) Ltd, informed the investigating team that the company - GM Sugar (U) Ltd - is currently using a total of 12 equipment to clear the land, five of which are owned by the company and the seven hired from a one Musa Ssekamatte - a private equipment provider from Kasokoso in Kayunga District.

The equipment, which are privately owned were used to clear land, while the tractors were being used to open, plough and harrow. 

No equipment or tractor provided by Government through the NAADS Secretariat to the three farmers' group beneficiaries in Kayunga District were found on site at the time of the visit.

The investigating team also visited Kwagala Galilaya Agricultural Marketing Co-operative Society and was taken to the area where the tractor received from NAADS Secretariat was operating from. And at the time of the visit, the tractor received from NAADS was working on a garden of one of the members of Kwagala Galilaya Agricultural Marketing Co-operative Society, far away from the area under question.

The records of Kwagala Galilaya Agricultural Marketing Co-operative Society presented to the investigating team indicated that the tractor is optimally used to benefit the members of the co-operative society to plough and harrow. 

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries heavy equipment units haven't been deployed or utilised for the works and activities found on the ground and no requests and application for that service has been expressed by the proprietors. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I would like the House to note the following: 
    1) The allegations that Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries heavy equipment units or NAADS tractors were deployed and are being utilised by the said company for opening, bush clearing and ploughing of the land in preparations for sugarcane growing in Kiwula Forest Reserve, Kayunga District is not true. 

    2) Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries heavy equipment utilisation is guided by the approved operational guidelines and regulations thus before any deployment is carried out, the engineers carry out detailed assessment of the applied works or activities based on the approved application forms duly filled, signed and approved by the sub county chief and the chief administrative officer of the respective district, thus clearing the land ownership issues and this also alerts the district of the Government equipment presence and utilisation in the area or locality. 

    3) I would like you to note that there is a wrangle on the said land being cleared, between National Forestry Authority and this company, GM Sugar (U) Ltd that is currently clearing the land. These facts can also be confirmed with the Officer in Charge of Galilaya Police Station mentioned above. I beg to present.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, that matter has been on the Floor of this House for some time. 

Right from the beginning, I was of the view that we should not continue discussing it because it is an active matter in court. And I still maintain that it is not right for us to also handle the same issue. I would like to advise those concerned to wait for the court to give its ruling in this matter as to who is the owner of the land so that we can lay it to rest.

MS NANTABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allocating us time; it is now more than four months, to deliberate on this matter. 

I do appreciate and know that the subject matter is before court. But I know that this Parliament gazettes forest reserves and has the powers to de-gazette them as well. 

I raised it before Parliament because I know that Parliament has not de-gazetted those three gazette forests in Kayunga. 

If anyone produces titles claiming private ownership, that would not leave any person concerned with our environment sitting and watching. That is why I and our cultural leaders came to you to file a petition. 

Madam Speaker, you assigned three ministers to respond to this matter. First we had the Minister of Water and Environment. Second, the House heard from the hon. Gen. Katumba Wamala, the Minister of Works and Transport. He accounted for the Government tractors from his ministry that were also involved in degrading this forest and the third was hon. Bagiire, the Minister of State for Agriculture. 

I recall that I informed Parliament that hon. Bagiire reached out to me – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nantaba, let us leave this matter, please. You did not produce evidence of the tractors here. You talked about it. We sent the works minister there and he said they are not his tractors. We sent the minister of agriculture and he said they are not his. You have not produced evidence here to show that the Government is actually involved in this degrading forest. Why don’t you leave the matter to the courts? 

MS NANTABA: Can I be allowed to produce that evidence?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us leave this matter to the court. Hon. Nantaba, take your seat. The matter is in court; let us leave it to the court. Let us go to item six.

RESPONSE ON THE ISSUE RAISED ON THE MANAGEMENT OF FLOODS IN KASESE AND BUNDIBUGYO DISTRICTS AND OTHER PARTS OF THE COUNTRY

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, where are you? Not here. Okay, next item.

RESPONSE ON AN ISSUE RAISED ON THE NON-PAYMENT OF RISK ALLOWANCE TO POLICE PERSONNEL AT THE FOREFRONT OF ENFORCEMENT OF ADHERENCE TO PRESIDENTIAL DIRECTIVES DURING THE ON-GOING COVID-19 LOCKDOWN 

THE SPEAKER: Where is the Minister of Internal Affairs? Not here. Okay, let us get to the next item.

RESPONSE ON THE ISSUE RAISED ON THE ESCALATION OF VIOLENT LAND CONFLICTS INVOLVING THE JONAM PEOPLE IN OBIRA VILLAGE, NWOYA DISTRICT, PERPETUATED BY SOME UPDF SOLDIERS RAISED BY HON. LUCY AKELLO.

THE SPEAKER: Where is the Minister of Defence and Veterans Affairs? He is also not here? It seems Government is not interested in responding to the issues concerning citizens, which are raised here. Yes, Prime Minister.

3.59
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, on the issue of violence that developed in Nwoya District, I would like to inform the House that the matter has been taken up by a Government ministerial team. This team is headed by the Minister of State for Lands, the hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi. The other members of the team are: the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, the hon. Obiga Kania and the Minister of State for Defence, the hon. Col Okello Engola. This team is doing its work. They have visited the area. They are due to produce a report and make recommendations to Government, and Parliament will be kept posted on the developments and work of this ministerial investigating team - (Interruption)

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural matter I rise on is that the matter was not raised by me but by hon. Jane Avur. I thought this needed to be corrected. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: It seems my clerks do not know the difference. Yes, hon. Avur.

MS JANE AVUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted to make that correction that hon. Akello has just made. The matter was raised by me and not hon. Akello. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let the records be corrected; it was hon. Avur. Let us go to item 5.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DEPLORABLE CONDITION OF BUSIA COVID-19 QUARANTINE CENTRE AND ON THE PLIGHT OF VOLUNTEER HEALTH WORKERS AT BUSIA HEALTH CENTRE IV AND THE PLANS TO AVAIL AN AMBULANCE FOR THE HOSPITAL

4.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, I would like to apologise that I had stepped out because one of my constituents had lost a relative and I had gone to give him money so that he could take the body back. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: You are now a purchasing officer. (Laughter)

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, following the outbreak of COVID-19 in Uganda, Government took a bold decision to test all truck drivers at the points of entry – Should I remove my mask?

THE SPEAKER: If you can speak, you speak. (Mr Oshabe rose­­) Why are you disrupting the minister? Come to this side.

MR OSHABE: Madam Speaker, we are seated around that area and the sound is very bad. We cannot follow. You see, I am speaking and they are not hearing. That is the procedural matter I wanted to raise; whether we are proceeding well while other members are not listening in to the session. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Is it something to do with the microphone? Speak louder.

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, following the outbreak of COVID-19 in Uganda, Government took a bold decision to test all truck drivers at the points of entry, including Busia. Government’s decision necessitated engaging volunteer health workers for each point of entry to beef up teams that were managing disease surveillance and laboratory testing at the points of entry.

Accordingly, in April 2020, we advised chief administrative officers at major points of entry to recruit volunteer health workers and funds were allocated as allowances for the said volunteer health workers for COVID-19 response. The recruitment of volunteer health workers for COVID-19 response in Busia was conducted by Busia District Local Government and those recruited have been working under the supervision of the said district. 

Madam Speaker, the summary of categories of volunteer health workers recruited and paid daily allowances at each point of entry, including Busia, is hereby attached. You can see Annex 1. Recruitment of volunteer health workers was a temporary measure, which was intended to address an emergency and those recruited have since been replaced by the district staff.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Health has received reports accusing some volunteer health workers at points of entry of involvement in forgery and seeking bribes. The Ministry of Health and Busia Local Government are investigating these accusations. Those implicated have been handed over to the police. Due to bad behaviour and challenges of holding public officers accountable, all chief administrative officers have been instructed to deploy formally appointed local government staff at points of entry and quarantine centres and for all the COVID-19 activities.

Madam Speaker, I therefore wish to inform this august House that allegations of demoralisation of volunteers at Busia Health Centre IV should not arise because the CAOs are moving away from an emergency mode of using volunteers to using local government employees, which is the correct procedure.

Madam Speaker, concerning the ambulance at Busia Health Centre IV, I wish to state that Government is rolling out the national ambulance system, which is fully coordinated and integrated to address national emergencies as spelt out in the national ambulance policy strategy. In this policy, ambulances are placed at health sub-districts to serve the entire constituency. In addition, regional call centres are being established at regional referral hospitals to support the system.

It is only regional referral hospitals, which will have ambulances attached to them as they need to refer to national referral hospitals. The policy is very clear; that attaching an ambulance to a health centre IV is not cost-effective.

Madam Speaker, the management of COVID-19 institutional quarantine centres in the districts is primarily a responsibility of the district taskforces. However, the Ministry of Health provides technical support and guidance to ensure the districts are operating within the set standards. 

You may recall that in April, 2020, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development allocated and sent funding equivalent to Shs 165 million to every district in the country to support COVID-19 related activities, including quarantine centres. This funding was uniform across all districts. High-burdened border districts like Busia were greatly disadvantaged by this allocation.

The Ministry of Health, working with the Office of the Prime Minister, mobilised food and non-food items and delivered them to Busia District and other high-burden districts across the country. This food and non-food support was largely donations, which you, Members, saw. Some of you donated to the Ministry of Health and to the Office of the Prime Minister. 

Madam Speaker, we are aware of the challenges of food and welfare of the quarantine residents in 43 quarantine sites, and majorly, the high burdened border districts. The Ministry of Health submitted a budget to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 10 June 2020 requesting for support to all quarantine centres. However, we are yet to receive any response. 

In the interim, the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Health has advised the district taskforces to contact the willing suppliers to provide food for the quarantined people, and also to ensure that quarantine facilities are supported with other necessities as we await for a response from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

The Ministry of Health will continue to give guidance and support to the district taskforces to ensure proper sanitation compliance with COVID-19 guidelines. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Macho and hon. Maganda, do you have any supplementary questions? We will receive the two supplementary questions, and then we move. 

4.12
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, with your permission, I request to remove the face mask. 

I would like to thank the minister for her submission concerning my questions on behalf of the people of Busia Municipality and Busia District. I would like to agree with you, Madam Speaker, that Busia District is on the frontline. Truly, we have a quarantine centre, which benefitted from Shs 165 million that was given to every district. 

Honourable minister, I would like to inform you that we have 56 people in the quarantine centre who ate food from the centre during those days when the Shs 165 million was sent. As I talk now, those people are forced to go to the small hotels in Dabani Trading Centre to get food to eat. This is a sign that more money has not been sent after the Shs 165 million.

Madam Speaker, at the same time, concerning the volunteer health workers, it is true Busia was given 56 volunteer workers, and Tororo got almost 80 volunteer workers. Two weeks ago, a circular from the Ministry of Health directed the district to reduce these workers to 30. As a result, they forced the 26 people to go back to their homes even before testing for COVID-19. As I talk now, they are back in their homes.
Therefore, I see that we shall have a bigger problem because in your submission, honourable minister, you said that you are planning to use the already enrolled Government health staff who are not enough due to the population of Busia.

We, therefore, seek Government to help us maintain all the people who were recruited as volunteer health workers because the numbers of the drivers are very high.

Madam Speaker, I think it was an oversight – the ambulance I was talking about was for the port health. Yesterday, honourable colleagues, you probably saw, on NBS and NTV, a COVID-19 patient was carried on a pick-up truck. Why? It is because they had discovered three days ago that he had COVID-19. The district had requested for an ambulance from the referral hospital in Mbale, but their request had taken three days. 

It is, therefore, my humble prayer that truly, the port health needs an ambulance. It can be located at the health centre IV because it is near the port health. An ambulance is very essential. It will help in minimising the community contacts because the way you saw yesterday, the COVID-19 patient was –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we have heard that. 

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, let me give this opportunity to my senior minister, hon. Maganda, to come and give more submission because truly we need an ambulance. 

4.15
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (NRM, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg your indulgence to allow me speak without a face mask. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Macho, for the questions that he raised for the Minister of Health to come and give a statement regarding the performance of the COVID-19 taskforces and even the health sector especially for Busia District. I also would like to thank the minister for the statement. I would, however, like to remind the minister that at a certain level, it is very unfortunate that she would deliver a message that Busia Health Centre IV does not deserve having an ambulance. 

Madam Speaker, the health system in Busia still requires a lot of support from Government. Busia, which is at the border, has a staffing ratio of 39 per cent. In the circumstance of emergencies like COVID-19 - (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, the minister has presented two statements on behalf of Government. Another minister has stood to quarrel with the statements. (Laughter) In fact, he is accusing his fellow minister for being unfair, and yet ministers represent Government, and they are bound by the collective responsibility policy. The minister who has presented the statements has simply recently opened a hospital she built herself. She is also uncomfortable that the Government is not caring for her people. That is why she went to build her hospital. 
The procedural issue I am raising is whether ministers of the same Government should come here and present a statement, debate it and oppose it, and yet ordinarily, when statements are presented by the ministers in this Parliament, it is us to debate them and ask questions.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in this country, the ministers are also Members of Parliament. I think hon. Maganda has a right to speak on issues concerning his constituency. (Applause) I am also aware that for the last several months, the ministers of state have not been attending Cabinet meetings. 

Hon. Maganda, please present your issues.

MR MAGANDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am standing here as a Member of Parliament for Samia Bugwe County South, Busia District. 

Just as I conclude, I would like to put it before the minister that probably, in her plans for the Ministry of Health, we need a consideration for an ambulance for Busia District. We also need more support for Dabani Quarantine Centre. At the moment, it is still a quarantine centre with the biggest number of people who have been isolated and kept there with almost no support. 

I am saying this because we the Members of Parliament are supporting these quarantine centres to exist by way of keeping the people there. I just wanted to support my colleague hon. Macho and also remind the minister that she needs to get back and plan better for the district, especially for the ambulance now that it is a border district with higher numbers of people crossing in and out. We have to curb the COVID-19 infections in the district. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

RESPONSE ON AN ISSUE RAISED ON THE PRECARIOUS CONDITION IN WHICH THE COVID-19 LOCKDOWN HAS PLUNGED CHILDREN AFFLICTED BY THE NODDING DISEASE SYNDROME IN NORTHERN UGANDA CHARACTERIZED BY INADEQUATE FEEDING AND CARE RESULTING TO THE DEATH OF AT LEAST 500 OF THE CHILDREN

4.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES)(Ms Robinah Nabanja): Madam Speaker, allow me to give a statement on the issue raised by hon. Lucy Achiro Otim, Member of Parliament for Aruu County North in Pader District concerning  the precarious condition in which the COVID-19 lockdown has plunged children afflicted by the Nodding Disease Syndrome in Northern Uganda, characterized by inadequate feeding and care resulting in the death of at least 500 of the children. 

Madam Speaker, Pader District has 772 children of Nodding Disease Syndrome who are accessing treatment. Those of you who have iPads this is uploaded already and below is the distribution of patients by subcounty in each facility. 
    1) Awere Sub County has 256, 
    2) Awere Health Centre III and Bolo Health Center II - and the patients are outlined properly. 
    3) In Angagura Health Centre III we have 153,
    4) Atanga 228, 
    5) Laguti 20, 
    6) Lapul 23, 
    7) Pader Kilak 12, 
    8) Puranga 7, 
    9) Acholibur 3. 
A total of 772 children are in ­­­ten facilities in that part of the country.

From 2012 to date, about 856 cases of Nodding Disease Syndrome were confirmed in Pader District with the latest case diagnosed in March 2015, from Bira Village, Pakeyo Parish, Laguti Sub County. 

Madam Speaker, a total number of 86 children with Nodding Disease Syndrome have since died because of nodding syndrome related complications such as deep burns, drowning, bacterial infections and severe malaria. Majority of them died in early years of outbreak. 

However, most of the victims of nodding syndrome are stable and have grown into adulthood although some had poor developmental milestones as a result of brain damage. Last year in 2019, only one female patient aged 19 years from Wii Olweny Atanga Parish died. However, autopsy was not done because the relatives declined it. 

Since this year began, only one patient of Nodding Disease Syndrome has died; this was a 20-year-old boy from Jaka Opatte Parish, Atanga Sub County. Autopsy was done in Lira Hospital, but the cause of death was not clear. Therefore, it is not true that 500 children of nodding syndromes have died of hunger and poor health care during the period of COVID -19 lockdown. 

However, three cases of epilepsy, which have almost the same signs, and symptoms of nodding syndrome, have died in the last five months. One died of severe malaria, the second one died of severe dehydration and the third one drowned in water. One from Wii Gweng Acholibur Sub County, another one from Bolo Parish, Awere Sub County and the third one was from Angagura Health Centre III. 

Madam Speaker, it should be noted that in recent weeks, the district taskforces with support from Ministry of Health has distributed food to 80 households of Nodding Disease Syndrome in Lawiyeadul Parish, Atanga Sub County and also in 200 households in Bolo Parish, Awere Sub County. 

The Ministry of Health has also put aside Shs 500 million in the budget of next financial year to buy food for victims of Nodding Disease Syndrome. Therefore, I wish to re-assure this House that Ministry of Health is very cognizant of the welfare of victims of Nodding Disease Syndrome. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

4.28
MS JUDITH AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Achiro has a sick child so she called me and asked me to put a supplementary question in case she gets here late. She is still on her way back with the child.

Madam Speaker, the issue hon. Achiro rose about the children suffering from the nodding syndrome was mainly the suffering of the children and lack of food that would reduce their immunity. Since their parents are not able to afford to go to work and are not able to get food and other needs, they are susceptible to diseases, malnutrition and so on. Therefore, the issue she was raising concerns what programmes Government has in terms of providing food in this period of COVID-19 because there is no means of livelihood for the parents and the children who are of course malnourished due to lack of food.

Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, the minister is talking of providing food for 80 households only yet the children that are affected with nodding syndrome are in thousands, at least from 2,000 and above in Aruu North Constituency alone.

Another lot which is in Omoro District is also yet another large number; at least over 500 households. Therefore, when the ministry provides food for only 80 households, what does it mean for the others who have not received food? 

The additional question she wanted me to ask is whether there is any plan from the Ministry of Health to provide medical attention for these children, alongside the request to provide more food. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, are you now turning this into a debate? 

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Franca for giving me way. We have children suffering from the nodding syndrome in the districts of Pader, Omoro, Kitgum and part of Amuru yet the minister is talking of only 80 households, found in only one constituency. More so, the Government is giving only five kilogrammes of beans and 10 kilogrammes of posho to each of those households. We have been under the COVID-19 pandemic for more than four months. 

Madam Speaker, what we would like to hear from the Government is about the plan they have in feeding all the children and families of children suffering from the nodding syndrome. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Health, you could respond quickly and also deal with the 6 (d) (ii) on the Kalangala Island. 

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, in my statement, I clearly told this House that the Ministry of Health has distributed food to 80 households suffering from the nodding disease in Atanga Sub County, Lawiyeadul Parish and also 200 households in Bolo Parish, Awere Sub County. In total, we have distributed food to 280 households. 

We are also putting in place a budget of Shs 500 million this financial year to buy food alone – 

THE SPEAKER: Will that cover the mentioned districts of Kitgum, Pader, Amuru and so on?

MS NABBANJA: Of course. 

RESPONSE ON THE ISSUE RAISED ON THE NEED TO CONSIDER UPGRADING ONE OF THE TWO EXISTING HEALTH CENTRES IV IN KALANGALA DISTRICT TO DISTRICT 
HOSPITAL STATUS

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please respond to that issue. 

4.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, I will just summarise. Okay, let me go through everything. 

THE SPEAKER: Summarise your response. They want to know whether you will upgrade or not; as simple as that. 

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, you are aware that there is no budget to upgrade all health facilities to district hospitals. It is in the near future that we shall do that. We have 51 districts without hospitals. They only have health centres IV. The list is hereby attached. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think the issue of Kalangala is that these are islands and the nearest hospital is in Masaka. One needs a boat to get to Masaka. The situation in the islands district is different from the one in the other districts.

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, allow me to go and inform the health team so that we can make it a priority. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, this matter was brought formally before this Parliament by the Members of Parliament representing Kalangala as a matter of national importance. You directed the minister to go and find out what they can do about it and address it. 
Is it in order, therefore, for the honourable minister again to ask for time to go and report to the ministry and see what to do about it? I thought she was here to respond to the matter. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, in the Third Session, the House gave directives to the Government, especially on the issues of the island districts, to give a special consideration. That is why Kalangala is asking what you are doing for them. The hospital is in Masaka. One needs to travel for about six hours by boat over a ferry to Masaka to access hospital services. There are over 80 islands in Kalangala. This is the issue we are talking about; the facilities for that island. That is what we are talking about. It is not like any other district. 

4.35
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, with due respect to the honourable minister, this issue has been around for some time yet the minister is just telling us that there are more than 50 districts that require such health facilities. And that if we have to consider Kalangala, she has to go back and consult.  

Madam Speaker, many of us might have watched television news the other day a story about how four staff - both male and female – in one of the health centres live in one room - we wondered how they are operating. 

We are fortunate that the Prime Minister is in the House. This is a situation that cannot be handled the way we handle issues of, for example, Kampala or Jinja. This is a unique situation; we need to save the people there. They have to travel over water using boats; their means of transport is different from the one we use here, for example, boda-bodas. 

We need to rescue these people by providing a solution to their bad situation. Therefore, since the Prime Minister, who is also the Leader of Government Business, is in the House, maybe, through your Office, Madam Speaker, we can get a commitment or an answer from him. 

4.37
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Madam Speaker, I am really dismayed. First of all, it is very painful that members of the Cabinet have failed to understand the plight of the islanders. 

Last week, people went to Namayingo District but most of them remained on the mainland, afraid to go to the waters. When you say that you do not have money to plan for the islanders, you are automatically telling us that we are not part of this country. It is not worthy because that is what you are saying and that should be marked very clearly.  

Therefore, I request the Prime Minister – because some of you have never gone to these islands – to go to these islands and see how people are suffering and how mothers are dying in the waters. It is very expensive to move the sick people, for example, the mothers, from the islands to the mainland; it costs between Shs 300,000 and 500,000. Because of that people have now resorted to going to the witch doctors or prayers. 

Therefore, this is not a laughing matter. We are requesting that you should – maybe we should request the President to appoint a minister in charge of the islands. That will help you to understand our problems better. 

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the Minister of –

MR KINOBERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give to my colleague is that, recently, while I was in the constituency, I received a call from someone in Kalangala. One of my nieces married there was in one of the health centres II giving birth. However, I can tell you that she suffered and received no medical care; she lost her baby. She was supposed to be sent to Masaka Hospital but there was no transport. I called the Member of Parliament for Bujumba County in Kalangala who also called the district health officer to send the ambulance to deliver this mother to Masaka Hospital and that is how she survived. Otherwise, she almost died too.  

Therefore, what the honourable colleague is talking about regarding islanders, is true. It must be taken as a special case. Otherwise, we shall continue losing mothers. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe the outgoing Minister of State for Primary Healthcare can say something about the ambulance. 

4.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Madam Speaker, I am now a former minister; I left the sector and so I am still not outgoing.

THE SPEAKER: I said the former minister.

MS OPENDI: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I would just like to state that I was in this sector for eight years and I visited most of these islands and I know the challenges that they are facing. I just wanted to inform my colleague that we had already agreed to upgrade Kalangala Health Centre IV to a hospital.

Madam Speaker, I know money is not available; you cannot find all the money at a go. However, the process that we had started was to allocate funding each financial year to this health centre so that work can be done in a phased manner, in a span of about two to three years.

Kalangala was supposed to have been included in this financial year’s budget before I left. That is what we had agreed on. I just wanted to inform my colleague that the best way - There is no money that you will find to put there at a go but put money in a phased manner so that Kalangala people can have a hospital but also Buvuma, which I visited just before I left the sector.

For the island and mountainous districts that do not have health centres IV, I had made a pledge on the Floor of this House that those would be priority areas. Therefore, this is what needs to be followed up by those who are still in this sector so that these people can also receive the health care services that they actually need. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we agreed long ago that we should give special priority to the island districts as they are not like everybody else.

MS NABBANJA: I am lucky to have a colleague who was there for eight years and she is thinking about working on those islands when she has left. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker - (Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, you said that we work as colleagues here. Every mission that is there is executed as a team. 

Madam Speaker, we have just seen and heard the former Minister of State for Health telling us what existed. When we go to some of these offices, we must always get what was there before so that you have work in progress. We cannot begin from heaven when something has existed on earth. 

Madam Speaker, the Minister of State for Health is insinuating that she is not interested in what existed before she went to the office. Is she in order to come here and begin saying that the former minister still wishes to stay in the sector she left and that is why she is coming to give information different from what she is giving now? Is she in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, issues of the citizens should not be personalised. That is why hon. Opendi came to give information that there is something in the pipeline, which you should follow up. It should be taken in good faith. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when can we get the full plans for the upgrading of the health centre IV in Kalangala?

4.44
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, first, I would like to commend Minister Sarah Opendi for sharing her information and the plans of Government with this august House. That is how Government works. We build on plans; it is not that we have just dreamt about them last night but these are plans that have been worked on by many different people at different times but as a Government.

Secondly, the Minister of State for Health also deserves some commendation. The reason is this: She said the concern is very clear but she does not have a ready answer here and now. She will go back to her ministry so that as a ministry, they can get information and she will come back and share it with this august House. 

Therefore, I commend the two ministers and all of you should commend them, by the way; one of them for sharing with us information that is crucial and the other one for showing that in Government, we work as a team and she was going to consult.

Now, I will give the final comment about Kalangala. The Movement Government has always prioritised islands and Kalangala in particular. This was exemplified when some years ago, with the population of only 16,000 people, Government decided to make Kalangala a fully-fledged district. There is no doubt that Government is going to prioritise having a hospital in Kalangala. There is no debate about that, for obvious reasons.

It is a very deserving area and indeed a number of us have been to Kalangala and seen this real situation. Therefore, Madam Speaker, the point about Kalangala is well made. The views here coincide with the views of Government and Government will prioritise Kalangala hospital.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, earlier I had amended the Order Paper to allow our committee to report. Let me invite the chairperson to present the report.

MR MUGUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural point I am raising is about the illegal detention of Mr Simon Peter Odongo despite a court order that this gentleman should be released.

Madam Speaker, my senior colleague, hon. Okupa, raised this issue in this House and the Attorney-General promised that he was going to answer within seven days. The Attorney-General is here.

Mr Simon Peter Odongo is seriously sick in detention and they have refused his family members, including his wife, to see him. Madam Speaker, we would like the Attorney-General to tell us what is going. Otherwise, his family members are scared. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, I believe you had made an undertaking on that issue.


4.48
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I did make the commitment last week and I wrote to the authorities. I had requested hon. Okupa to come to the office because I had wanted us to talk to the authorities together but - (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, this thing is not a personal matter. It is not about me but about a Ugandan. Last time I restrained myself from saying it here but this matter was raised in the House and it is the House to receive the response and interrogate it. 

I do not want to make it a personal thing. It is about a Ugandan who is in detention and the court ruled that the Attorney-General, the Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence (CMI) and the Inspector General of Police (IGP) produce him within 48 hours. Since that time, it is now seven days and the family is asking for his whereabouts. 

Therefore, I would not like it to be taken like a personal thing that I can come and discuss with the Government. First respond to it in the House.

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I was expecting the response this afternoon. On Tuesday next week, I will bring the evidence of this man’s production here. Apart from writing to the IGP, I also spoke to him yesterday and I am expecting that this person has been released. Therefore, on Tuesday, I undertake to show evidence of his release. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us wait for Tuesday. Yes, Chair Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

4.51
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Speaker, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs received instructions from this House to handle the regulations as brought by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. 

At the 12th Sitting of the First Meeting of the Fifth Session of the Tenth Parliament held on 2 July, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs laid those regulations on the Table. We used a methodology common to us in scrutinising the regulations. We invited the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs together with the Attorney-General. We invited the Democratic Party, Forum for Democratic Change (FDC), Justice Forum Party (JEEMA), the National Resistance Movement Party, and the Uganda People’s Congress Party as parties represented in this House, to give us their views on the proposed regulations that were laid before this House. 

We were given one week and I am glad to report - and I would like to thank the members of the committee and the secretariat - that today we are ready to report when we are actually making the seventh day, which is a week.

Stakeholders Views on the Regulations 
The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs noted that section 27 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2005 provides that he may make regulations, with the approval of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, I seek for your indulgence; please, allow me to adjust my mask so that it can loosen up a bit. 

THE SPEAKER: You can move it down. 

MR OBOTH: I have been wearing this mask from 6.00 a.m. 
Madam Speaker, I should note that as a committee, we have considered these regulations and we have the main report and a minority report, but we could not file both due to time constraints. However, they are uploading; I do not know if they have now uploaded. The clerks are working tirelessly on the one, which is supposed to be brought by hon. Sseggona. 

May I know if the report has been uploaded? If it is uploaded, Madam Speaker, it is a very brief report and I would invite Members to follow and if possible, I state the justification given by the minister. 

I had said that the minister came and gave us the justification that under section 27 of the Political Parties and the Organisations Act, 2005, he may make regulations, with the approval of Parliament, for the implementation of the Act. He added that the purpose of the regulations is to enable political parties and organisations to democratically hold their internal elections during the COVID-19 pandemic. 

He cited the rules for the prevention of the spread of COVID-l9 as issued by the Minister of Health under the Public Health (Control of COVID-19) Rules, 2020, wherein under rule 9(1)(e), public meetings, including political rallies, conferences and cultural related meetings are banned. This is a fact that has affected political parties and organisations activities in implementing the electoral roadmap as released by the Electoral Commission. 

The minister further noted that despite the outbreak of COVID-19, there are constitutional mandates under Articles 61 (2), 77(3), 105 and 181 of the Constitution that need to be fulfilled. He added that the Electoral Commission is required to conduct general elections since the current term of office of the President, Members of Parliament and other elective office bearers at district level is due to expire on 12 May 2021 as derived from the Constitution. 

He justified the need for the regulations as to facilitate political parties and organisations in conducting their internal elections for purposes of identifying political party flag bearers to contest in the next general elections due in February 2021, without compromising the safety guidelines under the Public Health (Control of COVID-19) Rules, 2020. This, he argued, will alleviate the challenges the pandemic has occasioned on political party activities such as the need to organise meetings to elect office bearers in accordance with the revised roadmap to commence on 30 June 2020, and holding party delegates conferences. 

He further justified the need for the regulations as to ensure and enhance safety and security entitlements of the citizens of Uganda as the first call of Government, uphold the legal and constitutional requirements of the Constitution of Uganda as the supreme law, and fulfil public expectations that after every five years they elect their leaders. 

Madam Speaker, the Democratic Party (DP) rejected the proposals in the regulations, especially under regulation 5(2), which prescribes the means by which political parties and organisations may hold meetings or elections of their executive committee, members of their organs or sponsored candidates to include virtual meetings, resolutions by circulation, and phased elections. 

They argue that parties have separate sets of constitutional mandates that cannot be subjected to the regulations as laid by the minister. They added that the Democratic Party's constitution cannot be usurped by the regulations to determine, for example, the term of office of office bearers. 

The Forum for Democratic Change submitted that they are not in agreement with the regulations and believe that their internal processes should not be interfered with by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. The FDC noted that the regulations, as they are, presuppose that political parties should plan and conclude all internal democratic processes leading to selection of candidates by 7 July 2020 for local government positions and about a month later for parliamentary candidates, to rhyme with the roadmap as released by the Electoral Commission. 

This is in total contradiction to the timelines the party constitution stipulates. They added that as FDC, they want credible internal democratic processes leading to the selection of political party flag bearers for the next general elections. They rejected the proposals made in the regulations. 

The Justice Forum Party appreciated the attempts by the minister to alleviate the challenges the pandemic has placed on political party activities. However, they noted that regulations 4 and 5, in their view, contradict Article 71 of the Constitution which provides for how political parties must carry out their activities based on democratic principles. 

They noted that this mandate is further reflected under section 10 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act, which explains how regularly political parties should elect their leaders. The Justice Forum Party faulted regulation 5 for conflicting with section 10 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act because it attempts to say that the National Executive Committees (NECs) of political parties can sit and extend the tenure of all the organs of the party. 

The Justice Forum Party further pointed out that the regulations by the minister fall short in addressing the ambiguity in certain provisions of the Political Parties and Organisations Act, for example section 14 on the restriction on contributions from foreign sources. However, the minister seems to address matters that are very clear in the Act in his proposed regulations. 

The Justice Forum Party therefore rejected the regulations, arguing that as they are, they conflict with party constitutions and would make it extremely difficult to hold elections internally.

The National Resistance Movement Organisation noted that the situation as presented by the COVID-19 pandemic is very precarious and it deals with matters of life, which the Government is supposed to protect. Citing their consultation with medical experts, the NRM noted that it is not yet safe to hold elections the conventional way.

Therefore, they stated that if the regulations as presented by the minister provides guidelines on how parties can proceed with their internal processes while observing the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), they are ready to embrace them and proceed with internal party activities in readiness to hold the national elections. 

They intimated that the NRM is passionate about balancing the strategic interest of the country by considering the constitutional rights of Ugandans to elect their leaders, the health risks involved in conducting elections in the current environment, including the measures the Government has put in place to ensure Ugandans are safe, and the economic cost of holding an election amidst the COVID-l9 pandemic. They opined that they see the regulations as a means to safeguard all these interests of the country and therefore support them fully.

The Uganda People’s Congress acknowledged the difficult times within which the country will have to organise the forthcoming elections. They stated that as a party, they are willing to support the regulations provided that a few hiccups are addressed. 

The UPC noted that the regulations pose certain challenges, for example in carrying out local grassroots elections, especially with the options being provided under regulation 5. Many of the candidates in the local government elections may not be in a position to organise or attend virtual meetings. 

The UPC called for more time so that such challenges can be addressed. They concluded that once addressed, they would support the regulations.

Analysis of the Provisions of the Statutory Instrument 

Application 
Rule 2 of the regulations require that the regulations apply to a political party or organisation that intends to conduct a meeting or elections during a period when public health restrictions exist in Uganda. However, whereas it is clear that the regulations are intended to provide for a mechanism of holding meetings and elections during the period when there exist health restrictions, this is not the only time when there might be challenges in holding meetings and elections in political parties and organisations. 

The committee notes that whereas an infectious disease is defined to mean any disease which can be communicated directly or indirectly by any person suffering from it to any other person, not every infectious disease will affect the holding of meetings and elections of political parties. It is only those infectious diseases that are declared in accordance with the Public Health Act, Cap 281, that require the taking of steps to preserve public health. 

Section 10 of the Public Health Act, for instance, directs the minister by statutory order to -
    a)  “ Declare that any disease shall be a notifiable disease for the purpose of this Act;
    b) Declare that only such provisions of this Act as are mentioned in the order shall apply to any notifiable disease;
    c) Restrict the provisions of this Act, as regards the notification of any disease, to the district of any local authority or to any area defined.”

Indeed, where an infectious disease is declared, like it was done in Uganda, section 11 and 27 of the Public Health Act empower the minister to issue regulations to safeguard the public, including closing of schools, declaring quarantines, closing of bars and other places of business. Therefore, the infectious disease that should be recognised is an infectious disease declared under the Public Health Act.

Furthermore, there are other instances which may prevent the holding of normal political party activities, including where there is a state of emergency or state of war declared in Uganda or any part of Uganda under Article 110 of the Constitution. In such a situation, one would wonder which provisions would apply. Therefore, there is need to prescribe a holistic approach in regulating matters that may affect the operations of political parties in Uganda, especially in situations of pandemics and existence of a state of war or emergency in the country or in any part thereof.

Internal Organisation of Political Parties and Organisations
Regulation 5 prescribes the matters that a political party or organisation may undertake during the period when health restrictions apply. The regulations empower –

    1) political parties and organisations, in the conduct of their internal affairs, in addition to complying with Articles 7l and 72 of the Constitution, to adhere to the Public Health Act and the rules made thereunder for the control of infectious diseases; 

    2) political parties and organisations to hold meetings or elections for members of their executive committee, members of their organs or sponsored candidates by any of the following means:
    a) virtual meetings; 
    b) resolutions by circulation;
    c) phased elections;
    d) secret ballot;
    e) open ballot;
    f) lining up behind the candidate of choice;

    g) election by an electoral college comprising members of an organ of the political party or organisation;

    a. election by an organ of a political party or organisation, other than that designated by the constitution of the political party or organisation, whose membership is of a number that can lawfully convene without contravening the provisions of the Public Health Act and the rules made thereunder for the control of infectious diseases; and
    b. Any combination of the means specified in paragraphs (a) to (h) or any other method of meeting or conducting an election approved by the Electoral Commission.

3) A political party to employ the method of election or meeting that allows the holding of the election or meeting without contravening the provisions of the Public Health Act and the rules made thereunder for the control of infectious diseases;

4) The executive committee of a political party or organisation to extend the term of office of elected members of organs of the political party or organisation, other than the term of the executive committee, where it is not practical to hold elections for the membership of such organs as a result of the restrictions or other measures imposed by the Public Health Act or rules made thereunder for the control of infectious diseases; and

5) The extension of the term of office of elected members of organs of the political party or organisation for a period not exceeding six months from the date of lifting the restrictions or other measures imposed by the Public Health Act.

The committee notes that the challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic require the imposing of these regulations in order for political parties and organisations to carry out their internal political activities in preparation for the forthcoming elections. 

The committee further notes that these regulations are not only essential but necessary in light of the challenges posed by COVID-19, especially in light of the fact that normal internal political party processes cannot be held as has been during normal elections.




Recommendations 
In light of the above, the committee recommends that these regulations should be approved by Parliament as required by section 27 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2005, subject to the following recommendations:

        (a) That the regulations should only apply to infectious diseases that are notified under sections 10, 11 and 27 of the Public Health Act, Cap 281; 

        (b) That the regulations should be expanded to include other matters that can affect the holding of normal party activities, including exigencies posed by a state of emergency or a state of war in Uganda or in any part thereof; and

        (c) These regulations terminate upon the lifting of the restrictions under which they are brought.

Madam Speaker, we have copies of the report and the minutes of the meetings held and I would like to lay the same on the Table.  I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson of the committee. Can I now invite the movers of the minority report to present theirs too.

5.14
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank colleagues and the committee for their consideration.Before I make a presentation, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the guidance to the committee today, which has enabled us to produce our dissenting view within the shortest time possible. I also thank the chairperson of the committee for enabling us to make a presentation this afternoon.

Madam Speaker, this is the minority report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Political Parties and Organisations (Conduct of Meetings and Elections) Regulations, 2020 – (Interruption)

MS ASAMO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Sseggona is my good friend. However, I am a member of that committee and I am very aware that hon. Sseggona has not been attending the meetings and hearings. So, I am wondering how he can present the report. Is it procedurally right for hon. Sseggona to present the minority report when he has not interacted with the different people who came to the meetings? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can I know from the chairperson whether hon. Sseggona has been attending the meetings?

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, it is true that hon. Sseggona is a member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and that he has been a member for a long time. However, it is also true that ever since we started the processing of these regulations – in the past few days or weeks – hon. Sseggona only attended yesterday, when we were writing the report. 

He did not attend any of the meetings with the witnesses. He only came in around 6.00 p.m., when we were writing the report and we were about to close. Therefore, the honourable member’s observation is valid.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if hon. Sseggona has not been attending the meetings, it is an abuse of the rules of this House for him to just jump in. (Applause) Can we have a member who has been attending?

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, the conventions of our democracy and our Constitution are that you must hear me. 

The committee started proceedings on Monday. I have attended two meetings. I am not being judged according to the rules. The rules require any Member dissenting to present a minority report. I am dissenting. I have attended some meetings and I have not attended others. You do not enforce discipline by barring Members from participating. I have participated. 

I represent a constituency. I have written a report based on the evidence before the committee. I must be judged according to the rules. Get the book, look at the attendance report and assure the House that I have not attended the statutory number of times. What is the minimum number of times in terms of percentages that I must attend? Get the attendance book, get the evidence and judge me according to the rules. Cite the rule under which I am being condemned. 

Madam Speaker, guide me on whether it would be fair for me to be condemned unheard. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am looking at the minutes. There were two activities – on the revised electoral roadmap and the Political Parties and Organisations Regulations. The honourable member attended the committee meeting today, 9 July 2020; he also attended the committee meeting yesterday, 8 July 2020. Those are the two times he attended. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, the meetings we held on 8 July 2020 and 9 July 2020 were internal meetings that were just considering the report. We did not have any presentation from the stakeholders. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if he attended the evaluation then I think he can present. (Applause)

MR SSEGGONA: I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for demonstrating the difference between lawyers and witchdoctors. (Laughter) That said, I will proceed to read the report signed by myself and other colleagues of mine. 

Introduction
The regulations were laid before Parliament by the honourable Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu, on 2 July 2020 in accordance with section 27 (1) of the Political Parties and Organisations Act. This followed a Cabinet decision to propose the same for adoption by Parliament to facilitate the internal elections and selection of flag bearers within political parties as a precursor for the country’s general elections – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hold on, there is a point of order.

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, the Member has just stated that lawyers are different from witchdoctors. Is the Member in order to insinuate that the Members of Parliament seated here are witchdoctors? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he did not name anybody. Please proceed, hon. Sseggona. 

MR SSEGGONA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

The same were referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for scrutiny and reporting to Parliament in accordance with the Rules of Procedure. 

Madam Speaker, with profound respect to my majority brethren in the committee, we find it inevitable to present this minority report with the view to persuading Members to agree with us that these regulations ought to be rejected for not passing the democratic litmus test if juxtaposed against the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the parent Act under which they are presented. 

Methodology
The committee extended invitations to and received the following stakeholders through direct interface:
    1. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs
    2. The Democratic Party (DP)
    3. Forum for Democratic Change (FDC)
    4. Justice Forum (JEEMA)
    5. National Resistance Movement (NRM)
    6. Uganda People’s Congress (UPC)

The Stakeholders’ Views
The views expressed by the stakeholders are well represented in the summary of the majority report and we adopted the same. We wish to add, however, that these were too limited in scope to represent a sample of the entire country, some of whose views may not have been taken due to the limited time. 

The Duty of Parliament
Madam Speaker, Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides as follows: 
“79. Functions of Parliament 
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda.

(2) Except as provided in this Constitution, no person or body other than Parliament shall have power to make provisions having the force of law in Uganda except under authority conferred by an Act of Parliament.
(3) Parliament shall protect this Constitution and promote the democratic governance of Uganda.”

In addition, the Political Parties and Organisations Act requires Parliament to scrutinise and approve these regulations upon examining conformity and consistency with other principal laws. Regulations, by their nature and hierarchy, are subsidiary laws, which must be subordinated to the principal legislation.

Madam Speaker, it is imperative to strongly caution ourselves whenever called upon to delegate our core function of making laws, to remind ourselves that anything that touches the Constitution and laws we make summons our most conscious attention as vanguards of the aspirations of our people. Delegating that power should be in the most deserving situation. Donating that trust given unto us by the people of this country should be in the clearest of cases. 

Scrutinising the regulations as presented here before us is a solemn responsibility that liberates or dooms the country with a high potential for anarchy. It is with such caution that we must attend to the business before us. We are required, for example, to examine whether the regulations conform to the Constitution of the land, the Political Parties and Organisations Act under which they are being proposed, the national interest as required under Article 8A of the Constitution, as well as the dictates of common sense that govern the conscience of every political and other patriotic mind - a mind that is selfless and country-driven.

In this report, we are guided by the need to uphold democratic tenets enshrined in our Constitution balanced against the need to protect the Constitution against the need to protect the people in light of the COVID-19 pandemic as lectured to us by the minister in his presentation. 

The Role of the Electoral Commission
The Electoral Commission is required, under the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, to conduct regular, free and fair elections - see Article 61(1)(a). The reason we are being stampeded into action is the requirement for a regular election. 

Parliament, on behalf of the people of Uganda, has a duty to ensure that the elections organised and conducted meet the test of a free, fair and democratic election envisaged in the Constitution. This must be one that meets the aspirations of the people through participation that is meaningful and not a cosmetic and ritualistic semblance of democracy.

Short of a free and fair election, both party and general, the relevance of this House is called into immediate legislative and oversight action. We are aware of the independence of the Electoral Commission under Article 63 of the Constitution.

Our Points of Dissent and Analysis of the Provisions of the Regulations
The minority recognise that the committee makes the following recommendations, which we disagree with: 
“In light of the above, the committee recommends that these regulations should be approved by Parliament as required in section 27 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2005, subject to the following recommendations:

(a) The regulations should only apply to infectious diseases that are notified under sections 10, 11 and 27 of the Public Health Act, Cap 281;

(b) the regulations should be expanded to include other matters that can affect the holding of normal party activities, including exigencies posed by a state of emergency or a state of war in Uganda or in any part thereof;

(c) these regulations terminate upon the lifting of the restrictions under which they are brought.”
The title to the regulations reads, “the Political Parties and Organisations (Conduct of Meetings and Elections) Regulations, 2020.” The same are made pursuant to the powers granted to the minister under section 27 (1) as well as under section 10 of the parent Act. It is, therefore, important to reproduce and dissect these said provisions. 

Section 27(1) provides thus: “The Minister may, with the approval of Parliament, make regulations for the implementation of the provisions of this Act.” 

Section 10 of the Act itself talks about the internal organisation of political parties and organisations and it provides thus:
“(1) A political party or organisation shall, in its internal organisation, comply with the provisions of the Constitution, in particular articles 71 and 72 of the Constitution.

(2) Every political party or organisation shall elect such persons as may be determined by the members of the political party or organisation as members of the executive committee of the political party or organisation with due consideration for gender equity.

(3) The election of members of the executive committee of every political party or organisation shall be conducted at regular intervals not exceeding five years.”
It is the command of the Act that parties, in terms of management and election, must conform to Articles 71 and 72 of the Constitution. 

Any noncompliance with the Constitution or the parent Act is therefore ultra vires, null and void, and any regulation against these laws is not only an exercise in futility but also marred with no legal authorisation. Please refer to the case of Fox Odoi Oywelowo and James Akampumuza versus Attorney-General, Constitutional Petition No.8 of 2003 and Kasibo Joshua versus Commissioner-General of Uganda Revenue Authority, High Court Miscellaneous Application No.44 of 2007. For emphasis, Parliament has no authority to pass any regulation that offends either of the two laws.

Article 71 of the Constitution provides thus: 
“Multiparty political system
(1) A political party in the multiparty political system shall conform to the following principles - 
(c) the internal organisation of a political party shall conform to the democratic principles enshrined in the Constitution.

(d) members of the national organs of a political party shall be regularly elected from citizens of Uganda in conformity with the provisions of paragraphs (a) and (b) of this Article with due consideration for gender.”

Further, Article 72 (2) provides that an organisation shall not operate as a political party or organisation unless it conforms to the democratic principles laid down in the Constitution.

Madam Speaker, the following must be borne in mind to deal with regulations placed before us:
    1. The regulations seek to give effect to section 10 of the Act in terms of meetings and elections. The minister was actuated by the existing pandemic to conclude that a normal election and meetings cannot take place without compromising the lives of the public. At face value, that is a fair motivation to act within the ambit of the section. It should, however, be noted that section 10 has nothing to do with meetings but elections. The banning of meetings in political parties’ operations is a matter of substantive and not subsidiary law. The former - I mean the substantive - has no space for ministerial intervention and/or interference. (Applause) 

Further, the nature, scope and purpose of different meetings as well as powers of the respective organs are different and cannot be regulated by an omnibus statutory instrument.

    2. The section requires the conduct of regular elections which must not exceed five years. Accordingly, any proposal to allow an organ of the party to operate beyond five years is ultra vires the Act and must be avoided.

    3. The section requires conformity with Articles 71 and 72 of the Constitution, which direct parties to conform to democratic principles. Any proposal to deviate from these is unconstitutional, ultra vires, null and void. They are prohibited by Articles 1 and 3 of the Constitution of the Republic. 

These democratic principles have recently been expounded by F.M.S Ngonda Ntende, Justice of the Constitutional Court, and in Constitutional Petition No.9 of 2019 - the hon. Theodore Ssekikubo and nine others (Members of this House) versus the National Resistance Movement (NRM).

    4. The effect of the regulations with respect to meetings in political parties is a matter of both the Constitution and statute and cannot be prescribed by regulation without amending the Constitution and the enabling statute. Such powers are not within the province of ministerial prescription under the guise of regulation. These are matters of substantive law and not subsidiary legislation. Parliament needs to immunise the minister of this mischievous temptation. (Applause)

    5. The passing of these regulations shall have an amending effect on the parties’ constitutions without consulting the constitution-amending powers within those parties. 

We note that there have not been any consultations with the delegates’ conferences of the affected political parties by either Parliament or the executive organs of the parties themselves. We agree that the times are difficult and therefore there is a stampede, and the temptation for expediency may not be a remote temptation. However, no circumstances can permit transgression of the constitutional democracy of our country.

The curtains of COVID-19 are being used and abused, whether consciously, subconsciously or unconsciously. The desired goals cannot be legally achieved without amending the Constitution lest we transgress on our sacred Constitution.

Regulation 2

Application

The regulation applies to meetings and elections while public health restrictions exist in Uganda. Madam Speaker, the definition given in the interpretation of regulations suggest  restrictions of a general public health nature, which are so wide. Secondly, the regulation applies to meetings whose regulation is a matter of substantive law as earlier explained. 

Enforcement is by the police whose involvement was first outlawed following the nullification of section 8 of the Public Order Management Act vide Constitution Petition No.56 of 2013 - Human Rights Network Uganda and others versus the Attorney-General.

Regulation 5: Internal Organisation of Political Parties and Organisations
Regulation 5(1) requires political parties to comply with the Public Health Act and rules made thereunder. This is axiomatic and needs no legislative reminder. It is, therefore, redundant and ought to be rejected.

Regulation 5(2) of the proposed regulations permits the holding of public meetings, which would otherwise be held by the respective organs of a political party. This effectively amends those parties’ constitutions without reference to the owners of the constitutions. This offends the democratic principles enshrined in the Constitution. There can never be a lawful justification to deviate from the Constitution without amending it.

Regulation 5 (2) (g) seeks to constitute the electoral college of the parties. This disenfranchises the people and those parties and offends the democratic principles. This is the same mischief caused by regulation 5 (2) (h). 

Regulation 5 (4) allows the extension of the time of office of organs of a party which would otherwise have expired. The danger caused by this is to offend section 10 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2005 which requires regular elections as per the constitutions of the parties. This is the right guaranteed under Article 71 and 72 of the Constitution. 

Madam Speaker, accepting these regulations would directly, and or by implication amend the Constitution and the parent Act. Giving the minister that kind of blank cheque would amount to amending the Constitution without a Constitutional (Amendment) Bill and without following due process under the guise of public health. The minority are of the view that it is possible to achieve the desired goals while complying with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

Article 259 of the Constitution provides as follows:
“1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may amend by way of addition, variation or repeal, any provision of this Constitution, in accordance with the procedure laid down in this chapter.
(2  This Constitution shall not be amended except by an Act of Parliament - 
        a) The sole purpose of which is to amend this Constitution; and
        b) The Act has been passed in accordance with this Chapter.”

The only way provisions of the Constitution can be affected is by an amendment Bill, which is not before us.

Recommendations
In light of the above, the minority recommends as follows:
    1. That the regulations proposed by the Honourable Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs be rejected in their entirety.
    2. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs be urged to present to Parliament comprehensive amendments in the Constitution and the Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2005 to transit the country through the COVID-19 pandemic. These should include a comprehensive plan of how the Government will go through the period of the pandemic.

We beg to move.  I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. Honourable members, you have heard the reports from both the minority and the majority. We can now have your comments. Three minutes, each.

5.41
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Rubanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the report presented by the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. The population is waiting for us to tell them the way forward as far as the next elections are concerned. What is delaying us is the issue of trading off between the health situation existing now and also giving the population an answer that we must have elections. 

The report is providing for all possible options to conduct elections in the current circumstances. It is from this background that I support the committee report, as also presented to the committee by the NRM Party, having envisaged the situation and also having taken care of the needs of the population. 

I appeal to colleagues to support the committee report and we pass the regulations. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us hear Members’ views. -  I am aware it is 6 O’clock but we have to finish this business, please. We have 15 minutes. In that case, one minute each. Is that what you want? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No. 

5.43
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the opportunity. I would also like to support the report of the committee. Like the chairperson stated, it is the right of our citizens to change us every five years. We have seen other countries carrying out these elections during this pandemic. Therefore, it would be a disservice to our people and the public if we do not hold these elections because other people also need to come in and others go away. We would be denying them a right. 

I would like to say that we should not look at all the other conditions because meetings have already taken place in organising how to hold these elections in a more comfortable, convenient and safe way so that we can see this also pass for us to execute the provisions of our Constitution. 

Therefore, I would like to support the committee position and say that we should not even wait. At the moment, the public, especially us, who come from rural districts - the voting mood is already high. If you told them that there is no voting, I know they would not see us as people who are here for their rights and also feel for them. 

I would like to say that we should proceed with this report and pass it the way it is so that our people can also enjoy their rights. 

5.46
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have carefully listened to the presentations of both the majority and minority reports. The spirit I have read in both reports is on how we can have a smooth election. 
Therefore, we all support each other but we would like a smooth management of elections. I would like to thank both the main and minority committee for reflecting that spirit to abide with what is in the Constitution so that we have a successful election. 

Secondly, I would like to thank the Government because the bringing in of the regulations is to bridge the vacuum. The whole country is in a vacuum. Many people are asking questions on what is next because this is the calendar for elections. Therefore, this is a way of answering people’s questions and I would like to thank the Government for bringing in the regulations so that we can take feedback to the people. 

I am also aware that the election process starts with primary elections because we are in a multiparty dispensation. The provisions and methodologies provided in the regulations have made a lot of input. It is upon the parties to decide which mode of elections is best for them. 

Government and Parliament, in my understanding, is not going to force political parties to decide on a specific mode but it is giving you options to decide upon. 

I am also aware that the current situation is not as bad as it was at the beginning in March. The situation is fairly improving and the general elections are going to take place after party primary elections. Therefore, I pray that we engage ourselves in enforcement to ensure that we fight COVID-19 so that probably, by October, we can have a better environment. 

Therefore, I support having a free and fair election within this pandemic situation by observing all the guidelines to save our country and everybody in it. Thank you.

5.49
MS ANIFA BANGIRANA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have attentively listened to both reports and I rise to support the majority report. 

I would like to say that we are in a situation similar to the one we were in during the time of the Constituent Assembly when we had to decide on the political way forward for this country.

I have listened and realised that there are questions to be answered by members of Parliament, arising from the regulations as presented both in main and minority reports of the committee.  
One of the questions is: should we democratically leave the internal management of party affairs to the parties? If we can answer that while knowing that we are under a multiparty dispensation.

The second question is: should we take into consideration the preservation of public health versus democratic normal electioneering? We should answer those questions. 

I said I was here during that time and I am looking at the same. We must have these questions in mind. We must not debate this issue because politically, we want to debate but we should answer some of these issues in order to come to a consensus.

Thirdly, should the regulations only be limited to activities and if it is that, I do not hear the minority report rebuttal it. I, therefore, call upon Members in the Opposition to support the majority report. The population is in the mood of elections. 

5.51
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, legislation is not an event; it is a process. If you decide to make it an event, you will deny people justice. If we towed the way of a process, then we will be giving Ugandans a gift of justice.

The parties have a right to consult with those who belong to them. Parliament must choose the line that allows the parties to consult deeply to have inclusive democracy.

We need to know that we are acting in a situation, which is not normal. During this period of COVID-19, life should be considered first. People are talking about elections but they have forgotten to talk about life.

South Africa is a good example of what is going wrong now where cases are rising every now and then. Somebody was duped to think that our situation is improving, yet, we are now realising community infections, which is very dangerous for us. We do not have the capacity to handle our health issues in case the situation runs out of hand. 

Madam Speaker, my main issue now is one: I think the minority report takes the day.  (Member timed out.)

5.54
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the presenters of both the majority and minority reports. I rise to support the main report. 

I understand that the purpose and the need for these regulations, was to cure the gaps in all political parties’ constitutions that did not envisage a situation of the pandemic that we now have.

I acknowledge that the COVID-19 pandemic really exists and it is my responsibility, as a leader, to protect citizens first before we move on.

I also recognise the fact that the Constitution requires that elections should be held every five years. In order to achieve the two, we must marry them and get solutions as Parliament. That is why I have also understood that regulations are providing scenarios from which political parties must choose how to operate.

I appreciate that any gap that we fear - we need to go back to our political parties, not here. I need to go to my political party now and give my view about the option we must take. Otherwise, the regulations are here to guide us on how to move. I beg to move.

5.56
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, sometimes I get confused when I look at Members in this House. I also think about a country called Uganda. The issues, which were raised by the minority report, are very clear. I thought it was important that even the Attorney-General would say we are doing a wrong thing as Parliament. The first issue is the illegality of what we are doing now as Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. 

We are not saying there should not be elections; I think Members are mistaken on that. We are saying if we are going to make laws for this country, this Parliament must do things that are within the law. The regulations must be within the law; that is very clear.

The second issue, which Members do not understand is that they are giving you a blank cheque for someone to write the amount of money they would wish to write, in terms of these regulations. Supposing the Central Executive Committee of your party decided that they are going to choose their own candidates. And if you not the favourite member of the Central Executive Committee, you are the victim of this regulation we are talking about here; you are the victim.

I wonder why Members would stand up and say they support this because the public is ready for elections. We are not saying that there should be no elections. We are saying that if we are making regulations, they must be within the law and secondly, do not give a blank cheque to somebody to decide your political future. That is the position we are talking about.

Honourable members, I support the minority report. I do not see the reason a Member should stand up and say - (Member timed out.)

5.58
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There has been an insinuation that the public expects us to have elections and therefore, this is an answer to the public expectation.

The public expects rallies. Are we going to give them rallies? The public would expect us to open schools. Are we opening schools? The public would expect us to open churches. Are we opening churches? Therefore, if you say that you are answering the public, have we answered what the public has asked us to do? We are regulating. 

Now, if we must regulate, we must look at life first. Unfortunately, there are people who think that some of us do not want elections. No, we are saying what type of elections are we going to have? If you give this authority to political parties - I know the minister has had a situation whereby political parties in the past – his former party, UPC - would choose candidates. I do not think that you want that for our parties.

Finally, Madam Speaker, majority of the political parties and the stakeholders who appeared were against these regulations. It was only NRM and UPC, the political party of Prof. Kamuntu, that supported them. Therefore, we cannot say that when the majority stakeholders were against it, we can sit as Parliament and go against the majority stakeholders. I support the minority report. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.59
MR ADKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to make my submission but I have to say that I totally support the minority report. I am a political scientist and at the highest level, my PhD was looking at transitions and elections. 

An election can make or break a country. Our laws are very clear; the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 and the Presidential Elections Act, clauses 3 and 23 are very clear. This has nothing to do with common sense; it has everything to do with the law. 
This country is not ready for another sham election. Ugandans need and deserve credible, fair and free elections. We have presidential candidates right in this House. I did not hear from the committee report, an opportunity extended to the presidential candidates. The last time we locked down the country, we had consultations of presidential candidates. Three months down the road, we came up with a roadmap that does not put into consideration the presidential candidates.

The onus is upon this House. Do we want to stand to be counted as a Parliament that mortgaged this country to anarchy? This has nothing to do with the regulations and we cannot be counted as a Parliament that allows regulations to change the Constitution. I entirely support the minority report. Thank you. 

6.02
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo North County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. We are talking about two rights here; there is a right to vote and we are also looking at the right to life. Which one is heavier in this circumstance of COVID-19? I would like to say that indeed, the right to life takes precedence. 

Imagine some of us started off as NRM members of Parliament and today, we are independent. By that time, there was no COVID-19 but there were a lot of irregularities in the elections. Just imagine tomorrow when it is Central Executive Committee picking candidates, what is going to be the commotion in this House? 

I am foreseeing most of the Members on that side being kicked out of the next Parliament. Therefore, it is incumbent upon us to uphold what the Constitution tells us. Let us go into the elections as prescribed by the Constitution and the prevailing laws of the country. (Interjections) I will take the information.

THE SPEAKER: We do not have enough time. Hon. OKumu, please come and make your submission.

6.04
MR REAGAN OKUMU (Independent, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for this opportunity. I do not have much to talk about; we have heard both the minority and the majority reports. 

I would like to pose one question; how are we going to handle the issue of illegality because voting in this House will not do that? I have seen this House, time and again, being dragged to court and certain things are turned down. I do not fear elections. Even if they say we go for elections now, I am ready. However, it is not a matter of going for elections just to win. It is a matter of other people, in case of any problem. It is also a matter of rights. What if your party decides to call a delegates conference by inviting one person per district and they pronounce themselves over the candidature of every constituency in this country because the regulations would have given them that power. How will you stop that?
Therefore, it is upon all of us because it will affect us. 


Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my colleagues to take your example from me. When I am in this House, they call me an independent member of Parliament. Even when parties and independents are inviting people to attend this Session, the independents always forget that I am in FDC and they do not invite me.

This matter is in court and has taken five years of injustice. The Court of Appeal cannot decide whether Reagan is a Member of Parliament representing FDC or he is an independent Member. Therefore, why wait to go to court when we can decide some of these matters here? I would like to appeal to honourable members that this is our country and it is not running away. We should have the freedom and the opportunity to safeguard, first and foremost, the lives of our people. Let us agree that we do not have the capacity other countries have; those developed countries. I would like to appeal that let us not just reject the minority report because it was read by hon. Sseggona, an Opposition member of Parliament. Let us look at the contents of that report and argue with our minds and not with emotions. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I originally expected the matter we are discussing to be a matter of the common good. Because we are talking about public health, I thought we are going to build consensus as a country. I did not even expect to have two reports. Already, we are becoming more polarised.

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of procedure?

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, it is 6.00 p.m. and I believe most members of Parliament would want to contribute and discuss on this subject matter. It will be very unfortunate for us to bypass our party constitutions, like in NRM where I am supposed to have a district conference, using regulations which are unconstitutional, leading us to litigation which we can, as an advocate of national dialogue, we could avoid proactively and preventively. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: What is your point of procedure?

MR MUKITALE: Wouldn’t it be procedurally right to give us a full day tomorrow to discuss this topic so that we are not seen to be stampeded to bypass our party constitutions and just circumvent the Constitution? (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, I plead, as an advocate of national dialogue, aware that this 10th Parliament did not implement what the Stephen Tashobya report in 9th Parliament should – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, take your seat. I have heard. We have a presidential candidate. Can I invite hon. Kyagulanyi to speak? 

6.09
MR ROBERT KYAGULANYI (Independent, Kyadondo East County, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to disagree with the committee report. The committee report only serves to expose how disconnected we are from reality. It is indeed hypocritical for the report to suggest that it is denying our people the right to make an informed decision because we are apparently protecting them from COVID-19. 

Less than half a kilometre from where we stand, there is a crowd bigger than any of us have ever seen. Down here in Kikuubo, there is a massive crowd every day. Therefore, it is not right for us to claim that we are blocking our people from the information that they need to make a very important decision that they only get a chance to make every five years. 

In any case, we all understand the challenges of COVID-19 and yes, it was envisioned by our Constitution. Article 77(4) of our Constitution provides that in a situation of a state of emergency, the Parliament shall extend by a certain percentage, the mandate of the Parliament and the leadership of the country. There, Madam Speaker, it is you that would be guiding the country into the next step. (Applause) 

Everything that is happening in Uganda today is a characteristic of a state of emergency. We all know that because the sitting President is so drunk on power, for lack of a better word, he cannot allow a state of emergency. 

We must not be seen to be so hypocritical as to try to gag our people and stop them from connecting -

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR KYAGULANYI: Madam Speaker, I thank you. We should all remember that here in Uganda, a bad election has cost our country more than half a million lives. 

Any time now, the people of Uganda are going to run out of patience and we shall have nobody to blame but this Parliament. Thank you.

6.13
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, allow me to thank the two honourable members that presented the majority and minority reports. I would especially like to thank hon. Sseggona who presented the minority report for his spirited effort at trying to convince us that subsidiary legislation cannot override the Constitution. 

Nobody said that subsidiary legislation overrides the Constitution. Absolutely not. We are fully aware that it is the Constitution that is supreme. Therefore, the Constitution is the supreme law of the land and of course, it must be protected, defended and respected. 

And because the Constitution is the supreme law, this country is compelled to hold these elections – presidential, general parliamentary and local government elections. 

According to the Constitution, this must now be done within the first 30 days of the last 122 days before the expiration of the term of the Government. 

The issue here is that without the political parties conducting their internal elections to elect their flag bearers, the elections cannot be held. In our view, this would create a constitutional vacuum that is likely to create a crisis. 

We must also address the public expectation. The public expects general elections by – (Interjections) - as has been the case since 1996. This country has consistently held elections. We also – (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Attorney-General is insisting that they have to follow the constitutional order and that the elections that they are planning must follow the constitutional order. 

However, the Attorney-General is not providing sufficient information to this House by leaving out the fact that the mover of the regulations, hon. Kamuntu, was in the Obote Government that led to anarchy between 1981 and 1986. Secondly – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, take your seat. (Laughter)

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, as I was saying, the public expects these general elections by 8 February 2021. This has been the case since 1996. This country has consistently held elections every five years. This can only be achieved if these political parties are facilitated to conduct their internal elections without compromising the existing COVID-19 rules.

The question is, why is the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs trying to address the issues through the Political Parties and Organisations Act? 

The health guidelines and statutory instruments, which have already been issued by the Ministry of Health under the Public Health Act have advised us that there is COVID-19, which is an international pandemic. This ministry has issued an alert to our country and has now told us that we are in phase III. 

The fact of the pandemic is not peculiar to Uganda. This is an international fact. We all know about it. It has caused death in many other countries. Fortunately, because of the measures that we have put in place, up to now, we do not have a recording of any death. 

Madam Speaker, the various parties of the country are aware of the public health implications and they are keen – I would hope – to prevent and control this pandemic. At the same time, they must avail the citizenry of Uganda of their constitutional opportunity to elect its membership. The upcoming election activities present various – (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, you have guided that we should not raise anything, which is not relevant to what is being discussed. The Attorney-General is raising matters to do with the Ministry of Health’s guidance in as far as the election and its conduct is concerned. May the Attorney-General quote for us the constitutional provision upon which all those regulations are anchored? 

The point of order I am raising is that it is over the issue of elections that the National Resistance Army launched a bush war. Therefore, let us be mindful of the fact that the Constitution’s preamble says “we are mindful of the past”. When we make any law concerning elections, let us be mindful of the past. Let us not do anything in a hurry –

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

MS OGWAL: Is it in order for the Attorney-General to be evading the facts about the Constitution, which has been raised to some extent by the minority report, fully aware that the consequences of the hurried decision, which we are about to be pushed into, may cause us another political crisis? May the Attorney-General clarify to me whether it is in order to be talking generally about the presidential guidance when he is not anchoring that argument on any constitutional provision? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not think you can determine the sequence of his speech. Allow him to give us his address, and, if he misses it out, you can come up.

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the guidance. As you have correctly said, I was just moving up with my presentation.

One of the duties of the Government is to make sure that they protect the lives of the people and that is why I was making reference to COVID-19. These circumstances are not usual. They are unusual and that is why I gave the example of people dying in many other countries.

One of the functions of the Government is to protect the people. Under Article 23 (d) of the Constitution – for the purpose of hon. Ogwal, “no person shall be deprived of their liberty, except in any of the following cases - for the purpose of preventing the spread of an infectious or contagious disease.”
That is one of the places where we derive the authority.

The second question that hon. Sseggona brought was: how does the minister get his power to issue the regulations? Had he been attending all the meetings that we had with the committee – I went to great lengths to explain that section 10 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act and section 27. Under section 10, the parties operate under the laws of Uganda – these govern the internal organisation of political parties. 

In order to allow political parties to choose leaders and sponsor candidates in a democratic way, sections 10 and 27 of the PPOA, under which these regulations are coming, are the ones that send us to Article 71 of the Constitution. Therefore, we are actually following the Constitution. It is the Political Parties and Organisations Act that sends us to the Constitution. 

Article 71 tells us “A political party in the multiparty political system shall conform to the following principles–“ The main principle we are interested in here is under Article 71(1)(c), which says “the internal organisation of a political party shall conform to the democratic principles enshrined in this Constitution.”

The democratic principles enshrined in the Constitution, Madam Speaker, are that Article 23 –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, kindly protect me from this gentleman.

Madam Speaker, this Article 71 is the one that led me to Article 23 of the Constitution. Therefore, in all cases, what we are trying to do is to conform to the Constitution. Article 23 makes sure that we protect the people of Uganda. The COVID-19 was not a product of the Government of Uganda but an international pandemic. We are trying to do two things: first, to protect the people of Uganda, and secondly, to ensure that we follow our constitutional mandate of holding an election after every five years. I beg to submit.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order against the Attorney-General who is attempting to guide this House but reading the Constitution selectively. Other than citing Article 71(1)(c), he should also tell us that this is going to lead to an election, which is provided for in Article 61, where it empowers the Electoral Commission that it will hold regular, free and fair elections. When you look at the provisions of these regulations, do they lead to what we would call “free and fair elections”? 

Should we leave this Attorney-General to mislead this House by only citing an Article and even leaving Article 68(6), which even rules out some provisions which have been cited in the regulations? For instance, when you read Article 68(6) –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, he was responding to the minority report. Please, take your seat. (Laughter)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: But is he in order to mislead the House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have listened to this matter from both sides. I now put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the minority report be adopted. (Members rose_) Take your seats, please.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE SPEAKER: The committee report has been adopted. House adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.27 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 14 July, 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)



