Tuesday, 3 July 2007

Parliament met at 2.32 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

 (The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I take this opportunity to welcome you and thank you for all the activities you have carried out to develop our country. This period is partly controlled by the Budget Act, but I am surprised that up to now certain provisions of the Budget Act have not been complied with and no reason has been given for this.  

The Budget Act commands that ministries or ministers submit policy statements to back up or explain the Budget by 30th June. However, I regret to say that on my desk I have one or two policy statements only and nobody has bothered to tell me why there is this default. I, therefore, urge those concerned to remedy the default by handing in their policy statements so that the various committees can study them and start handling the budget, which has a timeframe to complete. Thank you.

2.35
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on two brief matters of public interest. The first one occurred in my constituency of Madi-Okolo. When I joined Parliament in 2001, I found a practice amongst Members of Parliament of producing calendars for their constituents. I joined this practice and funds allowing I have been distributing calendars to my people. Last week, Tuesday, 26 June 2007, the Resident District Commissioner of Arua visited one health centre and found a calendar, which he tore to pieces. The workers –

THE SPEAKER: You mean expired calendars of last year?

MR ARUMADRI: Well a calendar can be revalidated such that if you do not have a current one you can look for one with a month that rhymes with the current month.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I was just asking to know more about the calendar. Proceed.

MR ARUMADRI: The matter I am raising is not really about the destruction of that calendar but the fact that the workers felt intimidated. The reports I am now receiving is that they want to leave the place. A health worker is not somebody you can pick from the streets and say, “You work here”. Now if these workers leave this health unit and there is an emergency like childbirth and somebody loses her life, who will take moral responsibility?  

Further to this, Mr Speaker, during the constitution amendment exercise many of us argued – (Interruption)

DR MALLINGA: Calendars are essentially campaign materials; therefore as a matter of courtesy and political practice in this country, political materials are not exposed in places like dispensaries and schools. I do not think my friend the hon. Member is correct to say that these workers are going to abandon their work because these calendars were removed.  Expired calendars are supposed to be removed. Do you think a nurse will abandon her job because of that calendar?  I think that is too much.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Minister, I think we should get the story as it is. We do not know whether they were expired or not, and in any case we do not know whether they were political calendars. Suppose there was a picture of Lake Victoria on one month and that of Mt Elgon on another.  I do not think these would be political calendars. Let us get the story and then you can investigate.  

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Speaker, I have stated very clearly that my concern here is not the destruction of the calendar. If the RDC had an official calendar and a current one at that, he would have provided it and ordered for the removal of the other.  But to go one step further and intimidate the staff for having this calendar in the premises is the issue I am raising. I am looking at a situation where there is no staff in this health unit and an emergency cannot be attended to.  

Before the Minister interrupted me, I was saying that during the constitution amendment exercise some of us argued for the abolition of this office in light of the new political landscape. I particularly argued that most of these RDC are people who have lost elections.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I would have thought that you would simply report the incident and tell us who did it.  The repercussion of this incident seems to be that people felt threatened. Leave the rest for investigations. When you start commenting on an office, which is established in the Constitution, you are going a bit far.  

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you for that wise guidance. Let me finalise this matter because I had promised that this was going to be very brief. The functions are clearly stated in Article 203 (3) and destruction of property is not among them.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you have made your point.  We realise that it was discourteous of this officer.

MR ARUMADRI: The second issue I wanted to raise is Local Government elections at L.C I and L.C II. My colleague, hon. Erias Lukwago, raised this matter and Government promised that a law would be brought here expeditiously because of the void and confusion that is pertaining on the ground. We have this premonition that my hon. colleague and senior Minister is dragging his feet on this matter so that the uneasy status quo can continue. Can I urge him to expedite this matter? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS MWESIGE: I would like to inform the Member and the House that Cabinet has already passed the Draft Bill and it is being printed; very soon it will be read before this House. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: As regards the matter concerning the Minister of Health or the minister concerned with RDCs, there is no debate required here. A report has been made so let those concerned investigate.

2.43
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise on a matter of national importance. Last financial year the government, having worked so hard to stabilise Northern Uganda, put in the budget of Ugshs 18 billion to help in the process of returning our people back home. Part of this money went to the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness to secure some seeds and other items to be distributed in the region. A number of varieties of seeds were identified and these included, maize, sorghum, groundnuts and beans. A number of farm implements like hoes, sickles and pangas were also identified and distributed. 

Companies were identified by the Office of the Prime Minister: Companies that were tasked with the responsibility of supplying these items included, Thika Seeds, Crocodile Tools, Morgan Enterprises, Kisugu Enterprises and Akuku Company Limited. These companies went ahead to procure these seeds at the beginning of this year and they were distributed without the consultation of the leadership of Northern Uganda. Of the seeds that arrived in Gulu District, there contained 32,000 kilograms of maize seeds. The bean seeds that were supposed to be 32,000 kilograms have not been distributed up to now. 32,000 kilograms of sorghum seeds were distributed, unfortunately this sorghum was the type called epuripur, which is meant for brewing not consumption. 24,000 kilograms of millet seeds and 23,000 kilograms of groundnut seeds also were distributed. 

Mr Speaker, in the last few weeks there has been a lot of controversy in the media between the Chairman of Gulu District and the Minister for Disaster Preparedness. This matter has been going on and the population in the North have been complaining and they are concerned. I wish, therefore, to take this opportunity to lay on Table a test by the District Agricultural Officer of Gulu District who tested these seeds that were distributed and found out that of the maize seeds that were supplied, only four percent could germinate. 

As regards sorghum, 98 percent of the seeds could germinate but it is not for consumption but for brewing. Concerning groundnuts, only 15 percent of the seeds could germinate. I wish to take this opportunity to lay this report on Table for Parliament. 

Supplementary to this, Mr Speaker, I also wish to take this opportunity to lay on Table some of the tools that were distributed by the Prime Minister’s Office. I have an axe here, which I would lay on table.

THE SPEAKER: Aren’t they offensive weapons? (Laughter)

MR REGAN OKUMU: They are not, Mr Speaker, these are tools that were distributed to our people to use when they returned home. I lay on Table a similar type of hoe labelled, “Made in China”, which I think would raise a lot of issues as to whether they are really made in China and how they got imported into the country because the Uganda Bureau of Statistics should have made sure that at least quality items come into this country. Nevertheless they were distributed. This has just broken off but I also wish to lay it on Table. 

I also lay on Table a hoe that is labelled, “Made in Uganda”. I would request- (Laughter)- Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to say that these seeds were kept in the government stores in Kampala and they were only sprayed outside the stores and not treated.

MR GODI: Information.

THE SPEAKER: Let us get his statement, please.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, the contracted companies did not meet their specifications as was required. The seeds also delayed in Kampala in the government stores as well as in Gulu District. The poor quality of the pangas and sickles raises suspicion that they were procured due to conflict of interest. No funds were disbursed to the District Chief Administrative Officers to facilitate them in distributing these items. 

Mr Speaker, as I speak, because of the controversy that arose, which many of us have read in the media between the Minister for Disaster Preparedness and the Chairman of Gulu District on the one hand and a presidential advisor who has been supporting the chairman of the district because he has also travelled widely and identified these items as fake, the CAO of Gulu has unfortunately been interdicted. The letter of his interdiction indicates that he was interdicted over the failure to distribute these seeds. 

I, therefore, would like to request that this matter be subjected to Parliamentary scrutiny and I would suggest that Parliament establishes an independent committee without the involvement of the leadership of Northern Uganda so that these items can be verified and more samples brought on board to truly find out if these are really the items – (Interruption)

MR OPANGE: Information.

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you allow him to finish what he wants to say? You can supplement later.

MR OPANGE: I wanted to provide further evidence by placing another item on the Table. I have a similar item from Teso region.

THE SPEAKER: But do you have it with you? 

MR OKUMU: More samples can be brought on board to truly find out if these are really the items –(Interruption)

MR OPANGE: Yes. I would wish to lay a similar item from Teso region, that is a hoe, which you can easily fold using your hands ordinarily. 

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to request this Parliament to establish a select committee to independently go and investigate this matter because it is a matter of -

THE SPEAKER: You are turning this into a debate yet you know what we agreed on. You just lay those items then I will decide.

MRS TUMA: I am concerned because I have seen weapons getting into the Chamber. I do not know what the Sergeant-at-Arms is doing.

THE SPEAKER: Have you finished, hon. Member?

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, following my consultation with you, I am very grateful and I have finished. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Documents and items received and since these are matters concerning agriculture, I direct that the Sessional Committee on Agriculture after completing the budget, which has to be done within a framework, should investigate and submit a report on this query. 

2.54
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In your opening remarks, you made some remarks regarding the budget committee and I am the substantive Vice Chairperson of the Committee on Budget.  But, what has been reported today in the media undermines my authority as the Vice Chair of the Committee on Budget. The information outside there - I have been receiving calls one after another asking for clarification and I want guidance from the Chair and anybody who can give the guidance. 

For anybody to think that he will remove a chairperson or a vice chairperson from his chair or her chair; Rule 168 is very clear on how a chairperson or a vice chairperson can be removed.  Mr Speaker, I need your guidance and guide the nation that Henry Banyenzaki, Member of Parliament Rubanda County West, is still the Vice Chairperson of the Committee on Budget until the term of office, which expires one and half years ahead, expires.  So, for all communication and matters of the budget committee, if the chairperson is not there, I am there to handle them. Mr Speaker, I request for your guidance. 

THE SPEAKER: I think you have referred to what was published in newspapers. Yes, I have read the newspapers about you and what was being reported on is what happened in the party caucus where I do not sit. I want to assist in the matter and according to the Rules it is the Whip who deals with constituting committees. Is it true that you have removed a vice chairman of a standing committee? If so, under what powers? (Laughter)  

2.57
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity. Yesterday, the NRM Parliamentary Caucus indeed sat and the main agenda was to look on how we constitute sessional committees. But, hon. Speaker, we also did look at the standing committees and how best we can place our Members as NRM Organisation. The proposals were put before Members of NRM of this House and they were approved and among the proposals was to shift hon. Henry Banyenzaki from the Committee on Budget to the Committee on Science and Technology.  This was done in line with our Rule 134(5) and this is to do with the representation on Standing Committees, and Rule 5 says in particular- first of all, Rule 134(2) says that in the selection of Members - maybe I could read everything. 

Rule 134(1), “The Members of Standing Committees shall be selected from among Members of Parliament.” Rule 134 (2), “In selecting the Members of Standing Committees, the parties represented in Parliament shall designate through the whips, membership to committees on the basis of Party representation in the House.” That one was done. So, Rule 134(5) reads, “Parties have powers to withdraw and relocate Members from individual committees.” Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: So, what you are saying is that this was a reshuffle under Rule 134?

MRS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, it was a reorganisation of our Members to see how our organisation can serve this country best and I will officially inform the House when the time comes. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, my concern is undermining my authority as the Vice Chairman of the Committee on Budget. Even when you have put it to the Chief Whip to answer this, she has referred to our Rules of Procedure, but my position is a vice chairperson of a standing committee and the Rules for removal of a chairperson from office are clear in Rule 168. 

Rule 168 of our Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda reads, “Removal of a chairperson from office:

1) “A Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson of a Committee may be removed by Members of the Committee on a motion supported by two-thirds of all Members of the Committee on any of the following grounds:- a) incompetence; b) misconduct or misbehaviour; failure or refusal without justifiable reasons to execute the duties of the committee.

2) The motion for removal of the Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson shall be initiated by not less than one-third of the Members of the Committee by giving seven days notice to Members of the committee, including the Chairperson or the Deputy Chairperson and to the Speaker, that they are dissatisfied with the conduct or performance of the Chairperson or the Deputy Chairperson and intend to move a motion for his/her removal.

3) The motion shall not be debated before the expiration of 14 days after a copy of notice is received by the Speaker.

4) The Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson in respect of whom a motion of removal is to be moved is entitled during the debate to be heard in his/her defence. 

5) The Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson in respect of whom proceedings for removal have commenced shall not preside over any proceedings of the Committee.

6) “The Committee shall make a report in the House on the removal of the Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson.”

Mr Speaker, none of these has been complied with. When you put it to the Chief Whip, she does not even clarify on this matter. And mind you, I am a deputy chairperson; I am not an ordinary Member. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, you are aware that when they are even giving the list of those who are on the committee, first they say, chairperson, then they put the name. Two, they say, deputy chairperson; they put the name. Then others are members. (Laughter) I do not fall in that category. So, for anybody to shift me from the committee where I am a deputy chair to another committee, if he so wishes, then it has to be initiated through the committee. So, this is a matter I want to be ruled on so that the whole country, Uganda, and the world at large knows that Banyenzaki is still the Deputy Chair of the budget committee and I am in charge of the affairs of that committee. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I have appreciated your concern and what we have to do is to consider the two Rules. Rule 134, deals with constituting standing and sessional committees. And because we are under a multi-party system of Parliament, the function of submitting those who sit on this committee was given to the parties as stated by Rule 134. I think your going to the budget committee was done under that Rule. 

Rule 136, which comes after Rule 134 is a situation where members of the committee or any other person in the House here thinks that you should not be chair or vice chairman. Therefore, he has to take the procedure under Rule 136. But before this happens, one must have been a member of the committee concerned. If you cease to be a member of the committee concerned because Rule 134 (5) has come in operation, the question of being removed will not arise because you will not be a member of that committee and you cannot be a chairperson. 

If a person like a professional – like if I am appointed a Judge of the High Court or maybe Supreme Court, I must have the qualification of having practiced, as I have done, as a lawyer. But should there be a case and I am struck out as an advocate of the High Court of Ugandan or subordinate court, I have ceased to have qualifications to be a Judge because a Judge must be a person who is a lawyer. 

So, in this case, I think what has happened as I see now is that there was a change in the membership of the committee according to your party. This can competently be done under Rule 134 (5). Therefore, the question of being removed does not arise because you are no longer a member of the relevant committee. 

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Standing committees in the minds of Parliament that constituted our Rules of Procedure are supposed to function in such a way that their activities are not unduly disrupted. Because of that, we in our wisdom considered the tenure of chairs of standing committees and members and established that one would be there for two and a half years. It now means that the chairs or deputy chairs of those committees – their positions are fortified by two provisions. One, the duration of tenure and secondly, the Rules that provide for their removal. If their removal were to be that straight forward, then there is absolutely no need to provide for their removal and tenure at the same time in a way that we provided. As much as the interpretation you have given us, Mr Speaker, helps in party administration, applying the Rules the way you have said does not help in the administration of –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Leader of the Opposition, this Rule 134 (5) is an umbrella Rule; it is wider and is not narrow. Maybe we made a mistake. We should have said, “In sessional committees or Ad hoc committees and spare the standing committees” The words in this Rule are so clear in their meaning. It says, “Parties have powers to withdraw and relocate Members from individual committees”. They did not spare any committee. And as you have heard, the whip of the party to which he belongs says there was relocation and he was relocated to the Committee on Science and Technology. This is what has happened. I think what we have to do, if we think this is not good, is to revisit this particular Rule and – No, I am only suggesting but as it stands now, that is the position, I rule. Hon. Banyenzaki, I think you are clear.

MR BANYENZAKI: No, Mr Speaker, I am waiting for the contribution of my colleague. 

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, your clarification is not very clear. I am not challenging what you have said but I want to give my opinion on this matter. 

THE SPEAKER: Opinion! You see, hon. Okot Ogong, if you have to give your opinion, I think let us ask the committee in charge of Rules to revisit the Rule and in the committee go and give an opinion as to what should happen. But in as far as this matter is concerned it is closed.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, what expired in the last session of Parliament were the sessional committees. The matter being handled, which is before the respective parties is on sessional committees. But we are talking about standing committees and budget committee is a standing committee.

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me. In Rule 134 (5), do you see – isn’t it an umbrella and broader Rule, which affects all the committees? It is. So, I was suggesting that should you think that we did not address what you should address now, ask the committee to examine and advise us to amend so that we spare the standing committees. But in as far as interpretation is concerned, I have no doubt that what I have said – looking at the Rules- is the position.   

MR BANYENZAKI: So, Mr Speaker, does this mean, like the way people outside are saying, that I am no longer a Vice Chairperson of the Committee on Budget? Or as far as Parliament is concerned, I am still the vice chairperson of that committee until it pronounces itself. I am saying this because I was approved by Parliament. 

Therefore, the guidance that I am seeking from you is to clarify whether standing committees are still serving; that they have not been dissolved; that their chairpersons and vice chairpersons, and members are still serving. I think this will make things clear because it is only the mandate of sessional committees that has expired, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You see, hon. Member, it is you who drew my attention to what was in the newspaper. Basing on that, we wanted to ascertain whether what was reported in the newspaper about your being removed as the Vice Chairperson of the budget committee did happen. It was reported that Princess Kabakumba, the Chief Whip of your party, said that. She has stood here and said that it is true you have been relocated to another committee. It is now on record that you are no longer a member of the budget committee; you are a member of another committee. So, that is the position from your party whip. 

Therefore, the question of saying you are still a Vice Chairman of the Committee on Budget does not stand because the record will show that you are no longer a member of that committee but a member of another committee.

MR EKANYA: Procedure, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: But has this not been decided on? I have decided.

MR EKANYA: I am just seeking your guidance, Mr Speaker. Members of the Standing Committees were nominated by the party whips and -

THE SPEAKER: By your party or through party whips?

MR EKANYA: Yes, it was done by respective party whips and brought to this House for Parliamentary approval. Since the actions of the NRM Chief Whip was not officially notified to this Parliament that she has taken another action to conform the first practice and that the principle that names are nominated and brought here for approval, as laid down in the rules, was violated, I think, hon. Henry Banyenzaki, still stands to be a vice chairperson. I think he should remain so until the party chief whip officially notifies the House of her action for approval or objection because that is the practice and principle. 

Mr speaker, in parliamentary practice, as we make laws, there is what we call the philosophy of the law: The spirit against which the Rules of Procedure are based. I am seeking for your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You see the position is drawn from Rule 134(8), which says,” Members designated under this rule shall be announced by the Speaker in Parliament and accordingly assume their respective Membership or offices.” There is no approval; the Speaker only announces. 

MR GODI: Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity to seek guidance. In the preamble of our Constitution, the framers did put it that having passed through the turbulent years, they adopt that Constitution so that it could state and live the test of time. That is the summary of that preamble. Mr Speaker, the guidance I am seeking, I know that you have explained this, but I have failed to pick one thing, that is, whether hon. Henry Banyenzaki is still a vice chairperson or not? 

Mr Speaker, I am saying this because our past history shows that there has been very many circumstances where the doctrine of separation of powers has been conflicted with. Therefore, I notice that the respect of rule of law has been raped in many circumstances. 

Mr Speaker, we should not be taken back to history by re-adopting Kangaroo methods of administration in this current Uganda, and it becomes very disastrous when it is the Parliament that cannot pronounce itself on such delicate matters of public importance. Mr Speaker, I beg your clarification on this. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I was in the Seventh Parliament when this system was being introduced. I remember we agreed, as a result of a referendum, that the next Government be run under a multiparty system. We expected a difference between the movement system that was being run on individual merit; where there was no question of a whip, where every member had his manifesto. That is why we agreed that we transit into a multiparty setting, and I think that made a difference. 

The Rules, which we are using, were made by us as Parliament and they are founded in the Constitution, which gives us the mandate to do so. You know very well that we sat here and considered these Rules before passing them though we now think that they are unfair. It could be true that they are unfair, but before they are amended, these are the Rules of Procedure that we have to follow. I am not saying that your stand is not good, but please let us follow the Rules. We can only amend a particular Rule, that we consider not good. Otherwise, as of now we are bound by the current Rules. 

Of course, hon. Banyenzaki was also basing on Rule 136. But the thing to guide us in as far as this matter is concerned is this particular book. I am not saying we cannot change it; we can change. However, as of now, that is the position.

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for this opportunity. You have ably guided the House by stating that the Chief Whip of the National Resistance Movement has given us a position. Yes, there is a position of the NRM Party, but on the other side, there is the position of the law. You have stated very clearly that as far as the interpretation of our Rules is concerned there is a contradiction between Rule 134 and Rule 168. 

Mr Speaker, you are well aware, and I am saying this because I know that you have been in this Parliament long enough, that there are petitions that have been taken to the Constitutional Court arising from unfair ruling of the Speaker of Parliament. Mr Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: You are free to proceed.

MR MABIKKE: Mr Speaker, whenever such petitions are taken before the courts of law, Parliament is ridiculed; we end up losing credibility and integrity as Parliament. I see a very dangerous -

THE SPEAKER: It is a constitutional right for anybody to resort to courts of law and in our Constitution which I was a party to its making in 1995, there is a constitutional court, which also double as the Court of Appeal. You do not need permission to proceed to a court of law for redress.

MR MABIKKE: Mr Speaker, I see a dangerous precedent being created. We will wake up one morning when the dominant party has agreed that even the Speaker of Parliament be removed- 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, they can, including yourself. (Laughter)

MR MABIKKE: Incidentally, I am an independent, Mr Speaker- 

THE SPEAKER: You see, do not blackmail me. You cannot threaten me, my dear friend. I was asked to interpret and in my way that is how I have done it. However, if you think the Constitutional Court can give you a better interpretation, you are free to go there; it is a few yards from here.

MR MABIKKE: Mr Speaker, I am not trying to blackmail you but I am only stating facts. 

THE SPEAKER: There are no facts. You see, we are talking about interpretation and looking at the newspaper as our evidence. This evidence was confirmed. There was no disagreement on this evidence. What now happened after the agreement was to apply the law; the law is the Rules of Procedure. Which other law do you want to apply? 

MR MABIKKE: Mr Speaker, with all these lacunas in our own Rules of Procedure, I would-

THE SPEAKER: The matter is closed. Next item.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.23
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, according to our Rules of Procedure, Rule 155 (4), I beg to lay the Report of the Committee on Local Government Account on Poor Revenue Performance in respect to the Tender for Nakasero Market as reported in the Auditor General’s report 2004/2005. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the report, with attached minutes, documents and correspondences between Parliament, Kampala City Council, Ms Sheila Investments and Nuwagaba and Mwebaze Advocates. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Have you already distributed the copies?

MR EKANYA: Yes, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: So, you have already done your work. Thank you very much. I want to thank you and all the others members of the committee. We shall debate this report after we have received copies.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF THE HOUSE 
TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL

3.25
MS WINIFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have fulfilled Rule 43 of our Rules of Procedure by giving a notice of motion. I, therefore, beg to move a motion to seek leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Members’ Bill on Trafficking in Persons. This is moved under Rules 105 and 106 of our Rules of Procedure.

WHEREAS the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides for respect of human dignity and protection from inhuman treatment and slavery, servitude and forced labour under Articles 24 and 25 respectively, and Article 44 provides that there shall be no derogation from the enjoyment, among others, the freedom from torture, cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment and freedom from slavery or servitude;

AND WHEREAS the same Constitution Under Articles 33 and 34 protects women and children from social and economic exploitation respectively;

AND WHEREAS Parliament has enacted several enabling laws prohibiting such practices including the Penal Code Act, CAP 120 and The Children Act, CAP 59, whose provisions do not specifically address the problem of Human Trafficking; 

CONSIDERING THAT the government of Uganda on the 12 December 2000 signed a Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially women and children to supplement the United Nations Convention Against Transnational Organised Crime to which Uganda is a signatory;

CONSIDERING FURTHER THAT the media has greatly and widely publicised that human trafficking in the country is on the increase, victims of which are mainly women and children who are transported from rural to urban areas or smuggled out of Uganda for purposes which infringe on their human rights and dignity;

NOTING THAT approximately 20,000 children in Northern Uganda have been victims of trafficking since the conflict with the Lords Resistance Army begun in 1987 with girls often forced into prostitution, leading to unwanted pregnancies, forced abortions and sexually transmitted infections, including HIV/AIDS, and are physically and psychologically abused;

NOTING FURTHER THAT women and children are the most vulnerable to trafficking because they are the most affected by poverty, discrimination, armed conflicts, HIV/AIDS, and other economic and social factors that expose them to human traffickers;

ALSO NOTING FURTHER THAT very few of us know about human traffickers and how they operate- human traffickers acquire and take human beings from one area, transporting them away from their families and friends and sell them into slavery, deceiving them with promises of education, marriage and employment opportunities elsewhere;

AWARE THAT in 2000, the government of Uganda reported to the Committee for the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women, that no prosecution has been realised against human traffickers and that the relevant sections of the Penal Code Act are empty symbols of law with ‘little or no practical use,’ and despite the alarming rates on prosecutions have been carried out up to date; current laws often penalise victims by holding them criminally liable for prosecution or illegal immigration;

NOW THEREFORE, Mr Speaker, I would like to request this House to grant me leave to introduce a Private Members’ Bill for an Act entitled “Trafficking in Persons Bill, 2007”, a draft of which is hereto attached and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.
 
THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. You can speak to the Bill.

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Trafficking in persons is indeed modern-day slavery. Trafficking involves abduction, coercion, violence and exploitation of human beings. It is a global issue of human rights, economic exploitation, migration, trans-national crime, labour and public health concern. In Uganda, types of trafficking include child soldiers, abductees, forced prostitution, forced labour, child labour as well as both sexual and domestic servitude. All these can be seen in our country.

This is an issue that has been discussed at length by different groups in this Parliament. I would like to point out in particular the Uganda Women Parliamentary Association, who identified this as a priority legislative agenda, as well as the Children’s Forum. They have realised that this issue has been on the increase and different papers have often alluded to this. 

If this Bill is introduced, it seeks to address issues of prevention of trafficking in persons, prosecution of offenders, protection of victims, as well as to provide for other related matters. All these have been significantly missing in our laws.

The issue of trafficking in persons has not been highlighted in most of our laws and it is on the increase, as we know. It is high time that Uganda, since it is a signatory to the protocol as I have already stated, domesticated this issue. If you go out on the streets, you will find many children loitering around. Many studies have come out to show that most of these children have actually been trafficked. They are brought to work on the streets as hawkers, vendors, commercial sex workers and domestic workers under very unbearable circumstances.

Mr Speaker, there is rampant commercial sex exploitation of children. This can easily be seen by several adverts that we see on the houses and different structures in this city. There are adverts like, “Do you need a lover?” I am sure most of us have come across such adverts.

About commercial sexual exploitation, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development states that about 7000 to 12000 children are engaged in commercial sex exploitation. It is high time Parliament looked at this issue so that we address it. We should realise that it will do this country more harm if we do not arrest such situations. About 28 percent have already been reported, assisted by third parties such as taxi drivers, bar owners and brothel owners of the children. 

Cross-border trade with Congo has increased commercial sex exploitation especially in areas of Arua. In Busia, there is also rampant trafficking of girls. All these have been talked about by all honourable members in this House. A report by Save the Children on commercial sex exploitation in Kenya has indicated that Ugandans are perpetrators of the commercial sex exploitation. 

So much has been said about this issue. This is clear indication that the problem is here with us. I am aware that members who support this motion have more literature, which they can give to show the extent to which this modern-day slavery has spread in our country. It is an international issue as well. That is the more reason why we should legislate for it. After having signed the protocol, we also need to domesticate it. 

Honourable members, I request you to support this motion and grant me leave so that I can move this Private Member’s Bill. I thank you.

3.37
THE CHAIRPERSON, UGANDA PARLIAMENTARY FORUM FOR CHILDREN (Mrs Ruth Tuma): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. During the course of our work, we have come across reports from parents and members of the community about the tremendous need to look at the issue of trafficking children in Uganda. On 16 June 2007, Uganda joined the African community to celebrate the Day of the African Child and the theme on that day was “Stop Trafficking in Children.” As a member state of the African Union and a signatory to the Charter of the Welfare of the Rights of the Child, Uganda is obliged to have laws to support and protect the rights of the child. 

Honourable members, every day children are transported away from their homes for exploitation. They are taken for work which is not good for a living. Trafficking has become a very serious issue in the whole world. It is a global phenomenon now, and it affects both women and children. As legislators, we have the obligation to make sure that we put laws in place to protect our children as well as mothers. 

Last week we read in the newspapers that Ugandan orphans were on sale abroad. As legislators, how can we just sit here and read in the papers about our children on sale in foreign countries? We must act now. Uganda is a signatory to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography and we must all wake up. This is something which we have talked about on several occasions. 

When we read our Northern Uganda report here in Parliament, we talked about the number of children - the girls and boys - who had been abducted. Recently, the report we have had is that over 25,000 children have been trafficked from Northern Uganda during that war that has been waging up there. Most of these children have been taken as sex slaves, cooks, combatants and all sorts of things. They have been taken as far as the Middle East and beyond as sex slaves. Some of them have even been used as sacrifices. We must protect our children. The ILO reports in Uganda tell us -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But can’t we curtail this debate really, because this is only for – (Interruption) 

MRS TUMA: Can I give you these statistics? The ILO’s recent report has told us that 70 percent of the economically active children are victims of child labour. Also, the Uganda Demographic and Health Survey (UDHS) report shows that 2.7 million children have been trafficked and are involved in labour. I plead with my colleagues to support this motion. I thank you.

3.42
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Central Region): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise very strongly to support this motion. However, from my experience I wish to point out two concerns. Under rule 105, it is the right of every member to move a Private Members Bill. But you know from experience that whenever we have to approve a motion of this nature, we end up with no Bill being read for the first time; why?

Under the provisions of the Constitution and section 10 of the Budget Act, if this Bill is to be introduced in this House for the first time, the mover must produce a certificate of financial implications. This certificate must be provided by the Executive arm of the State. We have powers to approve this motion but Mr Speaker you know this Parliament has no power to pass a resolution forcing the Executive to produce a certificate of financial implications.

You recall in that this Parliament authorised us to move a Bill establishing the [Persons with Disabilities]) Act, but I suffered a lot. I almost regretted convincing the Minister.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is no Bill here. We do not have any Bill. The Bill will come and when it comes, it will have to comply with all the requirements including a certificate of financial implications. If it has something, the Government will have to accept. That is why I said we can curtail this debate because it is for leave; leave may be granted, after which the Bill comes here. We shall examine it and either agree or disagree with it. That issue of financial implications will come at another stage.

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, thank you for your guidance. My point was to make an appeal that the Minister of Finance and the Executive should produce a certificate of financial implications to enable the member produce the Bill for the first reading in this House.

What I know is that the member can attempt to bring the Bill for reading for the first time but there is no way she can bring it here without a certificate of financial implications. Therefore, I am appealing to the Minister of Finance, if it is possible, to put it on record in the Hansard to demonstrate commitment, so that we believe that the Government actually supports this Bill. Thank you.

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI:  Mr Speaker, I am very worried about the last paragraph of this proposed Bill, which says “This House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled ‘Trafficking in Persons Bill, 2007’.” I think if we start wrongly from the beginning, it may give the indication that we are likely to traffic in people. I think we should start with the negative against the whole act because it is the beginning of the whole game. So I suggest an amendment at this stage. We could say, “…leave for an Act entitled ‘Prohibition of Trafficking in Persons Bill’” rather than Trafficking in Persons Bill. 

I would like clarification from you as to whether it is really prudent for us to propose something to traffic in people. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: The mover can explain.

MRS WINIFRED MASIKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We discussed both scenarios as the Uganda Women Parliamentary Association. When you say “trafficking in persons”, it does not mean that you are promoting it. It is a title of a Bill, and we shall not only prohibit but we shall also make sure that those that have done it are punished accordingly. If you read the memorandum of the Bill, it is about the protection, prosecution and prevention. So, we think if you say “Trafficking in Persons Bill”, it brings out all the three Ps. 

However, I will comply with what the members think about this. We think “trafficking in persons” does not really imply that people should go out there and traffic. That is what we think.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not contributing as such but I thought that I should supplement what the mover has just said. My view is that the proposal of the Minister is quite acceptable because we are talking about protection of persons and prohibition of trafficking in persons. So, I think in the process – (Interruption)

3.50
MR OGWEL LOOTE (Independent, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by hon. Masiko to permit her to move a Private Member’s Bill. I support the motion because a number of the children who are on the streets of Kampala and other towns of Uganda are directly or indirectly trafficked into the cities of this country. 

Last year, it was widely reported by the newspapers, the Inter-Parliamentary Forum for Children and the members of the sessional Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development who travelled to Karamoja, particularly to Moroto District, that a number of children were being trafficked. In fact, some children were directly sold by their parents to those who sought for the children to labour in their homes. So, if the mover is given permission, I think this motion will go a long way in helping the people of Karamoja who are being trafficked. 

It will also prevent parents from selling their children especially during the time of famine and starvation, so that they can survive and grow into productive adults. Therefore, I strongly support this motion to give hon. Masiko leave to prepare a Private Member’s Bill.  Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question on the motion seeking leave for hon. Masiko to move a Private Member’s Bill affecting trafficking of persons in Uganda.

(Question put and agreed to).

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT SEEKING TO BORROW US $ 30 MILLION FROM THE GOVERNMENT OF CHINA REPRESENTED BY EXPORT AND IMPORT BANK OF CHINA TO FINANCE THE NATIONAL DATA BACKBONE INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECT

3.53
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to borrow US$30 million from the Government of China, represented by the Export-Import Bank of China, to finance the National Transmission Backbone Infrastructure Project. 

Mr Speaker, the purpose of this loan is to improve communication infrastructure in this country, to reduce the cost of communications and to improve communications within government. This is the first phase. The entire project will cost over 100 million dollars, but we hope to be able to get this 30 million dollars to implement the initial phase of the 300 million dollars. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

3.55
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Ibrahim Kaddunabbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is the report of the Committee on National Economy on the Government’s proposal to borrow US$30 million from the Export-Import Bank of China for financing the National Data Transmission Backbone-Infrastructure Project. 

Background

Government is seeking to borrow US$30 million from the Government of China, represented by the Export and Import Bank of China, to finance the National Data Transmission Backbone-Infrastructure Project. 

The following is intended to be achieved by the project:

1. Establishment of the National Data Transmission backbone and E-government infrastructure.

2. Assist full liberalisation of the telecommunications sector.

3. Modernisation and enhancement of government capacity to deliver services to individuals, investors and corporate bodies.

4. To secure the availability of high bandwidth in all the major towns of Kampala, Jinja and Entebbe and then later on roll it out to all district headquarters of Uganda.

5. Reduce the cost of doing business in government through e-government infrastructure and improved communication between government agencies and increased efficiency in the departments of government.

6. Through e-governance, government procedures will be simplified and transparent, accountability will be enhanced, and information to the citizens shall be made timely and credible.

7. It is intended to provide for the promotion of appropriate infrastructure. This includes, among others, specific strategic programmes of establishing a National Internet Protocol backbone network and adequate connectivity to the Global Information Infrastructure (GII).

8. To provide internet points of presence to all district headquarters and a National Internet Exchange Point.

9. To establish information and communication access points at all districts and sub-counties in Uganda.

10. To establish infrastructure that addresses ICT needs of cross-cutting sections like health, education, agriculture, local administration etc. 

11. To facilitate the development of internet-ready industrial parks to engage in data capture and data processing export work.

Coverage

The project will cover Kampala, Entebbe and Jinja but will later on be rolled out to other districts of Uganda by 2010. 

Methodology

The committee held meets with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and the Minister of Information and Communications Technology.

The committee also analysed the following documents, which I will lay on Table later on: 

1) The loan request brief from the Minister of Finance.

2) The feasibility study report for the proposed National Backbone Infrastructure (NBI) and Electronic Government Infrastructure (EGI) phase one.

3) The Telecommunications Policy 

4) The E-Government Strategy and Action Plan

5) The National Information and Communication Technology Policy

6) A draft Bill for the establishment of the National Information Technology Authority (NITA) Uganda

7) The Memorandum of Understanding for the Uganda Integrated E-Government Project between the Government of Uganda and Huawei Technologies Corporation Ltd. 

8) The draft loan agreement

9) The External Debt Strategy, 1995

Mr Speaker, since all members got the brief from the Minister, I will not lay this on Table. I will also not lay on Table the draft Bill for the establishment of the National Information Technology Authority because the Minister will bring it to Parliament at an appropriate time. However, let me lay on Table the following documents:

1) The feasibility study report for the proposed Uganda National Transmission Backbone and E-Government Infrastructure Project (Phase I) dated February 2007.

2) The Communications Policy from the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications, dated April 2006.

3) E-Government Strategy and Action Plan from Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications, dated March 2004.

4) The National Information and Communication Technology Policy dated October 2003.

5) The Memorandum of Understanding for Uganda Integrated E-Government Project between the Ministry of ICT of the Republic of Uganda and Huawei Technologies Corporation Ltd., dated 23 June 2006.

6) The framework agreement, which is the loan agreement between the Government of the Peoples Republic of China and the Republic of Uganda on the provision of a concessional loan by China to Uganda. 

7) The strategy for reducing the external debt of Uganda dated 15 July 1995.

8) The minutes of the Committee on National Economy on this loan request.

The Loan Terms

1) The lender is the Government of the Peoples Republic of China, represented by China Export-Import Bank

2) The amount is US$30,000,000

3) The terms are 20 years for repayment, with a five-year grace period. 

4) And the principal shall be paid in 30 equal annual instalments after the five-year grace period. 

5) The security is a sovereign guarantee from the Government of Uganda.

6) The interest rate is two percent per annum.

Observations

1) Uganda has had rapid growth in the communications sector in the last decade following the liberalisation of the sector in 1996. Penetration has grown from only 0.26 lines per 100 persons, or you can say 0.26 percent, in 1996 to over eight lines per 100 persons in 2004. This is composed of both mobile and fixed lines. The fixed tele-density is less than one percent.

2) Data and voice solutions are largely provided by three major companies namely, MTN (Uganda) Ltd., Uganda Telecom Ltd. and Celtel Uganda whose mobile switching capacity is close to 2.5 million. The ownership of MTN, Celtel and UTL is by far dominated by foreign shareholding, represented by countries like South Africa, Kuwait and Kenya. Considering that presently all government of Uganda’s communication needs are serviced predominantly by these three operators, it raises the critical issue of government information security.

3) The committee further observed that the project is timely, considering that Uganda is hosting the Commonwealth Heads of State and Governments Meeting in November 2007.

4) In terms of network infrastructure, Uganda’s current optical fibre backbone is approximately 358 km, and the estimated length of the high-capacity fibre links required for the national data backbone before connection to all districts is about 2100 km. 

5) The Government of Uganda has signed a Memorandum of Understanding with a Chinese contractor, M/S Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd., without obtaining a loan approval by Parliament, thereby limiting the input of Parliament.

6) The loan terms are not in line with the National Debt Strategy and IDA acceptable concession loan terms, which require all such loans to have a repayment period of 40 years with a grace period of 10 years and an interest rate of not more than one percent. However, the committee was informed that this loan will service itself with the fees payable by the users. It is hopped that the recovery of the entire loan can be achieved in not more than ten years.

7) The committee observed that the National Information Technology Authority, a body to be established to supervise and monitor the operations of NBI and EGI, has not been established as there is no law enacted in this respect. 

Recommendations

1) Government should in future secure loans only in accordance with the National Debt Strategy, which is the guiding framework of the Economic Policy.

2) Government should ensure that the fees chargeable on the users of the National Backbone Infrastructure and the E-Government Infrastructure are reasonable and affordable, so as to attain the desired goal of improved communication countrywide. 

3) Government should bring to Parliament the Bill to establish the National Information Technology Authority.

4) While seeking for loans in future, the Government should seek for Parliamentary approval before entering into any memoranda so as to enable Parliament to effectively scrutinise the terms of the loan agreements while playing its oversight role.

5) The Government should ensure that the rollout schedule of this project is kept on course so that all districts benefit from this project. 

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee recommends to this august House the approval of this credit facility based on the enormous benefits and sensitivity of the areas it is addressing. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you chairman and members of the committee.

4.10
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson for a report well written. I stand to support the motion, but I have a few issues for which I want to seek clarification from either the chairperson or the minister responsible. 

When you go to page 3, under the terms, you realise that this loan is going to be acquired at an interest of two percent per annum, the duration is 20 years and the grace period is five years. You will realise that countries have standards. Recently, in order to minimise the burden of acquiring loans, we also set a standard; the grace period should be long enough for the country to have breathing space, a minimum of 10 years, and the interest rate is not supposed to be more than one percent. 

I am surprised that the committee went ahead to speculate, on page 4, yet our rule is very clear that we are not supposed to speculate while approving loans. On page 5, under terms of the loans, they are requesting for a duration of 20 years but the committee went ahead to say: “It is hoped that recovery of the entire loan can be achieved in not more than 10 years.” That is speculation! If you can recover the loan in 10 years, why do you again take it for 20 years and yet there is interest? Even simple economics tells you that if you want to save money in order for this government to eradicate poverty, you should take it for 10 years. Why are you taking it for 20 years? I just want to be advised by the chairperson because this should be deleted from the report. As Parliament, we cannot speculate. (Interjection) 

THE SPEAKER: Why do you call it speculation? They could have got an explanation and said it will work out fast or it is possible to do this within the 10 years. Is that speculation? For you to ask why they are taking it up in 20 years; I would rather use somebody’s money for so long than using it for a short time. 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, the issue is about interest and the welfare of the economy. If the economy is really vibrant and you know that you can actually pay in 10 years, it becomes illogical for you to take 20 years because you will be paying interest. Why don’t you save the economy? (Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Have you not seen people who have money and they go to the banks and borrow money?

MR NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, my second point is that the chairperson has made it very clear that by the time the Minister went to the committee, they had already signed a Memorandum of Understanding. His hands are tied because it looks as if he has no option, he must get the money. I want to thank the chairperson for raising this because it actually undermines Parliament. At the end of the day when you are doing your work, they will tell you “we want this money because we have already awarded the tender”. So, it is as if the loan was approved. Chairperson, thank you for bringing it up.

MS JALIA BINTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the report and I support the borrowing of the money. I am seeking clarification on the rolling out to other districts, mentioned on page 1, No.4. Experience has shown that most of the programmes that government has started have at times taken something like 10 or 15 years without rolling out from the initial districts that have been budgeted for or accommodated in such a programme. I am seeking clarification from the honourable minister; when will this rollout reach Masindi District and other districts? Thank you.

4.16
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My concern is on the committee’s observations, particularly observation No.5, which reads: “The Government of Uganda has signed a Memorandum of Understanding with a Chinese contractor, M/S Huawei Tech Co. Ltd., without obtaining a loan approval by Parliament thereby limiting the input of Parliament.” I suppose this was at the time the committee was scrutinising this matter. My knowledge is that, it is also beyond just the Memorandum of Understanding because as you travel along that Jinja route, you will actually find people digging up and laying some pipes. People like us initially thought it was water, but we were told it was for the provision of some infrastructure which is similar to this one here of the communication backbone. 

This observation raises very big concern on the whole question of what point Parliament comes in to scrutinise these loans. I think as a House we should reconsider the procedure. Should loans be brought in here when they are already in our indicative budget framework? When we are approving or even when there are misgivings with the terms and there are problems with the conditions, we are told it is already in our indicative budget proposals. Should that be the case? If Parliament in this particular instance, after looking at the terms of this loan as provided on page 2 or page 3, decides to withhold our approval, what will happen? The MoU has already been signed and work is going on, what is the whole essence of parliamentary approval of loans? 

I thought we were supposed to be consulted as people’s representatives, for whom this undertaking is being made, to the extent that we can be informed of the process and that we can also raise concerns and give advice. What if at the end of the day they tell us that 50 percent of this money that we have approved is actually already in the MoU and is supposed to go into monitoring and not actual infrastructure development, what shall we do? I do not like a situation where the Executive takes Parliament for granted. We would rather not approve this undertaking that has already been made. Those are my concerns, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Since this matter is coming up, can you just clarify why you are doing it so that it does not come up again? 

MR SURUMA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, a Memorandum of Understanding is different from a contract. It is quite common to have a preliminary discussion with would-be providers of a service or with agencies of other governments. In this case, when the Prime Minister of China came here in June last year, one of the offers he made to us was to provide this technology and this low cost loan so that we can improve our telecommunication. So we reached a Memorandum of Understanding on how this would be done, but the actual signing and processing of the loan has been going on up to now. It actually takes a long time to get the money and for the Export-Import Bank to agree to provide the loan. This has been going on and we have been discussing it. So, I think it is not correct to equate a Memorandum of Understanding to an actual contract that is binding with all parties and cannot be changed. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, if the Minister were to respond to your clarification that the memorandum was signed between the Government of China and the Government of Uganda, it would be acceptable. However, this is a private limited company whose registration we do not know about and it raises fundamental questions.

Secondly, in this country we have the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Authority, which must assess the viability, carry out due diligence, and do a background check to find out whether this is a true company that has the necessary technology or whether it is a sister, mother, or brother company. I am raising this because as regards BIDCO, for example, there are four companies in this country using the name BIDCO - the one that brings the seed, the one that owns the land, the one that processes and another one that does marketing. In fact, I and other civil societies are soon suing BIDCO. During our research, we got several companies using the name BIDCO. 

The Minister needs to come out procedurally and tell us whether the Memorandum of Understanding was between the Government of China and the Government of Uganda, or it was between the Government of Uganda and Huawei, and where this technical limited company was registered. If the memorandum was signed with Huawei, whatever they did is null and void and is illegal to that extent.  

THE MINISTER OF COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Ham Mulira): I want to clarify on this. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I think the previous honourable member hinted on the issue of Huawei and needed clarification as to where it was registered and why the Government of Uganda was signing a Memorandum of Understanding with it, a private limited company as he stated. Actually, it comes from what the Minister of Finance has just hinted on, the visit of the Prime Minister of China all across Africa to provide developmental support to African nations including Uganda. 

This is not the only project where support would come from the Government of China. It is one of the many projects that were going to receive support. According to the provisions for that support, within the arrangements as the honourable minister stated, was a Memorandum of Understanding, which is not a binding contract arrangement. The Government of Uganda was on one hand represented by the Ministry of ICT and the company on the other hand represented by the Government of China. 

The issue of the PPDA does not arise because this procurement effected is not within the jurisdiction of our country. It is coming from the Chinese jurisdiction, which is normal because bilateral aid always works like that. Countries providing bilateral support always use institutions within their jurisdiction and that is how Huawei is actually representing the Government of China. Thank you.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, the Constitution of this country is very clear; no agreement can be signed without involvement of relevant institutions. That is why we passed the PPDA Act. As part of procurement, the Attorney–General must be involved to analyse and Parliament must first authorise the money before the procurement is done.

MR NSUBUGA: I am worried because if the explanation of the two ministers is right, I do not think the committee, which had enough time to synchronise all the relevant documents, would have captured it the way it has. We are relying on the committee’s observations and recommendations, so let the chairperson confirm this. If the agreement was signed before as is stated here, then there is nothing to waste a lot of time on.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, before the chairperson confirms, I would really like to know how a private limited company like this one begins - if it is not an insult - to represent the Peoples Republic of China when there are ministers in charge of development co-operation. For our ministers to make an undertaking with the service providers -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think the Minister was saying that in this matter it was the Government of China but using an institution in China which belongs to the Government. I thought that was the explanation. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, what I am trying to understand is that this looks like a service provider. So, is this service provider undertaking this on behalf of government in order to guarantee us support or is it the very one that will come here and implement this project? 


MR KADUNABBI: Mr Speaker, the information that the committee got was that Huawei is a parastatal company owned by the Government of China. Secondly, the reason why China had to send their technology is because in the Memorandum of Understanding it was stated as one of the terms, that 50 percent of all procurements have to come from China. When we inquired why it was so from the Minister of ICT - or is it Finance - each loan request we get has its terms and so these are the terms for this loan. So if the Parliament is not really happy with those terms, we can advise them. 

I am not really in agreement with the Minister of Finance when he says that this was just a memorandum of understanding and that it is not an agreement or a contract. I do not know what the difference is because a memorandum of understanding to me is a contract on its own. It was signed by the Government of Uganda and the representatives from HAWE Technologies on behalf of the Government of China.  

MR KAWANGA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. The kind of discussions that are taking place indicate the discomfort that the honourable members have with this arrangement and this is coming out of the report of the committee. It appears that the committee accepted this arrangement with a lot of reservations. Unfortunately, the reservations have not come out clearly enough and that is why there is this debate. I pray that in the future the committee actually indicates why it has those reservations so that Members can contribute more. 

For example, the committee is uncomfortable with the fact that the loan terms are not in line with the national debate strategy, but it does not indicate why. However, the committee was informed that the loan would service itself with fees payable by the users. The question is: was the committee just satisfied with that information? What kind of information was it for them to be able to accept this kind of award? 

I also feel uncomfortable when I have approved a loan without assurance from the committee that it was satisfied that we are able to repay that loan within the framework of the terms given. The committee does not indicate that it thinks that we are able to repay the loan and we want a specific remark regarding that. 

For example, if we default on the payment, what are the conditions? We are not told the consequences in case of failure to pay. These are the kind of things that honourable members would want whenever these committees come here.  

When it comes to recommendation no.4, this is not the first time this kind of recommendation is being made. I want the committee to tell us what is going to be done to prevent this kind of thing from happening. It keeps coming whenever we get loan applications. Surely are we going to continue having this kind of situation whenever we get loans? With those reservations I think it appears that Parliament has no alternative under the circumstances, but to approve the loan, and I want to be told by the committee whether this is the situation. Have we no alternative? Can we stop this loan from being granted at this stage? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think what we need to know in these circumstances is what the memorandum of understanding is. I think we need to know that. Is it an agreement of giving a loan or it is something preliminary? This is what we have to know. Let us clear this one because it is causing unease.

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Mr Speaker, the memorandum of understanding is between us and the Government of China, and their designated parties that you are interested in this transmission backbone, subject to acquiring the funds from the Export or Import Bank of China. So, after signing the memorandum, we went ahead to apply to the Export Bank of China for this loan and to the Ministry of Commerce of the Government of China. We have been undertaking lengthy discussions. 

Of course if the Export/Import Bank of China did not approve the loan, the loan would not go ahead and the memorandum of understanding would not have any impact or any force. So ultimately the most important commitment for Uganda is for us to sign an agreement with the Export/Import Bank of China to borrow this money. If we believe that it is not in our interest then presumably we would have to say, “No,” and they would not sign for this loan and this would be the end of the matter. 

However, we believe that it is in our interest to have this communication backbone and we believe that we are getting it on very soft terms. We believe that we are getting it much faster than we would get it if we were to go elsewhere. It might take another five or ten years given how long it has been taking for us to get, for example, the loans for our dams. But we believe that this is an offer from the Chinese Government - although it requires us to get the technology from them, we are convinced that this is one of the best companies in the world for this technology, if not actually the best. We believe that the terms of two percent are concessional terms and we have indicated to the committee that in our view, a grant element of 40 percent, which is implied by this loan, definitely qualifies it as a concessional loan. Because of these reasons, I believe that the government has acted wisely to sign a memorandum of understanding saying that we will use our best efforts to convince all arms of government that this is international interest and they will allow us to sign for this loan.  Thank you.

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The hon. Minister of Finance should tell us; there are distinctions between a grant and a loan. If it had been a grant it would have had some tight conditions to say, for example that, “You are supposed to get it from say this company because it is a grant”.  However, if it is a loan that we are going to take and the Bank of China is giving us the loan, you get the funds first and then we have to find the way of procuring. This is like a tied loan whereby if you are to get this loan, you have to use a particular company. Could we know whether it is a tied loan? There is an element of how you procure the company that is going to do the job. We are not opposed to getting this money; we all support it but the way we are going to get it is what we want to get clearly. 

For example, as I said, sometime back the Government of China when I was still in City Council gave us 30 trucks for garbage. It was a grant and because it was a grant they said that JIEFANG Company of China was the one to provide the trucks. We could not argue because it was a grant. But for a loan, which is going to be repaid by this country, we need competitive people who can do the job after securing the money. 

4.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS (Mr John Byabagambi: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Government of Uganda has been borrowing money from Western countries and all that has been based on the conditions of these Western countries. It is only recently that the Government of Uganda has turned to the eastern block, including Japan, and we really have borrowed a lot of money and we are still going to borrow a lot of money from them, especially Japan. 

When you look at how Japan has been giving us money through their arm, which is called JIICA, it has had a grant component. What they do is that they usually advertise in their own country because those are the conditions, which are attached to that grant, and they award the contracts within their country. It is only after awarding the contract that a company is presented to the Government of Uganda and we sign a contract here. 

I am talking of -(Interjections)- Yes, yes. This is not the first loan we shall be getting from China. We have been constructing Nakivubo Channel and the company that constructed it - no that was World Bank and it was competitive although it was constructed by the Chinese Government. Look at the conditions of getting money from Japan. For instance now we are trying to get a loan because they have been giving grants only. It is only recently that they have opened up for us to get loans from their banks. We are trying to sell the Nile Bridge to Japan but they have gone ahead to say, “The study will be done by the Japanese and the construction will be done by the Japanese.” Those are the conditionalities they attach to these loans. So, if they give you a condition and you feel you do not want their money, you have to leave it. 

4.39
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all I support this motion and this report. This idea of getting loans with strings attached, I do not know, as Parliament and as government, how we are going to handle this. I will give an example from Fort Portal Municipality. 

Recently you read in the papers that a certain Chinese company, which is constructing the Kasese-Fort Portal Road, when they reached Fort Portal, I do not know whether they run out of funds, but wanainchi were removing the tarmac with their hands. The work was very shoddy and this called for a demonstration. In fact there was even a delegation from the Chinese Embassy and when we tried to ask them they said, “Well that is the company which was selected. It is a Chinese company and they were given that contract. They were the lowest bidder.” So, really we have to come up with a solution to this. When these people are given the jobs, we also have local consultants here, but as it were, for instance on that Kasese-Fort Portal road the local consultants, the RAFU, it seems they are also in a situation of hopelessness because these people -(Interjection)

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much. Hon. Kaliba, you seem to be very knowledgeable with countries we should do business with. We are not trying to blacklist China. The tools we have just seen here, the hoes that you bend using your hands, are from China. (Laughter) Not only those tools but if you go to the market, the bicycles, the radios, the plates, everything from China here is a disaster for our country. The shoes! The clarification I am seeking -(Interjection) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, in developed countries there are many things that are produced from China but when you buy them you think they are made in those countries and yet they are made in China. China is a developed country so you cannot underrate it.

MR KIBANZANGA: I understand, Mr Speaker - (Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Before we proceed I want to welcome Dr Chandrika Nath, Advisor to the Parliamentary Office of Science and Technology in the House of Commons, in the United Kingdom. She is in the gallery today. She has been meeting Members of the Science and Technology Committee and staff from research, ICT and PDCO. Please join me in welcoming her. You are most welcome. Yes, you can proceed.

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was giving information to the Member holding the Floor. It is very unfortunate that a Member of this august House should stand up here to ridicule one of the strongest countries and a power house in this country with some of the best technologies this world has had to see [Hon. Members: “Hear, hear.”] yes, I want to inform him that actually the things you are talking about, you can get the same even from Taiwan, America or England, depending on how much money you want to put in. Please know very well that in China, just like in America, you can buy a pair of shoes that will last one week. You can also buy another pair from the same two countries that can last 50 years -(Laughter)- yes. It all depends on the amount of money you are prepared to part with. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Do not underrate China. I think I should organise a trip for you to go and see what they do. (Laughter)

MR BYARUGABA: We could go together to China to establish that; you and I, sponsored by Parliament. (Laughter)

MR KALIBA: Mr Speaker, I was still holding the Floor when hon. Kibanzanga came in with a point of clarification. Having said that, I would like to support this report. I do agree that China is very powerful. It is not China, which has the problem, but the companies. These companies might also not have a problem but our people who are supervising these companies might be the ones with the problem. So, I would like to say that these companies, when they are here to do a good job on behalf of their countries we only need to put a very strong consultancy firm to work hand in hand with those companies. 

Mr Speaker, I support this loan and in fact, we should have got the money yesterday. When I look at what we are likely to achieve, especially in the education sector, we have been crying for the Open University of Uganda, which is heavily going to depend on ICT. I am sure that when we get this money, the education ministry will benefit and we shall have a lot of programmes through this technology. Considering the fact that we are having Universal Primary Education and Universal Secondary Education, that high influx of graduates from the USE has to be prepared for. We have to be prepared as a nation and I see the Open University of Uganda, which heavily depends on ICT, as a way forward for the high influx of graduates.

I remember when I had a chance to travel with His Excellency to Sydney in Australia there was a certain investor who wanted to sell Uganda saying that little is known about Uganda. However, I think if we get this money it is going to move a long way in marketing our country and exposing the tourism potential and the investment potential this country has. It is also going to be a very good tool to improve on the multi-ministerial, multi-departmental and multi-sectoral linkages so that we can have a very effective administration and management. There is no doubt communication is the lifeblood of administration and management. Therefore, when the government takes a step to secure this money to improve on communication at all angles I do support that and I would like to appeal to this august House to support this loan. 

Of course I also urge government that when such a company like the World Technology is put in place, there must be a very strong consultancy firm here to work along with that company so that we have value for money. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.48
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Looking at the observations on page 4, the national backbone to cover all districts will require 2,100 kilometres of fibre optic cable. Then when you look at observation No. 2; the second sentence is talking about the companies: MTN, Celtel, and UTL being dominated by foreign shareholding represented by countries like South Africa, Kuwait and Kenya. What I would like to find out is, if this loan is for putting up the infrastructure, who at the end will own that infrastructure? It is not clear from the report as to where the ownership of the infrastructure will be. Is it going to be with the communication companies already in existence or will some other company take over?  

The concern in observation No.2 is that presently all Government of Uganda communication needs and services are dominated by these three operators. This raises the critical issue of government information security. Does this by implication mean that the Government of Uganda is going to be the ordinance, Mr Speaker?

MR MULIRA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. The backbone, indeed because it is a government project is exactly like a super highway. The roads are owned by government but as for the traffic and services, which utilise those roads, those now belong to whomever. The three service operators who have been mentioned: MTN, UTL, Celtel plus others who have now come on board after liberalisation are actually going to be the consumers of the facility of the backbone. As to the ownership of the backbone, it will be the Government of Uganda, like it owns the roads. 

In terms of day-to-day management, there is an institution, which is one of the recommendations in the report by the committee that the National Information Technology Authority’s establishment should be expedited by the Bill coming quickly to Parliament. As we speak, the First Parliamentary Counsel has already finished drafting the Bill, and Cabinet had approved the principles and objectives and passed it on to the First Parliamentary Counsel. The Bill, which is going back to Cabinet in the next few weeks, will be brought to Parliament. Thank you.

4.51
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion –(Applause)- on the following conditions: sometime in the last session this Parliament was informed that the Government of Uganda was being penalised for not utilising some of the loans approved by this Parliament and Ugandan taxpayers are being punished when the money is sitting idle. I think as a national Parliament we should ask the Minister of Finance to Table in this House the status of all the existing loans so that we know how the loans we approve are performing instead of us being asked nearly every month to approve the borrowing of money. I think we should ask for the performance of the loans; what are the loans doing –(Interruption)

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you honourable member, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that the hon. Minister for Finance laid before this House the status of the various loans that have been acquired and that was on the 14th when the Budget was presented, except that we were in the Conference Hall but that information is within Parliament.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank the Government Chief Whip for that information. I was out of the country; I will look up the documents and satisfy myself. 

If you look at page 2, the way that No.4 is put, to someone who does not know Uganda they might think there are only three major towns because they say the major towns of Uganda are Kampala, Jinja and Entebbe. However, Mr Speaker, Entebbe is part of Kampala and in a situation like this, having picked Kampala and Jinja why do we not pick another major town from elsewhere instead of asking the other towns for the rolling out which by the way may not occur? I think we should be fair enough and distribute development instead of restricting all the developments here. I think the Committee should have looked at that matter.  

On page 4, No.3 we are approving this loan; I believe it is not yet borrowed. I am not sure whether the committee is convinced that CHOGM, which is tomorrow, will benefit from this loan. Is it true that if we approve this thing today and the money comes tomorrow, it will be used for CHOGM -(Laughter)- to me it is not being realistic. 

Still on page 5, I would like to know from the committee what this memorandum of understanding is about. Is it about the loan or about the work that will be done by this company? Mr Speaker, you know better; this company is a legal entity and its action does not bind anybody else. I think it is not fair to say that a legal entity, a private company, is acting on behalf of a national government because this is a legal entity, which is just like a human being. So I would like the committee to clarify about this memorandum of understanding whether it is about the work or about the loan. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: What I have gathered is that you are having reservations, which we should address.

4.53
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker for the opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for coming up with this report, which we are now trying to look closely at. However, I would like to seek clarification from the minister. 

On page 2, No. 9 says, “This centre is supposed to access all points to the district and sub-counties.” On the same page under coverage it is said that, “it is supposed to rollout by the year 2010”. I would like the minister to help me with this. We have a problem as a country with electricity and you are trying to provide this service up to the sub-county? I am wondering whether there is an assurance from the sister Ministry of Energy that by that time, leave alone Kitgum headquarters, power would have reached the sub-county so that we can have this service effective? 

Secondly, on page 4, the last part of the sentence under No. 2, is the critical issue of government information security. I am wondering whether this expression of a critical issue of government information security is not being linked to phone tapping, which will infringe on the privacy of members if it includes phone tapping. I thank you.

4.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE (Dr Kibirige Sebunya): Financing the national data transmission backbone infrastructure project is partly loan, partly grant. I want to thank Dr Mulira for the input you must have put in this. I am looking at page 1, on the background: the following is intended to be achieved by this project; and I read 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. 

I sympathise with my colleague hon. Ekanya, he could have been incensed by that memorandum of understanding but I put the question: supposing we do not take on this loan and grant, what alternatives do we have in the immediate future? I rest my case. I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

4.57
MR LUBYAYI IDDI (Independent, Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): I would like to thank the Chairperson of the National Economy Committee for the good work done, and I also associate myself with the comments made to the effect that the Ministry of ICT and Finance have done their good job to give an input to this report. I will not go into the justification or why we need the national data backbone; I think that has been ably stated before. 

As I stand to support this loan I have only one reservation directed at the Chairperson of the ICT Committee. On page 5, No. 3, I think as we approve this loan I would urge the Minister of ICT to restructure the framework under which this backbone is going to be managed. I do not feel that NITA, a body that is proposed to be established would be the appropriate body to manage this backbone because of the following reasons. 

First of all that body is not yet in existence; the Bill is not yet in Parliament but the backbone is supposed to be utilised by CHOGM, which is due in November. 

Secondly, we had an opportunity to discuss with the Minister of ICT in our committee the proposed set up of NITA. At no one point did the running of this backbone come into the picture. So, I do not think NITA would be the right body to run this massive investment on behalf of the country. So, as I support the loan, I urge the minister to re-examine the body that will run this backbone so that we can get efficient output of the loan. Thank you.

4.59
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the committee for the report, and I support the approval. However, I have one very serious reservation, which I think the Ministry of ICT together with the Ministry of Works should put into consideration. This is on page 4. In terms of network infrastructure, Uganda’s optical fibre backbone is approximately 358 kilometres, and we expect it to reach 2,100 kilometres. Currently there are ongoing excavations but the integration of replacement of tarmac, the degree of damage, which is being done as we excavate in order to put these underground fibre cables, is going to leave us with very poor road networks. 

We need to integrate it into our road networks whereby we establish underground channels through which the fibre networks will be laid to avoid continuous excavation of the good roads we are trying to put in place. This is one of the major considerations I want as we integrate the operations of ICT and the road networks to ensure that at least there are well designed underground channels with culverts and networks that are well laid so that we avoid the continuous excavation of the roads. When you travel through Kampala there is real damage on the road networks. I rest the case. 

5.02
MS PHERRY KABANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before I say whether I support this motion or not, I have a few reservations: 

One is on page 1 and this is on the background; two is on accessing full liberalisation, and they say it will assist full liberalisation of the telecommunications sector. It is only the telecommunications sector that is fully liberalised. You will see it on page 4 under No. 2 where he actually tells us that UTL is owned by some company in Kenya. I suppose Celtel is owned by a Kuwaiti company, and MTN I do not know, but all these companies are owned by other organisations which means that it is only Uganda Telecommunications Ltd that is fully liberalised. 

So, I do not want to believe that this project will help in the full liberalisation of the telecommunications sector. If anything it is going to cause a monopoly and I will tell you why it will cause a monopoly. Right now Huawei, whatever it is, is supplying modems to UTL and I have one by UTL. It is supplying modems to MTN and I have an MTN one too. It is again going to supply modems for the internet to the Government of Uganda. How will this help in the preservation of security if the same organisation is providing modems to the private sector and to the Government of Uganda? So, I suppose this is causing a monopoly. 

Secondly, it may not create the type of security that government is looking for. I also wanted to –(Interruption) 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, UTL owns its own fibre optic network. MTN does it on its own and it is only Celtel that is using the mobile system that - I think those ones do not have their own fibre optic network.

The infrastructure we are talking about is just an optical cable, a backbone which will be owned by the Government of Uganda. Any private investor - including the honourable member, if you want to set up a telecommunications company will just approach the regulator and you will be looped to that backbone. The issue of supplying modems and what have you does not come at the backbone. That is for the end user, the equipment that is used by the customers of that very company that would have been given the permission to tap on the government’s backbone. 

MS MUNYIRA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like the minister who is holding the Floor to assist me to know whether this new arrangement is going to help reduce the cost of communication because that is what would help us as ordinary Ugandans.

MR BYABAGAMBI: As you have stated honourable member, this is a cable, which does not need electricity to power it -(Interjection)- no, it is the end user who will need electricity especially when it comes to computers and what have you. At the same time, it is a one time investment. This is a cable, which is going to last several years. Therefore, the cost unit of oral telecommunications will be reduced tremendously.

MS KABANDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. But still the question remains and I would like to get clarification. Citing that none of the telecommunication companies in Uganda belongs to government, how will this cause full liberalisation of the telecommunications sector among the other things that I have already mentioned? Thank you.

5.05
DR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE (NRM, Sheema County North, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this request for a credit facility mainly because of the following reasons: 

One, people who use the internet particularly for e-mail will really have trouble sending documents across our internet system. Even when you want to send a simple attachment, it can take hours and sometimes you fail even from our site here at Parliament. So I am sure if this backbone is put in place it will facilitate our communication. When you try from upcountry like in Bushenyi - the Minister of course said UTL has its own fibre optic cable, but it does not go very far. If you are upcountry and you want to set up an internet facility, you will find difficulties because they want you to use satellite technology, which is very expensive. And our land lines, which used to go upcountry because of the mobile technology, are no longer cost effective to have upcountry. Therefore, I support this particular credit facility. It should have even come earlier. 

My only challenge is the roll out to districts. I would want to know, for example, whether the US $30 million includes financing for rolling out to the district headquarters or it is only to cover the initial step. Because when you look at the 358 kilometres that are already catered for, you will most likely find that they are in Kampala, Jinja and Entebbe, which already have enough fibre optic capacity although it is owned by MTN and UTL. Therefore, it would have been good to see that there is financing prepared to roll out to other districts, otherwise we might have a big challenge.

The second reason why I support this credit facility is because of job creation. Currently we have challenges with our young people who finish university and are pestering Members of Parliament to get them jobs. We know very well a country like India is benefiting a lot from out sourcing whereby somebody sits in India and does accounting jobs for people in Canada. Because of the time difference between places like Uganda and the USA, you can get people here, they do some work and by the time the people wake up at 2.00 a.m. in the USA, they find work already done. We can only do that if we have high speed internet facilities, which will be brought about by this backbone.

The challenges have been the band width and the accent. As you hear my accent, people sometimes cannot easily understand the accents of Africans, but the Indians have tried it. In Africa it is only Morocco that has benefited from this facility, Kenya is also trying and, therefore, with Uganda having this backbone, I am sure that with the innovation of our young people we can earn a lot from this facility and therefore we can support it. However, the challenge is that for this facility to work very well, we need to connect it to the international facilities. Because I am still wondering after laying these cables, how are you going to be connected to the international world apart from using satellite technology? 

There was a marine cable project, which was supposed to put a wire from South Africa via Madagascar to Mombasa and then to Kenya and Uganda in which case you would have one cable across the Atlantic and Indian Oceans and from which you would connect this cable we are going to lay in Uganda. I would want the minister to tell us whether with the East African Community or the East African Federation, we are also moving forward to work with Kenya to see to it that we are connected to this cable? 
 
The other important information is that as we open up the super highway we have to train our people; our security forces and everybody to be alert because we are opening up to the world. Recently, Estonia, a country in Eastern Europe had everything shut down – Estonia is one of the countries that are heavily computerised but everything came to a stand still because somebody hacked into their system and everything broke down. Therefore, much as we try to import weapons, prepare for big wars and do what - I think the war in future will be on ICTs. And as much as we bring in the money to lay the cables, we need to make sure that our boys and girls are trained to prevent an attack which might come through the ICT.

We embrace the Chinese and they have come greatly in Africa but I am sure they have their own agenda and we must be wary of what they come with. Sometimes they want to come and have this project on what we call concessional terms but when they are actually looking for jobs for their own people. We want to be sure that once we pass this money – with these very not fair arrangements - it will be our people who will be digging the holes because the Chinese can bring their prisoners and all these people. You find even a simple Chinese also digging, work which can be done by a Ugandan! 

So we need to get Ugandans to do most of this work because what happens after with the Chinese - and with the big projects because when the big projects come and people are doing this work, then you hear some children are disappearing and a lot of things happening. It is important that as much as the Chinese will want to have jobs for their people but this is a loan and not a grant. We should ensure that at least our people participate in this project by making sure that they also get jobs. 

The other quick point is in view of the doubt that the Members had towards the quality of Chinese companies especially the products they bring to Africa - I mean you go to the US and Canada, they are using Chinese products but they are of good quality; high quality. They prepare things for Africa and then other things for the rest of the world. So when we dig and we are going to put a cable there, our people should have the capacity to see that this cable they are laying underground is going to last so many years and is of good quality. We need very serious supervision of this project. 

Otherwise, Mr Speaker, I am happy that the project is going to the district headquarters implying that if you have a district, you have an advantage of getting such a project. And when you hear people asking for more districts, you will understand why they are asking for such districts. (Laughter) Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson of the committee; let us start with you and then the minister. It is just a few points to clarify on. 

5.10
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Ibrahim Kadunabbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Many Members talked of the concessional nature of the loan and we really made our observations in our report. 

When we go to the external debt strategy – it is a little bit huge but we have tasked our technical people and as a Committee of National Economy, we intend to come to this Parliament and report to you what we think are the standard terms of a concessional loan. Because now we have IDA loans and this is not more than 1 percent for the 40 years, including ten years of grace period. But we want also to look at loans from elsewhere and we shall come and report to Parliament. 

Then about Huawei Technologies Ltd; true it is one of the best companies regarding the laying of fibre optic cables and you might have heard that they are going to Rwanda to do a similar project. And as I was in one of the Middle East countries, Huawei was doing so. They also signed a contract maybe with MTN - if I am not mistaken - to do for them a smaller project regarding their network. So the selection of that company is not at all a problem but the input of all stakeholders is the issue and government should help all stakeholders to be involved before we make a decision.

Hon. Okello-Okello asked whether it is possible for this project to benefit CHOGM; yes. Because a lot of work has already been done as we speak now -(Interruption)- yes, they are already laying cables. That is what we told this Parliament that when they signed they started work. 

Again I want to answer what the memorandum of understanding means: when the government signed a memorandum of understanding with this Chinese company, the Chinese company came and started the process. The minister will help us and –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Clarification.

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you seek clarification from the minister because he has preferred to take over?

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When you say the work has already been started – we were talking about the memorandum of understanding and we are sure that a memorandum of understanding is not like a contract. So that means that even the contract has been signed because you cannot start work before signing a contract.

MR KADUNABBI: Hon. Nsubuga that is what I said, it can only be the Executive to tell us but I am reporting to you what as a committee we were informed is on the ground now. 

Hon. Baliddawa, the Chairperson of the Committee on ICT, we got that concern that NITA is not yet operational but you are also informed that there is still some time before this infrastructure is completed. As Parliament we have the Committee on ICT, which can at a later stage monitor and report to this Parliament whether NITA is in place, and if not, what we can do and how we can move. Those are majorly the concerns.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much. Yes honourable minister.

5.14
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Dr Ham Mulira): Thank you very much Rt hon. Speaker. I will start from the last one because of the issues regarding management, that is, NITA. Hon. Baliddawa has stated on page 5, item 3 that it would not be right to get the proposed National Information Technology Authority, which is in the final phases of its formation, to actually take on the responsibility of managing. He says something different should actually be used for managing. My question is: If NITA, which is in advanced stages of being formed, is not acceptable, according to hon. Baliddawa and something else should be managing because NITA does not exist and the other something that we even do not know what form it is in should be the one managing, can I get some clarification here? (Mr. Baliddawa rose_)

THE SPEAKER: No. The question was – he said the Bill has not been brought here and therefore there maybe a delay in constituting this authority. So in lieu of default of the existing, who will be in charge?

DR MULIRA: Thank you very much, Rt hon. Speaker. Yes, the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology is standing in, in the interim. But as hon. Baliddawa mentioned, this discussion has taken place in another forum. His actual point was that there has to be another entity altogether even in subsequent management of the backbone because in the other –(Interruption) 

MR BALIDDAWA: Excuse me, Mr Speaker. I have not made mention of the alternatives to this on this Floor. I just raised a concern.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. He said that this thing will start working when the authority is not there but you have told us that in the interim there is something therefore what you should do is to expedite the process of bringing up the Bill.

MR OCHIENG: Mr Speaker, at this point we need to be clear. We are talking about a number of things. 

THE SPEAKER: But you see we have to separate two things: we are talking about the loan - that we need a loan to put up this infrastructure - then the other point will be the administration. That is a different thing, which we cannot really handle in this debate.

DR MULIRA: Thank you very much Rt hon. Speaker. Hon. Kasamba talked about the work; the integration between the different government organs. That is very important and it is being taken note of and strong supervision at the implementation stage will be taken care of.

Hon. Kabanda was talking about the liberalisation of the telecommunications sector and the examples she quoted were slightly not what is really meant by liberalisation of the telecommunications sector. She was referring to the facts of the ownership of the companies within that sector, but liberalisation of the telecommunications sector refers to the ability to invest in the sector. In the past, between 1997/98 and 2005, only two main companies were allowed to invest in the telecommunications sector in the country. The third one, Celtel was there by default because it came in place before the law for exclusivity started. After 2005, liberalisation means that any entity is free to come and invest in the telecommunications sector and provide any type of service. 

There are two types of licences given: one is for service provision; any service be it telephony, mobile telephony, fixed lines, voice-over, IP, internet et cetera; and the other side is the infrastructure. So there are two types of licences and that is what is meant by liberalisation.  

As for point No. 2 on page 1: “To assist full liberalisation as per the committee’s report.” Here assist means that once the backbone is in place, it is like government investing in setting up a highway. The social economic spin offs on that highway are what are measured in additional economic terms. So if government assists in investing in putting up the digital highway, then the liberalisation is enhanced in the sense that even smaller companies can now invest in telecoms without having to invest heavily in laying the infrastructure because it is already there. So they can invest in service provision. There are different types of services provision which, for instance, Dr Elioda Tumwesigye was talking about.

If I may then rapidly move on and wind up with hon. Dr Elioda Tumwesigye where he says that apart from the backbone within the country, how do we get out of the country, how do we link to the external world? This now is the issue of the cable, which he mentioned, the East African Sub-marine System. The East African Sub-marine System cable is a fiber cable, which is going to be laid from South Africa up to Mombasa. It is a joint project by 23 countries starting from Uganda going all the way down to South Africa. 

Initially it was a private sector project by all the telephone operators in those 23 countries who decided to get together and invest in that cable. Ultimately it was felt from previous experience in West Africa where the private sector also laid a cable and because of the overheads, the costs and they wanted to get returns from their investments, the whole objective of lowering costs of communication was not met because the pricing was still high as the companies wanted to get returns on their investment. So the governments of these 23 countries got involved and came together in the project for laying down to South Africa. Nevertheless, during that process there were some disagreements in governance, investment et cetera so the project also disintegrated and is being handled in a slightly different way where the private sector is still going ahead and laying that cable. 

The understanding is that once you have the sub-marine cable, which is jointly owned by all the 23 countries and operators in those countries, each of those countries has to also internally lay its own fiber backbone. Uganda is actually doing what would have inevitably been done by laying its internal backbone. Kenya will also lay its own backbone; Tanzania will, Mozambique, Angola and all these others will lay and ultimately we shall have all of them interlinked both directly and through the sub-marine cable. That is how we get out of Uganda into the rest of the world. But until that sub-marine cable is laid, a lot of traffic is also internal. 

So as we communicate we should recall that there is the second part of the project which is electronic governance linking government ministries and departments together. A lot of the traffic – correspondence, physical memos, telephony will all be carried on this network, therefore, bringing down public administration costs greatly. A lot of traffic is still local, meaning that within the country people are communicating with each other, and a smaller percentage is the one which goes out. So part of that will still go through satellite but because of telecoms liberalisation, there will be many more people providing access to the satellites. So again costs will be reduced. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the motion is seeking a resolution of Parliament to borrow US $30 million from the Government of China represented by the Export and Import Bank of China to finance the National Data Transmission Backbone Infrastructure Project.”

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I want to thank the committee and all of you for the ideas you have expressed on this issue. Now we have come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.25 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 04 July 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)








