Thursday, 1 July 2004

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me on your behalf welcome the pupils of Top Care Primary School, Mukono, who are seated there in the gallery. You are welcome. (Applause)

Secondly, honourable members, I have some sad news. I regret to inform you that the hon. Beatrice Wabudeya, Minister of State for Higher Education, has lost her father, Mr Saul Kisolo. He will be buried tomorrow at Mutufu in Sironko at 2.00 p.m. In case there are members who wish to make contributions, they could be given to hon. Edward Wesonga.  

The other sad news is that hon. Syda Bbumba, Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, has also lost her father, Haji Zacharia Mubi. He too will be buried tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. at Kilwanyi in Luweero District.  

The third piece of sad news is that hon. Dora Byamukama has lost her sister, Ms Marina Kanabahita. However, the date, place and time of burial are yet to be communicated. So, in view of these numerous deaths I would like to ask us all to stand up and observe a minute of silence in memory of the departed.

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION 
TO PARLIAMENT

2.33
MR HENRY BASALIZA ARAALI (Fort-Portal Municipality, Kabarole): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for having given me this opportunity to present a petition from the students of Fort-Portal Clinical Officers School. This is not my petition, it was presented to you by the students but since they come from my constituency, let me now read it:

“School of Clinical Officers,
P.O. Box 724,
FORT-PORTAL.

29th June 2004.

The Hon. Speaker of Parliament,
SUBJECT: PETITION TO PARLIAMENT FOR TERMINATION OF STUDENTS FROM THE COURSE OF CLINICAL MEDICINE AND COMMUNITY HEALTH.

We, the affected students of the above school, offering the course of Diploma in Clinical Medicine and Community Health, humbly submit our cries and concerns to your attention requesting for your intervention following the JAB decision that left 86 students discontinued from the course on 23 June 2004.

The screening exercise took place on 16 June 2004 by JAB officials, the first of its kind in this school. That is to say, it had never been carried out since we joined the institution. It is unfortunate that all the academic years were affected, including the finalists who were only left with two months to complete the three-year course.  

We were all admitted by a representative of the Minister of Education and Sports, who was the principal tutor, on presentation of academic transcripts. We have admission forms; we have been on private sponsorship for these years and paying the amount of tuition fees as shown below:

1. First year first semester, Shs 600,000; second semester Shs 553,000.

2. Second year, Shs 440,000 each semester.

3. Third year, Shs 440,000 each semester.  

We have cleared all the school dues and we have been passing examinations to the required standards of school.

We, the affected students, who could not meet the minimum requirements for entry in the above institution, hereby request for consideration basing on the following points:

• Allow us to continue with the course since we have been performing well and we were legally admitted to the school.

• The academic transcripts we presented on admission are the very papers being used to discontinue us.

• Being privately sponsored students, our parents have spent a lot of money and we have also spent a lot of time on this course.

• We have been left futureless with almost nowhere to go next despite the knowledge we have in the medical profession, bearing in mind that our courses are limited.

• It has been too late for JAB to come in at the end of the academic year. This should have been carried out at every beginning of the academic year.

The petitioners pray, therefore, that you act positively and revisit the resolutions made by JAB. We shall be grateful if our cries are heard and parents are saved from what we are going through. 

For God and my country.

cc: The Chairperson, Social Services Committee of Parliament
cc: Hon. Basaliza Araali” 

Thirty-three students signed this document. I beg to lay this on the Table. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter first came up when hon. Kagimu raised it. However, hon. Basaliza informed us that the petition was coming. The petition came but the students also came and they called on the Speaker. He was very concerned and he had already alerted the Committee on Social Services to examine the matter. However, for purposes of reporting back to this House, we are now formalising it by presenting it formally to the Committee on Social Services to examine and come back to us.  

2.38
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mrs Dorothy Hyuha): Madam Speaker, it is true this matter has been drawn to our attention as a Committee of Social Services, and I am happy to receive it formally on behalf of my committee members. I wanted to inform this august House that we have already started investigating the matter.  Yesterday we interfaced with the students, some of whom have been dismissed. This morning we interfaced with the two ministers; we had a joint meeting with the Ministers of Education and Sports, and the Minister of Health. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the Minister of Education and Sports has requested for at least one week to investigate the matter and then he gets back to us and we get a comprehensive report. In a quick way, I want to inform this august House that although some members have been arguing that these students are roaming about and that the ministry should rule and they go back, they fall under various categories. We have the category of students who are said to have forged the documents. We have a category of students who are said to be foreigners but they are studying in the clinical school, we need to know which policy is used. 

We have a category of students who are said to have been admitted when they had Arts combination at A’ Level like HEG (History, Economics, Geography), DEG (Divinity, Economics, Geography) LEG (Literature, Economics and Geography).

We also have a category of students among these who were dismissed, who are said to have done Science combination but they may not have had minimum requirements, as you heard from the petition. We also have a category of students who are said to be nurses but they wanted to upgrade to clinical officers. So, it is not a matter to which we can have an immediate solution as some members have been thinking. I would beg this august House that as per the request of the minister, and we have agreed as a committee to give the Ministry of Education and Sports one week to investigate then we can have a comprehensive report, which we shall analyse as Social Services and then we report back. We should have comprehensive recommendations on what the minimum requirements are and what would happen to those who may have had similar qualifications but have already been qualified. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We leave it in the good hands of your committee.

CONSIDERATIION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON HUMANITARIAN AFFAIRS IN THE WAR AFFECTED AREAS

(Debate continued.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we listened to three responses. Could we have the Minister of Health?

2.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, PRIMARY HEALTHCARE (Dr Alex Kamugisha): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. My response is contained in a document, which has been circulated, entitled, “Ministry of Health Response to the Report of the Select Committee on the Humanitarian and Security Situation in Acholi, Lango and Teso sub-regions: Health Sector component.”

I would like to thank the committee for the report and I need to say that overall the report has brought out some of the activities, which we have been undertaking in the area and some of the efforts that we have made to address the problem of the internally displaced people in particular, and the rest of the affected sub-regions in general.

My report starts with an introduction that we have been working with the districts in the area to implement the emergency action plan. Three specific plans of action were developed and implemented in conjunction with the districts, NGOs and CBOs: The first one was, “Response to the health crisis affecting internally displaced persons in Northern Uganda.” 

The second one is “Child survival package in emergencies in Northern Uganda”. The third one is the “Home-based care in internally displaced persons camps”, that is the most recent.

The objective of these programmes was to address the high levels of mortality and morbidity in these areas, and respond to breakdown to health services and shortage of trained staff.  

The areas of focus of these interventions include: treatment of common illnesses, prevention of HIV/AIDS and measles, nutrition, safe childbirth and rehabilitation of the disabled. It also included mobilisation of communities for sanitation through health education. Epidemic diseases like Ebola, Meningitis and Yellow Fever were contained and the current programme of home-based care is designed to take services closer to households.

The following actions have been taken by my ministry to respond to the situation:

• First, we established the multi-sectoral national taskforce for co-ordination of these activities to provide technical support to the districts, and for resource mobilisation. Similar district taskforces have been established for co-ordination at district level and overall, we are part and parcel of the committee under the Prime Minister’s Office. 
 
• We developed and implemented the initial part of the emergency plan of action, which responded to the needs of shelter, sanitation and improvement and management of medical conditions.

• Strengthening outreach services to treat the common medical conditions above, through a strategy of village health teams within the camps to handle the households.

• Finally, rehabilitation of health facilities in selected areas based on security. In other words, where it was secure to operate.

Madam Speaker, honourable members, I now respond to specific issues, which have been raised in the report.  

Mortality, which is raised on page 26, it is true that at the peak of the insurgency in Teso region, which was last September, the mortality rate had doubled due to Measles and Malaria. Action was taken immediately through a Measles immunisation campaign, which most of you members campaigned for and took part in and intensified care management of Malaria. As a result the mortality had been reduced to expected levels by November 2003. So, it is no longer as double as it had been at the beginning of the year.

Drugs supplies, page 26. It is true that credit lines established two years ago have greatly improved drugs supplied to the districts. However, the current level of utilisation of these credit lines by districts is still less than 100 percent and the utilisation has been put at 70 percent. 

Members of Parliament are requested to work with the districts to ensure maximum utilisation of these available resources. What I am trying to say here is that about two years ago we shifted from a policy of push to pull, meaning at that time the Minister of Health through the Medical Stores, used to send drugs to the districts and they used to determine what they thought the districts wanted. We found that method was not appropriate because it was not based on what the districts required. So we changed it to the pull system where the districts and the hospitals determine their requirements and make requisitions to the stores. So, funds are deposited in the Medical Stores and that is what we mean by the credit line. What we are saying here is that the districts sometimes do not fully utilise their credit line and this is where we are asking everybody to lend a hand so that the population is not starved of drugs.

With regard to reported pilot schemes on Malaria, the programme on indoor residual spraying is being expanded using funds from Global Fund on AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. The procurement process has started and the scheme should be fully operational within the next six months.  

Disease prevalence in IDP camps, page 27 of the report. The committee’s discussion is noted and it is accurate. A current strategy for emergency preparedness, which is home-based care, emergency response to IDPs and child survival outlined in my introduction, have been developed and work plans are being implemented.  

Medical personnel, page 27. The committee correctly raised issues of understaffing in health facilities in the region. Under decentralisation, Madam Speaker, recruitment and deployment of staff remains a responsibility of the district. With regard to regional hospitals such as Soroti, Lira and Gulu, staff posted there from the Ministry of Health have all reported except one doctor who, due to genuine social reasons, has not reported but others who are mentioned in the report have now reported. 

Referral services again on page 27, we acknowledge the need for improving referral and ambulance services. Referral services by ambulance have since improved from last year as follows: 
 
(a) Through support from JICA, Teso sub-region received six station wagons, which were distributed as follows: Soroti two, Katakwi two, Kaberamaido two and in addition the Teso sub-region got 35 motorcycles for each of the health centre IVs and health centre IIIs.

(b) Under the ADB support programme, ten ambulances and 74 motorcycles, and 565 bicycles have arrived and they are being cleared through customs. They are destined for Adjumani, Moyo, Yumbe, Nebbi, Lira Apac, Kaberamaido, Katakwi and Kapchorwa.  

Direct purchase by the Ministry of Health:

Last year in Lira at Dokolo health centre IV; in Apac at Aduku and Nyeko health centre IV, Kitgum, Namakola, Gulu at Lalogi, ambulances were given and they are based at the sub-districts located within the camps. More vehicles are expected this financial year for those health centre IVs without transport. 

Blood banks are organised through six regional offices at Arua, Gulu, Mbale, Fort-Portal, Mbarara (this is national), and Nakasero, which is the main centre. The regional centres deliver blood to hospitals and health centre IVs in their catchment areas. A new finalised supplementary plan supported by the Global Fund will facilitate blood distribution to health centre IVs in areas with IDPs.  

Staffing, page 27. We agreed that the hardship allowance is necessary to motivate healthcare workers in these areas. The Ministry of Health has written to the Ministry of Public Service for action but in the meantime workers receive safari day allowance when they go to work. 

Medicine and drug supply – drugs and Malaria:

We note the committee’s suggestion on additional drugs and supplies. Drug supply to districts with IDPs has been increased through the following mechanisms:

• Providing additional drugs through increased credit lines based on IDPs as a factor.

• Increasing a drug conditional grant allocation to districts with IDPs; and

• Allowing flexibility of use of regular conditional funds by districts to purchase drugs.

Here I need to say that the supply of drugs is not the biggest problem in the area as most of the units have drugs, except where there is a security problem then the flow of drugs is interrupted. But overall all these mechanisms have ensured reasonably adequate supply of drugs.  

Special programmes for Malaria based on home-based treatment of Malaria, popularly known as “home pack” was launched at the end of last year by the Ministry of Health working with WHO and Malaria Consortium. The programme covers the districts of Gulu, Kitgum and Pader, and recently Katakwi. This is to be expanded using Global Funds on HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria.  

HIV Antiretroviral drugs:

There are components of this ARV treatment namely, Prevention of Mother-to-Child Transmission (PMCT), treatment of AIDS and IEC and voluntary counselling and testing, in which individual communities are educated on the importance of their sero-status and on preventive measures. Here I need to say that all these components, PMCT is already working and mothers who are HIV positive who want to deliver are given this treatment. And recently, as most of you are aware, we launched the ARV treatment programme. The drugs for universal treatment have arrived and the programme was launched last month. This will scale up treatment throughout the country free of charge. This must be noted that the ARVs will be free of charge. An appropriate training package is part of this, and the anti-retroviral strategy to counsel and handle terminally ill patients.  

The following units are providing services in the North and North Eastern Uganda. The prevention of mother-to-child transmission in Arua is at Maracha health centre IV and Arua hospital. In Moyo at Moyo hospital; Yumbe at Yumbe hospital. In Gulu at Gulu, Anaka and Lacor hospitals; Lira at Lira hospital, in Apac at Apac and Aber hospitals; in Kitgum at St Joseph’s Hospital; in Soroti at Soroti hospital and Serere health centre; in Pader at Kalongo hospital; in Kumi at Kumi, Atutur and Ngora hospitals; and in Moroto at Moroto, Amudat and Matanyi hospitals and Tokora health centre IV.

The anti-retroviral treatment, these services are in all regional hospitals in the North in Arua, Gulu, Lacor and Soroti regional hospitals. You should add Lira here; and here I should say that this programme is going to be scaled up to include all district hospitals and later on health centre IVs and the programme goes with the establishment of testing and counselling facilities, as well as training of appropriate staff.  

Psycho-socio counselling. This is a multi-sectoral undertaking and the major stakeholders include Health, Gender, Labour and Social Development, Local Government and Education. In other words, we work together. 

Increasing access to mobile clinics. We note the comments of increasing access to healthcare. As a major measure to address this chronic issue, a new strategy called home-based care was launched in Gulu recently. The purpose of the new initiative is to provide medical care within 24 hours so as to reduce mortality from the major causes of death namely Malaria, coughs, Diarrhoea, nutritional worms and skin and eye infections. The second package provides essential supplies for safe childbirth. 

Operation of the home-based care. This approach is based on community participation in healthcare delivery. In each village a number of community persons are chosen and trained to provide simple treatment against common illness. Each such a person is called community healthcare worker and is assigned between 50 and 100 households nearest to his/her home. In a village, there are several community healthcare workers depending on the size of the village population. Each of the community healthcare workers takes care of 50 to 100 households. A sum total of these workers in the village form what is called a village healthcare team. 

This arrangement is being extended to more IDPs districts to ensure maximum coverage of villages whose members may actually be related. Each village healthcare team member will serve 250 to 500 people per population and will be provided with the following facilities: a First Aid kit - I should have brought here a sample of this kit but the officer who brought it two days ago has not yet appeared here. But these are bluish bags, which contain First Aid equipment and also safe delivery equipment. And we are going to designate in each area the people who will be carrying these bags to avoid them landing in wrong hands, so that it is clear that so and so is the designated person to handle these kits. So, a First Aid Kit and a safe childbirth delivery kit are what I am referring to. By taking these drugs to the community, outreaches will reduce since treatment will be at the level of a household.
  
UNICEF has already purchased kits worth US $500,000. These will last for six months, and another US $600,000 worth of similar supplies is expected this year. This programme was launched in March 2004 in Gulu.  

Establishment of centres of nutrition. The concerns of the committee are acknowledged as you heard from the report from the Office of the Prime Minister. The Office of the Prime Minister is responsible for providing food. The role of my ministry is to provide therapeutic feeding, that is, treatment and rehabilitation of those who are sick because of malnutrition due to poor feeding, using high protein and energy supplements. This is not news.

The following therapeutic feeding centres have been set up and are operational. In Gulu District they are three, at Gulu hospital, Lacor and Anaka. In Lira at Lira hospital and Lango College; in Pader at Kalongo and Pajule. In Soroti, Soroti hospital and Serere, and this can be increased depending on the necessity. There is an active outreach programme, which maintains surveillance and identifies those who require nutritional rehabilitation.

Funding and supervision of emergency activities. We note and agree on the concerns raised about poor funding of emergences especially at district level. Currently, 15 percent of conditional grants in each district are earmarked for emergency and flexibility on the use of PAF funds will help alleviate funding gaps at the district. But additional support in terms of manpower, supplies and funding will be required in the course of time. The budget for 2003 to 2045, for health emergency in the North and North Eastern Uganda is estimated at US $8 million and we have a funding gap of about US $4 million.

I should also add that we have earmarked funds, the Ministry of Finance has agreed to give us additional funds to cater for sanitary towels and this will be done expeditiously. 

As I conclude, let me state once again that the Ministry of Health is committed to fully support the districts in the North and North Eastern, to improve their health status in addition to the regular programme. The districts with IDPs are in a special category and proportionately get slightly more financial allocation than others. Working together with these districts we have been able to contain the threat of Ebola, Yellow Fever and Meningitis. In addition the districts performed very well during the mass Measles immunisation drive. Despite the insecurity, we were able to get this high percent of immunisation against Measles, and generally routine immunisation coverage has also been up in those areas. 

I should add that the Guinea Worm disease, previously endemic in 16 districts in the North, has virtually been eliminated. In 1990 there were 126,000 cases per year in 2,677 villages; today there are only five cases of Guinea Worm in Kotido and this is just one village in Kotido. I think this is a remarkable achievement for the programme to eradicate the Guinea Worm. Our efforts would be enhanced if the districts continue to strengthen management of health services under their control.  

I would like to thank honourable members for the support they have shown in health matters in their districts. But here I need to say that we have experienced some problems with some districts in the affected areas through weak management of health services, and also weak support at the districts. We do not feel that the services are adequately given support by the relevant district councils and authorities. This is a point where Members of Parliament could help us so that they also step up their momentum. 

I thank the committee for raising the issues in the report, and I need to pledge that we shall endeavour to do a lot more. There is an Annex at the end for those who may want to look at the distribution of motorcycles and other ambulances, which I have mentioned in my report. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I thank you for listening. (Applause).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members, that is a response from the Ministry of Health. Are there any queries?

3.09
MS SARAH KIYINGI (Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I wish to start by thanking the minister for his response to the committee’s report.

I, however, wish to seek clarifications. On page 5 of the minister’s report, under the sub-title “Medical personnel” the minister agrees that there is a problem of understaffing but then he says that under decentralisation, recruitment and deployment of staff remains the responsibility of the district. I thought that one of the main issues that were being raised by the select committee is that these districts are not functioning normally because all the structures within the districts have been turned upside down as a result of this insurgency? And in fact, on page 36 of the report, the committee goes into detail to say that the districts are not collecting taxes, and the presidential pledge to facilitate retention of funds and flexibility of use by the district local government pending the return of normalcy, has not been operationalised. The committee also learnt that no affected districts had obtained any special grants to enable them cope.

So, when the minister tells us that this issue of recruitment of staff remains the responsibility of the districts, is he assuming that they are operating normally because obviously according to the committee report they are not. I think what the committee was asking is that special attention should be paid and the ministry or Government takes care of this staffing problem to take care of the many people who are crowded in the camps and they have special medical problems that need to be handled. The staffing is so inadequate and the districts are unable to cater for that problem.

Then on page 8 of the minister’s report, he talks about psycho-socio counselling, and all he has given us is that it is a multi-sectoral undertaking, which is of course true, and he mentioned the ministries that are involved. He is not telling us what is happening on the ground. It may be multi-sectoral but surely where can these people go for instance? Are there centres established to carry out this responsibility? Where can the leaders within the districts direct such people who need this kind of counselling? I need to be clarified whether there is actually anything on the ground as far as that counselling is concerned or not. Thank you very much.

3.13
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister about his statement. On page 4, about the mortality rate, he indicated that this was reduced to expected levels by November 2003. We had a problem in our committee. We wonder why he decided to submit this report reflected on page 26 of our report in January 2004, and yet this problem was already solved? Then, I wanted to know what expected levels he has been talking about? 

Also, I had wanted to inform him that in Lira we have problems with some camps like Atogu because the funds are not delivered immediately. As a result the doctor always locks up the stores and he stays in Lira expecting to receive funds. So, the mobile team, which should be going to Erute County North, always takes about three weeks or more to get there. Even now, as I speak, they are still expecting funds from the centre. Until these arrive people will continue to die. I wonder whether this has come to his knowledge, and when can he intervene? Thank you.

3.15
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to draw the minister’s attention to page 5, paragraph 2. I would like to read it verbatim: “With regard to reported pilot schemes on Malaria, the programme on indoor residual spraying is being expanded using funds from the Global Fund on AIDS, TB and Malaria.” That statement saddened me because just before you talk about the perception of spraying, in Uganda we have some fundamental laws, which protect the citizens of Uganda from random spraying and I wanted the minister to take note of the following.

When you refer to residual spraying, I get worried because that process may bring in the aspect of DDT, which is internationally outlawed for given reasons.

The minister should know that although the people in the camps badly need to be assisted over Malaria, the main problem in that area is malnutrition. Many of the children between one year and six years who are victims of Malaria die not because of the bites of mosquitoes, but basically when the mosquitoes come, they find no defensive mechanisms to protect those children, and they have to die.

The minister should know that Uganda has signed the bio-safety protocol. We have also ratified the protocol. There are certain standards we must protect. Uganda remains to bring in a law to enforce that bio-safety protocol. So, if you did any activity beyond that dimension in terms of spraying, especially if that activity impacts on the application of toxicity, then you have a problem and you have to answer for that particular point.

The minister should know that under the National Objectives of State Policy on the Environment (XXVII), any pollution, which is hazardous to the human being, is outlawed. 

And lastly, the minister should know that under Article 245 of the Constitution, all the Members of Parliament, including the minister himself we are all duty bound to protect the Ugandan environment from hazardous pollution and any random spraying related to the application of DDT or its equivalent will work out in that position.  

So, I would like to end by saying that much as we have the problem in the North related to mosquitoes and Malaria, we should try as much as possible to maximise the application of alternative measures capable of fighting Malaria without depleting the environment. Thank you.

3.19
MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start by taking the opposite view of what my colleague at the back has just talked that we must not spray. It is very important that the Minister of Health together with his colleagues should spray where it is necessary. 

The situation of Tsetse flies, I did not hear it in the report specifically because Tsetse flies in some of the areas in the North could be increasing faster than what we think. It has not been highlighted. If I see Tsetse flies in Kamuli, I can imagine what is happening in the North. I am looking forward to getting a comment about the issue of Tsetse flies, because they are not something you should joke about. 

I must really take the opposite view to that of hon. Ken Lukyamuzi that where necessary we should use all the means to destroy insects like Tsetse flies because they killed one million Basoga in 1900. And if we start fooling around with them, we cannot really afford this thing to go and actually cause more destruction in the North. (Interruption)

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, I would like to give the following information for the benefit of the House. About two weeks ago there was an outbreak of Sleeping Sickness disease in one of the sub-counties in Kaberamaido, that is, Alwa sub-county, bordering Dokolo in the north and Apac in the southwest. And the effect has been that we have so far lost more than 11 people to Sleeping Sickness. The Ministry of Health has tried for the time being to give us the trappers for the insects, but we think that the treatment is necessary and if possible the spraying could also be done because we think that the Tsetse flies will spread all over to the Northern part of Uganda and become very difficult to control.

DR STEPHEN MALLINGA: I think spraying for Malaria, DDT is not the only medicine, which can be used for spraying. There is a plant from Kenya - pyrethrum. The extract from pyrethrum is quite safe and has been used for massive spraying in a number of countries with good consequences. DDT causes impotence -(Laughter)- I am serious.  DDT affects birds to the extent that the shells of the eggs do not form, and it has a long residual effect. So, in many countries, it has been abandoned and safer drugs have been used.

Sleeping sickness, trypanosomiasis, in this country we had eradicated this disease by the 1960s when there was an active programme of eradicating the disease by spraying and trapping the Tsetse flies. There were less than 100 cases of sleeping sickness a year. But because the government has not focused on this disease, there is now rampant outbreak of trypanosomiasis along Lake Victoria -(Interruption)

MR ETONU: I thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to be clarified by my colleague, Dr Mallinga. When I was growing up, the use of DDT was very common. I never heard of anybody who became impotent and I know that this medicine was used during the time Dr Mallinga was growing. Is he telling us that he is actually now impotent? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know this is a serious report and we have five responses today. Can you, please –(Interruption)

DR MALLINGA: As far as impotence is concerned, the honourable member, how many people in this House does he know who are impotent? Impotence is a big secret; nobody ever talks about it. But if the honourable member is concerned about myself, I have a child who is three years old -(Laughter)- so, he should know, he is my friend. You should not be concerned about me. 

But to proceed with Sleeping Sickness and Malaria, we let the Malaria Eradication Scheme fail. We used to have a mosquito catcher in every town whose business was to go around looking for places where mosquitoes could breed. The medical doctor who was in charge of that programme was Dr Ibanda in Jinja. But that programme collapsed completely. There is no malarial eradication scheme anymore in the country.  

Malaria had been eradicated in places like Kigezi and if people from there came to this area they used to get cerebral malaria because they had no immunity. Sleeping Sickness had more or less been eradicated to the extent that in the 1960s and the 1970s we were having less than 100 cases of Sleeping Sickness a year. But all these have been abandoned, and all these diseases are back. 

Thanks to President Carter, guinea worm is being eradicated, and it was a simple thing - providing clean water. The Ministry of Health is not being sufficiently -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Mallinga, the Minister said he has dealt with the problem of guinea worm. There are only very few people in Kotido who have it. You are now telling him that although you have eradicated the guinea worm, the money came from Carter. I do not think that is what is important. 

DR MALLINGA: I was just saying he should not claim what he has not done. But, Madam Speaker, as far as dealing with emergencies is concerned, in the past we had outbreaks of diseases like Cholera in this country, and the Ministry of Health had to take charge. Do not trust the district, they do not have the expertise and the money. So, in a situation of health problems in IDPs, the Ministry of Health should be directly responsible for providing health care in these areas, but not pass it on to the districts because they do not have the personnel and the money. So, the Ministry of Health should deal directly with problems of health in these areas.  

The other thing, which was not mentioned, and which everybody might think is not important, is tampons for ladies. Does the ministry have them in their plan because in one of the camps I went to, you could see ladies walking around with their dresses stained with menstrual blood! What answer do you have to that? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wambuzi, please wind up and the minister will answer. We are taking too much time on this health problem.

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: I thank you, Madam Speaker. As you saw, somebody contributed instead of information, but all the same he enriched my speech. 

I would like at this stage to conclude by saying that the Minister of Health has a Health Digest, a publication, but it does not really cover the details you have given us today about the northern province. Can we request the Minister of Health that in future, the Health Digest, which is published regularly, should give the same details he has given today about what is happening in the North, on health? 

Indeed, other ministries should do the same because the Ministry of Health’s Health Digest is very good. It is giving us reports but unfortunately it does not focus directly on what is happening in the North. Now that he has come out about the North, we would like to be upraised on a continuous basis in your Health Digest on the details of what has been zeroed on as a problem in the North until the situation there improves and goes back to an acceptable level. We could be upraised as a Parliament and indeed the whole country on details of what is going on in the different health situations in the North.  

Finally, Madam Speaker, the feedback and control system of the Government on the events happening in the different parts of the country is still poor. We are requesting that this feedback and control system be improved so that we are continuously upraised about the different aspects. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, PRIMARY HEALTHCARE (Dr Alex Kamugisha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start with the issue raised by hon. Sarah Kiyingi about staffing. I think it has been said in this House before that we have generally had a problem of shortage of health workers. More so when it comes to insecurity, then it has been a problem to a number of districts. 

Recruitment of staff remains the responsibility of the districts, and this is according to the existing laws of Uganda. But the central government gives out the money to the districts, and it will remain like this. Some time back a number of districts, not only in the North but even elsewhere - I think the Ministry of Public Service was carrying out a restructuring programme and there was a halt put to recruitment. But I think recently they were told to fill all the positions, which are available, and wait for the restructuring exercise to come later on. What makes the situation even more difficult is, of course, when there is insurgency in an area and health workers have to leave. Then when you go to the area, you may find one or two staff members or even none, as we have seen in some units. The concept of village health workers is partly meant to offset this problem. It is paying us dividends and we intend to encourage it so that we have people who live within the community and they give emergency treatment within 24 hours.  

Hon. Gutomoi asked, “What are the expected levels of mortality?” Of course we know that at any one time people are being born, and of course there are those who die, and death is from very many causes. So, we calculate mortality based on current levels of sickness and other conditions, which take away life. At any one time we may have a given death rate in a community but when there is an insurgency like this one - and this is what happened in the Soroti region - there were many more deaths than we had before. This is what I meant when I said that mortality, which had doubled had now come to what we generally expect based on the current mortality rates as well as other criteria of the time.  

You are right that sometimes doctors stay in Lira. I have also seen it at a place called Alebutong when we visited the area with hon. Alex Okot. The doctor had even taken the ambulance to Lira and there were two nurses at the station, who decided to stay. The drugs were also stopping in Lira but we instructed that drugs should be taken to Alebutong so that those who are courageous enough - because there was even a UPDF unit nearby and patients were coming to the hospital yet there was a shortage of drugs. 

So, we said drugs should go to the area and those two ladies continued rendering services. But these are the kinds of things we would like to stop. When we investigated we realised that actually it was not absolutely necessary for the ambulance to be withdrawn and for the store to be locked, and for the drugs to stop in Lira. There were people who needed them and not everybody had run away from the unit. We discussed it with the district authorities and realised that the situation could have been averted if they had sat and addressed it. I guess that is what you are talking about; that it is also happening in other places elsewhere.

Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, I think we have talked about DDT at other forums and I know your stand on DDT. The Ministry of Health has resolved to use DDT within the guidelines, which have been set by the World Health Organisation and we believe – (Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: I am standing on a point of order on the strength of one very important point. This country is losing a lot of money in court cases. A statement like that could prompt a responsible citizen to go to court and eventually to have the Attorney-General to make sure that the offended person is paid. In light of the fact that Uganda is not an island, Uganda has specific laws especially bio-safety laws embedded in documents like the Environment Statute 1995, the Constitution of Uganda Article 245, the environmental provisions underlying No. 27 of the National Objectives of State Policy and the Protocol of Bio-Safety, which Uganda has just ratified; is it in order for the Minister to use this forum to make inflammatory statements short of mitigation in consonance with the existing law?  

We have laws protecting any measures, if the Minister endeavored to spray using DDT we would have to apply appropriate laws and measures in consonance with the existing law. But as I speak now, we do not have any legal ground capable of sanctioning the application of DDT. Is it in order for him to make inflammatory statements, which could cause environmental hazards -(Laughter)- and even cause the taxpayer to lose money through court awards similar to what has happened recently in the Constitutional Court? What is his legal basis for making such statements, which are inflammatory and environmentally unfriendly?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am aware of the skirmishes between hon. Lukyamuzi and the Minister of Health over this DDT, but I think we shall not conclude them on this Floor. So, I am not going to make a ruling on this one. Minister, please complete your answer; I want to move to another ministry.

DR KAMUGISHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just to wind up this particular point, Malaria is one of the biggest problems in this country, the biggest cause of poverty, the biggest drain on our budget and there is no evidence that DDT causes the toxic effect which -(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, this is a very sensitive point both in law and environment vis-à-vis the Constitution. Noting that the matter is contentious, it demands a lot of science in terms of complication –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, can you cite the law, which bans the use of DDT?
  
MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Specifically. Yes, I want the Act, which bans the use of DDT.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, Article 245 of the Constitution stops anybody from applying DDT at random because it would –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Read that Article. (Laughter).

MR LUKYAMUZI: “Parliament shall, by law, provide for measures intended to protect and preserve the environment from abuse, pollution and degradation.”
 
It is common knowledge that DDT is toxic – (Laughter)- and if you apply it at random, it will affect non-target areas. If it can affect non-target areas and you cannot guarantee against that, then where do you get the moral authority to subject those non-targets to the application of DDT?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, I think you must admit that you have no legal basis; there is no law. The Parliament has not yet made a law on this matter. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Why don’t you give me time to articulate the matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please, I have asked you about the Act you are relying on to say that the country banned the use of DDT. I want to know it from the laws of Uganda.

MR LUKYAMUZI: I am saying under Article 245 and the National Objectives of State Policy vis-à-vis the Environment Statute, 1995.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They are not justiciable.

3.42
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers’ Representative): Madam Speaker, I would like to proceed under rule 59 that my honourable colleague be no longer heard because he is persisting in arguing with the Speaker even after the hon. Speaker has ruled that this matter should be handled outside this House. (Applause). I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Minister, please finish.

MR KAMUGISHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I wind up -(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, the issue of using DDT in the eradication of mosquitoes is generating a lot of debate in this country, and also beyond the borders of this country. There are those like the Minister, who are for the use of DDT, and they give the merits of using DDT. There are also those, including some scientists, who believe DDT could be harmful to the population maybe not in the short-run but in the long run. Considering that this is now becoming a matter of contention, would it be procedurally right, Madam Speaker, to continue subjecting this House to a situation that the Minister is putting us in by declaring that whether we like it or not DDT shall be used without us considering in depth -(Interruption)

DR HERBERT LWANGA: Thank you honourable member for giving way. Madam Speaker, let us not play around with the lives of Ugandans. The issue of DDT is not a Ugandan issue, it is an international issue; it is an issue of the World Health Organization.  

As we talk now we are considering the millennium development goals. You cannot fight poverty - that is goal number one - without first fighting diseases and Malaria is a number one killer. It is our biggest problem, even bigger than the problem of Kony as we talk now. There is no country in the whole world, which has broken through poverty without fighting disease, without fighting Malaria in particular, and without using DDT.  

DDT is a chemical, which has been used in the United States of America, Europe, and South Africa; even right now they are using it. Even Latin America is reconsidering the use of DDT because malaria is re-emerging there. Other alternatives have been given, other alternatives have been used elsewhere, they have all failed. South Africa had abandoned the drug some time back. When its democratic government came into power it had abandoned DDT but right now they are using it; and members are busy eating fruits from South Africa, why are you not debating those? Let us give Ugandans a chance to make a breakthrough. Let us fight these diseases and we make a breakthrough through poverty and all diseases. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have through my office, provided you facilities for training in legislative drafting. You have failed to bring a Bill here under Article 245 –(Interjection)- yes, for or against. You have failed to bring a Bill here to activate that Article. [An. hon. Member: “And the financial Implications”] Forget the financial implications. You have an avenue in this Parliament to bring a Private Member’s Bill on this matter. Until you do that, I do not want to make a ruling on whether DDT is good or bad. So, it is up to you to bring a Private Member’s Bill here. I will give you space on the Order Paper. Wind up, Mr Minister.

MR AMURIAT: If I could be allowed to conclude, Madam Speaker, I had not concluded.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have decided, let us leave this debate of DDT. You bring a Bill here and we debate the matter in substance.

MR AMURIAT: But, Madam Speaker, the Government is intending to go ahead to use DDT. Are we being given sufficient time to discuss this further?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have said, bring a Bill. I have facilitated you in legislative drafting, to write Bills. There is legal counsel here. You go and bring the Bill here and we shall give you time on the Order Paper.  

DR KAMUGISHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will wind up this issue with just one statement to help everybody in this House. We must distinguish between two issues: indiscriminate use versus limited residual spraying. If we do not appreciate that difference then you will continue being confused.  

Hon. Wambuzi raised an issue on the Health Digest and I thank you for the compliments for that. 

Hon. Mallinga raised issues on what used to happen in Malaria control. I think our friend hon. Etonu replied him on the toxic effects of DDT; I will not repeat that. But the good Malaria programme, which hon. Malinga is referring to, collapsed during the Obote regime.

Tsetse flies; we have a programme to eradicate it both in the short-term and long-term. All that will be articulated in our health policy report.  

I mentioned about sanitary towels: these should help our women not to go around with menstrual bloodstains on their clothes. It is very unfortunate but I mentioned that we are going to address this issue.  

The programme on guinea worm is a Ugandan programme, whether it is funded by Carter or whoever, it is a Ugandan programme implemented by Ugandans and I think you should give credit where it is due, to both sides.  

Madam Speaker, I think, those are the main issues, which have been raised. We are open to discuss anything else that I have not highlighted. I thank you very much for listening.

3.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRANSPORT (Mr Andruale Awuzu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a response to the issues raised by the Select Committee of Parliament on the Humanitarian and Security Situation in Acholi, Teso and Lango sub-regions by the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications. I will begin with the general observations.

The Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications is in agreement with the report made by the Select Committee on Humanitarian and Security Situation in Acholi, Lango and Teso sub-region. In addition, the ministry is happy that the committee recognizes the importance of the Northern Roads Emergency Programme (NREP), commonly referred to us security roads, which the government put in place to deal with improvement of essential feeder roads in order to facilitate pacification and resettlement efforts in the region. In general, the observations and recommendations made by the committee are welcomed by the ministry and if implemented will help to improve the services provided by the concerned sectors in the affected sub-region.  

However, in the following report the ministry clarifies and provides more information on the specific issues raised in the report.  

The committee noted with the concern the severe financial constraints confronted by the ministry in implementing its mandate and that all the funds for security roads are obtained from Uganda Government. Our response is that it is true that NREP is severely financially constrained. In financial year 2003/2004 Shs 7.6 billion was budgeted for the programme, unfortunately at the beginning of the financial year the ministry was already irreversibly committed under the programme to pay for the on-going contracted works/outstanding bills, which spilled over from financial year 2002/2003. 

The spill over bills, which have all been paid in financial year 2003/2004 amount to Shs 5.042 billion. Yet in financial year 2003/2004 Uganda Peoples Defence Forces requested the ministry to construct a helicopter landing pad at Acholi-Pii and to urgently open very important roads namely Soroti-Obalanga-Aswa River, 80 km; Awere-Pajule via Bolo, 54 km; Atanga-Were 84 km; Agago-Aswa, 74 km; Lapuda-Omere-Odeke, 67 km; Omoti-Ogwang, 30 km; Bolo-Kwarawinya, 29 km; Olum-Omunyole, 20 km; and Aswa River-Ogwete-Acholi-Pii, 18 km costing Shs 18.421 billion. 

In addition during implementation of the programme some additional works were carried out which were not envisaged at the time of planning and costing of works to be carried out in the financial year 2003/2004. The total cost of these works, which involves the installation of two bridges crossing River Agago and extra widening bush clearing of a five meter width to both sides of Awere-Pajule, Atang-Awere and Lapuda-Omere-Odeke roads and the construction of a helicopter land pad at Acholi-Pii in Pader, is Shs 3.852 billion.  

Page 2, the summary of the financial position of the programme to-date is as indicated in table 1. The funds budgeted for and used in financial year 2003/2004 were Shs 7.6 billion, there was a supplementary of Shs 2.35 billion. This amounts to Shs 10.96.

The payments made to-date, including the entire spillover bills and part payment contracted out works, were for Shs 9.865 billion. Therefore, the balance of funds we expect is Shs 1.085 billion.

Outstanding certified payment, certified already for payment - this is work already done - is Shs 2.647 billion.

Value of outstanding contracted works, these are works, which have been signed although not yet done but they are now contracted and are legal and we cannot run away from them. The value of irreversible commitments and extra works is Shs 3.852 billion. Therefore the outstanding deficit by the end of the financial year, that was yesterday, is Shs 8.223 billion. The outstanding deficit to-date is Shs 8.223 billion yet in the financial year 2004/2005 only Shs 5.26 billion is budgeted for the programme. So you can see we already have a deficit. What we need is just to pay what we were supposed to do in the last financial year, the Shs 8 billion and yet only Shs 5.26 has been budgeted for this financial year, which started at midnight. 

Therefore, assuming no new projects are undertaken in the financial year it should not be becoming because we are already in need. This report was made in the last financial year, so you correct that accordingly. The shortfall in funding the problem amounts to Shs 2.963 billion yet during financial 2003/04 more roads were forwarded to the ministry by the UPDF requesting us to have them opened. The list of roads to be considered for implementation in financial year 2004/05 is more. If both funds are availed, the programmes are given in the report and I do not think I need to read that list; you can see it there. That is the list of roads on page 3, which the UPDF wants done; it is a total of 18 roads. 

The list is to be discussed with the UPDF in order to have the roads ranked according to priority. However, the final list of roads to be worked upon will be dictated by the available funds because the financial year 2004/05 is commencing when the shortfall is at Shs 2.963 billion as I had explained.  

The second point the committee raised was that there was a presidential directive to have funds that were meant for other programmes in affected districts and which could not be undertaken for security reasons to be used for security roads, and this had not been fully implemented. It is true that the Presidential directive was given to secure more funds for the Security Roads Programme in the month of June. The supplementary amounting to Shs 3.35 billion was passed for the programme, which has helped to offset some of the standing bills but the financial position of the programme is very bad with the financial year closing with a deficit or spill over amounting to Shs 8.223 billion. 

The committee noted that the service provider did not deem telephone coverage to affect the district profitable, and recommended that the Ministry should provide telephone coverage to affected sub-counties as a matter of priority. 

Our response is that the committee’s response is in line with the ministry’s or the government’s rural communications policy, which supports the development of communication infrastructure in rural Uganda. In addition the policy ensures that the people in rural areas have access to reasonable and affordable communications services. The objectives of these services are: 

One, universal access to voice telephones, which is the provision of at least one public telephone per 5,000 people at the sub-county level throughout the country in 154 unprotected sub-counties by the year 2005. I will explain what unprotected is all about later.  

Two, to promote information and communication technologies (ICT) use in Uganda by providing Internet access at every district headquarters through the implementation of Internet points of presence and promote ICT training to enable the creation of multipurpose tele-centres located at various institutions.  

Three, to ensure effective utilization of the Rural Communication Development Fund (RCDF) as a subsidy to rural communications development and provide innovative solutions to turn communications into profitable business. The RCDF areas are the 154 sub-counties in Uganda, which the Uganda Communications Commission and the Rural Communication Development Fund identified as not being served by the two national operators owing to their lack of commercial or technical viability. 

I need to inform you that when the two national operators were licensed, that is UTL and MTN, they said that there are some areas in Uganda where it is unprofitable for them to go and operate. So, the Government got over this by levying on all business done by the two companies, through the Uganda Communications Commission, a certain percentage of their profits, which money is used to take telephone services even though they are un-economical, to these 154 sub-counties so that the whole of Uganda is covered. 

The Uganda Communication Commission is starting tendering these areas for minor licenses in July this year, with transparent subsidies to encourage investment in rural telephony. A list of 154 RCDF sub-counties highlighting the population of each sub-county and the sub-counties covered under the rural telecommunications component is given in table 2. This is given by district and by sub-county. You can check for your district or constituency. These are the 154, which the national operators are not reaching and, therefore, we have to help them to get telephone services. So, if your sub-county is not here, it means you are on line naturally. That goes on up to page 8 and ends with Soroti, where we have Kasilo and Serere sub-counties.

RTS is the contractor, which has undertaken a comprehensive technical and market survey in Uganda to evaluate the potential of the RCDF areas and will exchange information and data with UTL and the telecommunications commission.

The committee observed that the provision of shelter to IDPs was not the mandate of the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications and it urged the ministry to explore a point of entry to IDPs’ shelter in a bid to save some of the camps from the perpetual fires and leaking roofs. The ministry will explore this proposal. However, implementation will require Government providing special funds for the project.

The committee noted that Apac District administration has been diverting money, which was given for feeder roads works, and the Ministry has put steps in place to make sure that the district does not misuse Government money, which is meant for feeder roads.

Finally, the committee recommended that the Ministry of Finance should expedite the President’s directive to avail un-utilized funds to the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications for the purpose of opening up of security roads. The ministry is in agreement with this recommendation and if put in place, more tactical roads will open, which will further in facilitation and resettlement efforts in the region. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR AMURIAT: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and the honourable minister for that response to the report. I have mainly two issues that I would like to raise. 

One is related to communication. Those of us who were in the area of insurgency when Kony moved on to the North eastern parts of the country realized that a mobile phone was very handy in passing or sharing information with various people who were in charge of security. Katakwi recently was provided with a mast, unfortunately it is unable to serve certain parts of the district that were meant to benefit from it. This has raised concern to the extent that even the military have asked us, Members of Parliament, to mention this to the ministry. 

Over the weekend, a few of us from Parliament had the opportunity to go to Orungo and I did have a chat with the division commander who said, “You know, the frontier between Teso and Lango is not adequately covered”. If it were covered by boosting the mast in Katakwi, it would help in their military operations.  

Secondly, the Minister has spoken about security roads. During my private visit to the municipalities of Gulu, Lira and Soroti, I realized that owing to military activity and movement of heavy military equipment, the bitumen pavements in these municipalities are falling apart. It is unfortunate that these heavy tanks were allowed to move along those flexible pavements. What is the ministry considering to do in helping the authorities in these municipalities to fix their roads? Madam Speaker, you realize how expensive it could be for the municipalities to even attempt to repair this damage caused by stress or distress from the heavy military equipment. Thank you.

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I understand that we have been able to do some roads within the territorial boundaries of some of our neighbors in the name of security roads. We are also aware that many of our sub-counties have many roads, which are practically impassable. I want clarification from the honourable minister whether we have bi-lateral arrangements with these neighboring countries, who have benefited from construction of roads within their territories, for reimbursement in future so that we can bring these goods home and do work within our sub-counties where roads are also in dire need of repair? I thank you.

REV. SSEMPANGI: Madam Speaker, I am concerned about the human factor of these security roads. How secure are these roads for the people who are working there? Has it been smooth work, and has there been any incidences of death or anything? How secure are the people who are working on these roads?

MR ANGIRO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am concerned about how voice telephone has been considered in the 154 sub-counties. In fact, Erute County has not appeared on this list and yet in Erute County North we have a total population of 88,664 people and with the current IDPs, excluding the people of Erute North themselves, they are about 102,569. The honourable minister said this one has covered almost all the country to help in communication. How we are going to communicate with our neighbours and the international community when we are excluded completely from the programme? Can he clarify to me so that I go and inform my people about it? Thank you.

MR AWUZU: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable members who have raised the questions. 

First, hon. Amuriat, if you look at the list for Katakwi, which is on page 6, under this programme we are going to be dealing with Usuk, Amuria and Kapelebyong. But any other areas, which are not among these three sub-counties, means that eventually both MTN and CELTEL are obliged to put a network there - even CELTEL because it is a matter of competition. So, the bigger your network is the more people you will net. And I should say that actually when you raise your complaints to our ministry and so many Members of Parliament have done so, we have asked these people to go and do the needful. So if you have problems, you come to us. We shall go to them and it means they are putting out bigger nets to catch more people.

I am sorry about the pavements falling apart in these municipalities. Under normal circumstances tanks would be moved on tank carriers but then when you have an emergency as you know when we were attacked in Teso region, perhaps we have a limited number of tank carriers and yet we need to move tanks very fast. Therefore, we cannot wait for the tank carriers because if your house is burning you must do something very quickly to put out the fire. But on the other hand I must say that we shall be very willing to assist because we have a programme every financial year where the ministry does tarmacking of urban roads, one in each region in every financial year. So we shall definitely be willing to spend Shs 200 million in every urban area, every financial year. So you can take that message to your people.

Hon. Arumadri, you are asking whether the roads which we are doing in neighbouring countries and in fact specifically the Sudan - we should mention it, we should not be afraid of mentioning it because we are there legally - we have an agreement. We are doing these roads for our benefit. It is not for the benefit of the Sudan, although these roads are being done in the Sudan. It helps our soldiers to move quickly. I am sure you know  -(Interruption)

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Speaker, when we met His Excellency the President some months ago in Otuke County, we discussed the problems of these roads. We also discussed the problems of the money, which was being returned here because it could not be used for security reasons and we agreed with His Excellency the President that this money should be used to carry out other activities like opening roads in these areas, which are affected. 

I want to get clarification from the minister on the money, which is being used for these roads in the Sudan and elsewhere. Is it coming from another source or is the money being returned from those areas affected the one that was supposed to be used for the roads in those areas? I think there is a bit of concern there. I thank you.

MR AWUZU: Thank you for that clarification. I can tell you with full confidence that the money, which is being used in the Sudan, is not money from the districts. It is money from the central government, because the expenditure of this money that is supposed to have been returned is not actually by the central government. What happens is that the districts or the Army identifies the roads, which are to be done in each district. Then this money is released to the LC V chairman of that district. We the central government, do not touch that money.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you honourable member for giving way. Actually Apac District has received about Shs 50 million from this very money. When we were there with His Excellency the President at the fundraising, you remember those of you who were present that this issue was raised. You were demanding for Shs 100 million because it was supposed to be Shs 150 million and he instructed the Ministry of Finance to make sure that this balance of Shs 100 million is forwarded to the local governments of Apac district. The money that is making roads in Southern Sudan, as the minister has said, does not come from the district money.  

The second information I want to give is that these roads that are made in Southern Sudan, although we are seeing them as roads to assist UPDF, that is an immediate arrangement. After the establishment of peace, the people of Uganda especially from Northern Uganda are really going to benefit because they will be the ones to take food there. As far as I know - yes, we have to look beyond. As far as I know Northern Uganda is going to be the food basket of Southern Sudan and we are encouraging our people in Northern Uganda and we shall assist them as Government to make sure that they produce food enough for themselves, but also for commercial purposes. I thank you.

MR AWUZU: Thank you, hon. Nankabirwa, for giving that information. I want to repeat this for emphasis. This money, which was returned from the districts, is spent through the respective districts; it is not spent by the central government. It is sent to the local government, the work is done and then the money is disbursed to the contractor by the local government. 

I would like to confirm hon. Nankabirwa’s story about people who will benefit when this war ends. Already from the West Nile region there are so many engineers, contractors and so on from Uganda here who are actually already working in Sudan, building roads and so on. So, it is not only on the side of food, it is actually on many fronts that Ugandans are going to benefit when peace comes to the Southern Sudan.

About hon. Arumadri’s question, he is very much aware that in his constituency during the dry season most of the huts in that area are in danger because they are exposed to bush fire. You also know very well that when there is a bush fire coming from somewhere you do not wait at your home and fight it, but you go and make a fire line some distance away from your home and make sure that this fire does not jump and come to burn your house. This is exactly what the Government is doing. 

MR ARUMADRI: Madam Speaker, I want further clarification on this. We experienced the five-year Luweero Triangle war here and we never heard about these security roads. This is more or less the same kind of war. If you are building a road on the other side, we shall use it but Kony is also free to use it. Where do you draw the line?

MR ANDRUALE AWUZU: Kony is free to use that road but Kony has no tanks or armoured vehicles. So, these roads will be of no value to him. In fact for him he prefers not to use the road, he prefers to go in the bush. These roads are valuable to our forces because we need to move very fast and block the way for Kony. So, these roads are of no value to him; he needs to move through the bush.  

Hon. Ssempangi, that is a very good question. When we were discussing this report in the Prime Minister’s office the same issue was raised. Although the UPDF guards all our units, whether it is the Ministry of Works unit or contractors who are working on roads in these areas, we have had a few incidents where some contractors have lost one or two people, or got injured. The UPDF has done a good job because they have been able to guard the equipment and the personnel and we have had very few cases of injuries. The UPDF must be commended for that.

Madam Speaker, I was being distracted left and right, I did not get -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was one question from hon. Angiro. 

MR AWUZU: I am sorry I did not get it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Angiro said he has looked at the list of the areas, which you are going to supply with communication, and Erute does not feature. So, he wants to know why Erute does not feature on your list.

MR AWUZU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If you do not feature on this list, it means that your sub-county is profitable and therefore you will be covered normally. Thank you.

MR OCULA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I am concerned about the list of roads. I am suspecting that No. 12 and No. 13 on page 3 should have been names of my constituency. No. 12 is reading Ogwang-Barlegi- Aweri. I suspect it should be Agweng-Baralegi-Adwari road. That is a correction. You put it right. No.13 is reading Amoro Headquarters and Malaba Market in Gulu. I think it should be Aromo Headquarters. Thank you.

MR ALONGA: Madam Speaker, I am not yet convinced with the reason given by the minister. I have seen all the neighbouring areas of Moyo, Adjumani, Arua, Maracha, but there is no mention of a place like Koboko, Yumbe and yet there are important roads going to Sudan. At one time when the enemies attacked us - those are the Sudanese Forces - they crossed via Koboko, entered through Midigo back to Sudan. These roads are so important that they should have appeared as security roads. I just wanted to get a clarification, what rationale was used to identify these security roads? Thank you.

MR LOLEM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am also seeking a clarification from the Minister. I am one of the beneficiaries because I can see my sub-counties on the list. The minister should clarify whether he has merged my constituency into Pian County because I do not see the name of my county.  

MR AWUZU: Thank you for the questions. I have noted the errors and my engineer is even here, I am sure he has taken note. Hon. Alonga, when they are talking about Northern Uganda West Nile is excluded. Therefore, you cannot complain because we were not dealing with the districts of West Nile.  

In the last question the honourable member did not mention the constituency he is complaining about and, therefore, I am not able to answer that question. But all these fall under the same problem. If I have not mentioned your constituency or a sub-county in this paper, it means you will be covered in the normal process. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.28
THE MINISTER FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Zoe Bakoko): Madam Speaker and hon. Members for Parliament, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development interacted with the select committee and these are the issues, which we highlighted and picked from the report:

1. Engendering services, which are being provided to internally displaced persons.

2. Rehabilitation and re-integration of children.

3. Youth and Women Councils.

4. Undue publicity of returned children.

5. Psychosocial Support Programmes, which have been debated a lot in the House.

6. Skills’ training for youth in internally displaced camps.

7. Tabling of the Orphans and Vulnerable Children’s Policy.

8. Community based rehabilitative care.

9. Status of functional literacy in the internally displaced camps and then general reactions.

The Select Committee on the Security and Humanitarian Situation in the Acholi, Teso and Lango Sub-regions met with met with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, among other ministries, on the issue of internally displaced persons. The committee came up with a report highlighting a number of issues and now we want to respond to the issues that have direct relevance to our mandate. These areas of concern included the following.

Engendering services provided to IDPs, the committee raised the concern that relief items are not engendered. In the process of engendering sectoral programmes our ministry has focused on training central government staff, technical staff and political leaders at local government level to enhance their capacity in gender analysis skills to enable them adequately identify gender and women concerns in their work and to put in place actions to address them. 

We have also trained staff at the district level, especially community development officers, district probation and welfare officers and district gender officers in identification of gender issues and using the right approach in service delivery. We have also at the district level given support to district programmes where we identify gender and women concerns and interventions to address these problems.  

The ministry has also worked very closely with the civil society, UN agencies and other humanitarian agencies like UNICEF, World Vision, and Norwegian Refugee Council to engender programme interventions. Consequently, the provisions of basic commodities and services in IDPs is engendered. You have heard and you might have seen also in the camps that food, blankets and other household equipment are given as priority to the women in recognition of their gender roles at the household level. 

With the support from the United Nations Capital Development Fund we have developed guidelines for mainstreaming gender issues and women concerns in the local government programmes. In these guidelines a section of addressing women concerns in conflict situations, including IDPs, has been clearly articulated so that they can guide the local government and other humanitarian agencies in addressing very specific women’s concerns.

The second issue is rehabilitation and reintegration of children. The committee raised the issue of documentation of the number of children rehabilitated and re-integrated. I want to say here that the armed conflict in this region has been characterized by systematic abductions of both adults and children and up to now it has not been established how many people have been abducted and returned. We estimate that up to about 14,000 children have been so far abducted and about 8,000 have managed to escape, and 6,000 are still unaccounted for.  

We also estimate that between June 2002 and April 2004, 9,660 children were rescued and placed in various trauma centres in Northern Uganda. The children who are usually received are placed in trauma centres for counselling, rehabilitation and eventual re-integration into their communities. This is a collaborating effort between the central government agencies, the UN agencies and the local government, which includes the probation and welfare officers and the civil society organizations that are working in those areas looking after children in collaboration with UNICEF and district authorities. 

There is a shelter for children commuters in Gulu; there is education in Kitgum District; there is water and sanitation in Pader, there is provision of non-food basic items in Katakwi, Soroti and Kaberamaido, training of community-based resource persons in 20 out 28 sub-counties in Lira District and HIV/AIDS awareness in 6 out 22 sub-counties in Apac.  

All these children have been re-integrated within their communities. However, it has not been easy to ascertain the number still in the communities because of the continuous displacement and possible targeting for re-abduction. What happens is that when these children are brought back and you integrate them, the chances that they will be re-abducted are very high. Therefore, these children are very insecure within their communities because the LRA can sneak in and take them.  

The ministry together with the United Nations Children’s Education Fund has established district level abduction registration committees, which have become in some areas dysfunctional because of the prevailing situation and they are now being revamped with in the camps.

For the youths and women councils, on the issue of the guidelines to facilitate operations of the women and youth councils in the affected areas, the national youth and women councils have developed guidelines to guide the operations of women and youth councils. However, these guidelines are not specific to one particular region. They are general guidelines for all districts including the war-affected areas. It is also important to note that the elections of the youth and women councils took place effectively even in those war-affected areas and the guidelines are derived from the National Youth and Women’s Council. With the recent amendment of these laws and election of the new executive, these guidelines are being reviewed to accommodate the new changes and challenges in the war affected areas.

The committee raised the concern that women and youth councils were not functioning and, therefore, women participation was not mainstreamed into decision-making. The structures of these councils are formed on the basis of elections for a specific term of office at the village, parish and sub-county up to the district level. These leaders are supposed to participate in decision making in their areas of jurisdiction. 

During times of war it is possible that the leadership dispersed to various places leaving behind a leadership vacuum. What has happened is that if you went to camps you would find most of the leaders are concentrated in Gulu town or in Kitgum town; they have moved away from the areas where they were elected. The operation of these councils in the disturbed areas particularly the camps is, therefore, a big challenge. However, women are being trained as community-based resource persons and volunteer councilors as well as child care takers. 

The concern of undue publicity given to returnee children became an issue of concern in 2002. The New Vision paper carried a photo of three formerly abducted children disclosing their names and identities. Again in the same year another headline in the New Vision, Saturday, August 2002, carried a headline, “Museveni adopts ex-LRA child”, the name of this child was disclosed, which is against ethics in a war situation. I addressed members of the print and electronic media over this concern and this practice has since ceased. The minister periodically conducts sensitisation sessions of the media on observation of children’s rights. I also remember that in consultation with the Rt hon. Deputy Speaker, we had to discuss the issue of women being portrayed in the media as Kony’s wives or Kony’s sisters. So, we felt that it was not safe and right to expose these people just because of the relationship they had with the LRA leader.  

Psychosocial support programmes. The committee was concerned about the absence of trauma centres and psychosocial support programmes in the region. In 1997, the ministry together with development partners formed a national core team for psychosocial support programmes. The core team facilitates co-ordination and technical assistance to psychosocial interventions. The partners include UNICEF, International Services Volunteers Association (AVSI), Save the Children (Denmark), Save the Children (Norway), Trans-Cultural Psychosocial Organisation (TPO), Uganda Catholic Social Training Centre, World Vision and several other NGOs. But all these NGOs are co-ordinated under the national core team, which is co-ordinated in the ministry. These organisations and teams have mounted an intensive psychosocial programme in the children’s centres and communities.  

We have a harmonized trainer’s guide, which we developed in the ministry in 2000 and different actors who operate in those war areas use it. This guide is being reviewed to include counselling trauma caused by HIV/AIDS, displacement, sexual molestation and multiple vulnerabilities of individuals and children. The trainer’s guide is used to train household heads, technical staff of all social services like teachers, health workers, extension workers, volunteers, NGOs, CBOs and FBO staff. Furthermore, the psychosocial team has developed guidelines on psychosocial re-integration and recovery for formerly abducted children.  

The national core team supported districts and NGOs to establish trauma centres. Many of the trauma centres, which are there in the region, are actually affiliated to our ministry and we normally work very closely with them. Some of these centres are Gusco, Kicwa, World Vision Centres and the Rochelle Centre. The national core team trained probation and welfare officers, community development assistants and staff from the NGOs who in turn have trained volunteer community counsellors to handle cases of trauma.

In collaboration with the former Institute of Teacher Education, Kyambogo, the ministry trained all primary school teachers in Northern Uganda in psychosocial handling of children. However, the village counsellors and the probationary welfare officers are overwhelmed by the situation in the camps. You should realise that this is a problem, which has been there for some time. Therefore, it is a problem that has to be dealt with systematically. We have started and we are moving forward; we will be able to handle it.  

The ministry also recognises that among others, armed conflict has propelled the worst forms of child labour through abduction and forced labour.  In this regard, the minister – that is myself - together with my colleague in the Ministry of Education sourced US $3,000,000 from the United States Department for Labour for a project called “Opportunities for Reducing Adolescent and Child Labour through Education.” These funds are being expended within the region, especially in Pader and Kitgum. This three-year initiative was launched on 4 March 2004 to ensure empowerment of former child soldiers and children at risk of exploitation through material support, transitional and non-formal education programmes and family-based poverty reduction strategies in the districts of Pader and Kitgum. This project is implemented in collaboration with the International Rescue Committee and seeks to contribute to the reduction and elimination of the worst forms of child labour in Northern Uganda.  

The project specifically targets 3,500 children to be enrolled in school, 400 children to be enrolled in post-primary formal education, 550 to be enrolled in non-formal vocational educational programmes and 400 to be enrolled in alternative education as a transition into formal, school and or vocational education.  

With a multi-sectoral approach, the project has the following components: awareness creation of communities, parents, teachers and the children on the problems of child labour, the importance of education and their roles in bringing about change, enrolment of vulnerable children in non-formal and formal education programmes, training of teachers in the target districts, provision of learning and teaching materials and provision of post-primary education.  

At the same time the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has just concluded a study on the interplay between child labour and armed conflict in collaboration with the International Labour Organisation programme on the elimination of child labour. Gulu and Masindi are among some of the districts that were covered by the research.  The findings of the above study will be used to design action-oriented programmes for the children, their families, guardians and their respective districts. 

Skills’ training for youths in IDP camps, the ministry implements a programme for children and youths in Arua, Gulu, Nebbi and twelve other districts in the country. There is also a programme for enhancing adolescent reproductive health, which targets the districts of Moyo, Lira, Gulu, Apac, Nebbi, Moroto and the Northern region. Through these programmes youth groups have been trained in income-generating activities, basic planning, HIV/AIDS awareness and self-esteem skills and also provide recreational facilities like sports equipment.  

In addition, the programme supports SOS children villages in Gulu by training the trainers who continue to work with the youths. We have a mobile youths truck, which goes to the North to show educative films on IGAs, HIV/AIDS and reproductive health. It also targets the night commuters.  

From January to June, the Ministry trained 45 out-of-school youth from Northern Uganda in various vocational skills such as tailoring and carpentry in Ntawo Youth Training Centre in Mukono District. We provided start-up kits, which include sewing machines, materials and basic carpentry tools, to the participants. We are now developing teaching materials for youths in IDPs. I have an appendix for detailed recent activities.

The orphans and other vulnerable children’s policy is complete and Cabinet will soon approve it.  

Community-based rehabilitation. The committee raised an issue that the aged, disabled and maimed live in deplorable housing conditions. The ministry promotes community-based rehabilitation care and uses a multi-sectoral approach. A national CBR steering committee developed a national CBR strategic investment plan and the CBR guidelines, which guide the implementation of CBR activities in the country including the districts, which are in conflict areas.  

The ministry in collaboration with Uganda Society for the Disabled Children (USDC), implements CBR in Northern Uganda currently covering districts of Lira, Apac, Arua, Yumbe, Adjumani, Moyo and Nebbi. Activities focused on raising awareness on disability issues through radio programmes, occasional workshops and posters; training government staff, CBR volunteers and the parents of these children who are disabled on how to prevent and manage disabilities. We also provide the community with education and vocational training and USDC has rehabilitated Ogur Rehabilitation Centre in Lira. We have Ocoko in Arua for provision of skills to Persons with Disabilities (PWDs). In Lira, particularly USDC is providing medical service to children with disabilities. In other internally displaced persons’ camps they have started identifying and registering for referrals for appropriate services.  

Under decentralization the ministry provides services through district rehabilitation officers. These people offer psychosocial support to people with disabilities and the elderly in the districts. However, these officers are constrained, as there is no conditional grant for disability and elderly programmes.

Status of functional literacy in internally displaced persons’ camps. The committee observed that the functional adult literacy programme was not being conducted in some camps. In allocating the functional adult literacy conditional grant to districts, insecurity is one of the criteria for allocating funds. Consequently, the districts in Northern Uganda are allocated on average 30 million each year compared to other districts, which get between seven to 20 million. These funds are used for training of instructors, sensitisation of leaders, purchase of materials like chalk and chalkboards and district monitoring and supervision of adult classes.  

Early this year the ministry instructed the districts to open literacy centres in camps and to integrate social skills training in functional adult literacy classes. As a result, districts such as Apac have four functional adult literacy classes and Kitgum has 51 classes in camps. Some of the big classes are in Layam Camp, Lamit and in Akwang Camp there is a literacy centre known as Pagimo Functional Adult Literacy Class. Gulu has 72 classes; Gulu has already integrated psychosocial issues into functional literacy. 

The functional adult literacy instructors have been supported with bicycles as an incentive and the process of establishing these classes in the camps is continuing.

Finally, these are the general reactions. It is important to note that the committee appreciated the vital role played by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development’s district based staff such as probation and welfare officers, community development officers and assistants.  This is a result of technical support from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. However, the work in the camps is challenging, leading to overload of the probation officers. To ease this problem the Ministry is training volunteer staff from other sectors, NGOs and CBOs to handle psychosocial counselling at the community level.  

To implement the public-private sector partnership principle of Government, the ministry co-ordinates the various interventions of civil society organizations and humanitarian agencies in IDP camps. These organizations include: ALFC, Save the Children Alliance, GUSCO, TPO and others.  

The ministry has developed the social development sector investment plan and among other priority programmes in the plan interventions for people affected by war are articulated under the programme for support to people in difficult circumstances.  

Our plan also proposes specific targeting of people in different circumstances such as widows and widowers, orphans, child-headed households, internally displaced persons, persons with disabilities and the elderly, for social protection. Through these interventions communities will be supported to avert risk and manage livelihood shocks.  

It is also important to note that our role in other programmes like supporting education, supporting the disaster preparedness ministry, supporting the health sector is that we mobilize the communities and when we mobilize the communities, our role is to ensure that they can demand for these services and seek for accountability from the leaders. This is why many of them ask you their representatives why they do not get some of these services. In that same vein my ministry is also going to mobilise for the distribution of the sanitary towels and we have yet to agree together with the leaders and the people at the camps on the mode and the type of pads that have got to be distributed to the camps. The Ministry of Health is going to be sourcing the sanitary pads and then our role will be distribution and mobilization.  

Finally, through a recent trip to the Commonwealth, we have as a Ministry reached an agreement with the Commonwealth team coming to Uganda this month and next month so that they would be doing a needs assessment of what is happening in the camps. Already their sector on conflict resolution is allocated some money, which is going to come through our ministry to GUSCO so that it can help in the psychosocial support to some of these children as an initial phase. After that we hope that several programmes can be opened. I thank you for listening to me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Queries to the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development? 

4.28
DR STEPHEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have to say I am impressed by the presentation of the honourable minister on one item and that is the supply of sanitary pads. I was extremely depressed when we visited three camps in the Speaker’s group, which went to these camps to obviously see that some of these ladies were walking around with their clothes stained with menstrual blood. I think that is a good step forward.

However, what the honourable minister has not specifically touched on satisfactorily is the fact of rehabilitation. The Minister is a psychiatrist and when we look at people in those camps or in a similar situation anywhere or people who have been in combat, the most important thing is subsequent rehabilitation. In the opinion of the Minister is the rehabilitation sufficient to make those people who have been rescued from the combat area to come back and function as normal people? 
 
Secondly, those ladies and gentlemen and children, who are staying in those camps, is there enough psychological counselling to make them function normally after they leave those camps?  

Thirdly, I would like to touch on the physical activities like games and education to keep the people busy. There was an element of developing alcoholism in most of the camps we visited. Alcoholism usually develops as a result of idleness, especially for the young people. Have you provided enough in form of games? I know you mentioned about educational facilities but are these emphasized? In your opinion are they being provided in sufficient degrees to avoid development of alcoholism? Alcoholism is a genuine danger in situations like this. Are there steps being taken to avoid younger people from becoming alcoholics in these camps? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.59
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Northern): Thank you, Madam speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development for her elaborate explanation of what the Ministry is doing in the war-ravaged Northern region. I would like to appreciate the programmes she has for women and youth, which are taking off. They seem to be very impressive and the people are benefiting from them, especially the psychosocial programme, which helps to reduce the number of mentally ill people. Otherwise, without psychosocial programmes old people in the North would be mad. I thank you.  

The Minister has also mentioned the community-based programme, which is being conducted by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and USDC. It is still in the pipeline because the investment plan has not yet been activated to benefit the people.  

Then for USDC, she has mentioned the areas where USDC is working. In the area of Gulu, Pader and Kitgum, where the people who are displaced are living, USDC is not working there. That means those disabled persons are not catered for.  

The Minister has mentioned that there is identification of people with disabilities in the camps. For sure after 18 years are you still identifying the disabled people in the camps? First of all, who is identifying those disabled persons and what programmes do you have in plan, and when will they take place because from my assessment there is no programme for persons with disabilities in the protected camps? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.01
MR ANANG-ODUR (Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the minister for this elaborate report in response to the Alaso report. But I have got a problem with paragraph no. 2 on page one, “Rehabilitation and re-integration of children.” When I was in primary school, I used to be good at arithmetic. The figures, which are described at the bottom of this page say, it is estimated that up to 14,000 children have so far been abducted with about 8,000 managing to escape and about 6,000 unaccounted for. It is estimated that between June 2002 and April 2004, 9,600 children were rescued and placed in various trauma centres in Northern Uganda.  

Madam Speaker, what I do not follow is the first sentence. It means the total number of children who were abducted comes to 14,000. If that was so, are we now saying that 6,000 are not accounted for and 9,600 were rescued? If I add the two up it comes to 15,660. Then if you add the 8,000 who managed to escape and came back, it comes to 23,660. I think, Madam Speaker, we need some explanation. 

However, my worry, which I would wish to note here is that these unaccounted for children, the 6,000, we have been raising a lot of concern about children who get abducted and trained to become soldiers involuntarily and when they come back they become the casualties we normally report to this House. To me, Madam Speaker, this is a serious matter of concern. We have been asking the Government and the Army in particular to really look very closely at how they operate to save this situation. We have said these children get abducted because government has failed in the first instance to protect them.  This is a very serious matter.

Madam Speaker, I just want to note on page 2, the last paragraph, “The Committee raised concern that women and youth councils were not functioning in these camps.” It is true. I have just come from a tour of a constituency and there are a lot of complaints that youth and women councils are not being facilitated. Certainly if in the other undisturbed districts are not being facilitated, the situation must be worse in the disturbed areas.  

There is also the issue of the psychosocial support programmes, which is on page 3, and the minister has given an elaborate description of what is on the ground. I just want to make one small correction. The last paragraph, the first word on the third line, the name is “Rakele” camp. I notice it is wrongly spelt. We have centres for children but, Madam Speaker, we have in Lango a large number of adults who were abducted and they have come back, they are traumatized, others were attacked in camps require the same sort of services. I do not know whether the minister might have forgotten to tell us where these people can go. I shall be very glad if she let’s me know, because certainly they need the services very urgently.

Madam Speaker, we always appear to be complaining too much but we have a lot of displaced persons in Apac District. In my district we have a camp but it is not as big as the other camps. However, if you look at the activities, which the minister has reported about in Annex 1, I do not see programmes for children or people who are displaced but are staying with relatives. There are no services for these people, including their children. I do not know whether the minister has got any ideas as to how she can handle this particular situation. I thank you very much.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, as a matter of emphasis, hon. Anang-Odur has raised the issue of the figures and I am also very uncomfortable with the issue of the figures. If you look at these figures here, there is need for them to be reconciled. First of all, what was given as the estimated number of abducted children was between 20,000 and 25,000. The committee has given 14,000 and the minister has given the estimated number of abducted children as 14,000 children. But then if you look at the period she has given, between June 2002 and April 2004, there is a total of 9,660 children. This means within one and a half years that is the number of children who were abducted. But if you stretch from 1990 to 2002, does it mean they were only 5,340? I need some clarification on this issue of the figures. Thank you.

MR LOLEM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is on paragraph 9, page 6, the status for adult literacy. Madam –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which paragraph, Mr Lolem? 

MR LOLEM: Paragraph 9 page 6, the status for adult literacy. This activity also takes place in Karamoja. In Karamoja there are so many tribes. Mine is only to convey to the minister that the instruction materials they are using in Karamoja - Nakapiripirit District especially has two tribes, the Karimojongs and the Pokots. So, you find the instructors having a difficult time translating the Karimojong language to the learners because these are the learners who have not gone to school. For example, I am come from Karamoja region but I do not understand Karimojong. So, that is the problem of the instructors and the learners in Upe County are facing. Thank you very much.

5.11
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Zoe Bakoko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the honourable members for raising these issues. Hon. Mallinga said the only sensible or the most important thing, which was discussed in my report, was the issue of the sanitary pads. I want to thank him for that. A few days ago I was telling colleagues that as a ministry we will demonstrate to you how these pads are applied and we hope you will join us when we are distributing them.  

The second question he brought was a very important one and that is the one on alcoholism. Honourable colleagues, I do agree with hon. Mallinga on the issue of alcoholism. That is why in my report I brought out the issue of youth and income generating activities. 

About the youth being engaged in sports, I also wish to inform you that we supplied footballs to the youth. We want to reduce idleness in the camps so that these people can be engaged in some useful activities and avoid alcoholism. The honourable member asked whether these things are sufficient. Definitely, they are not sufficient but we are moving forward and we hope that eventually we can reach sufficiency.

Hon. Baba Diri wants to know what we are doing in the camps. I know hon. Baba Diri is aware that the ministry’s major programme on CBR was in Tororo District. But we have started on the – she is asking why for 18 years we have not done an identification in the North? My sister, it is not that we have not done identification. One has to identify resources to be able to reach out. We have not marginalized the people with disabilities. I think people with disabilities have moved very far and I know you as a strong representative of those people from Northern Uganda you have been ably articulating their issues and we are going to have to work very closely together so that we address their problems.

Hon. Anang-Odur raised the issue of these figures. I want to insist those are the figures. If you add 6,000 to 8,000 it comes to 14,000. Maybe what I did not say was that there is an estimate of 8,000 who had managed to escape and 6,000 who are still unaccounted for; 6 plus 8 is 14. I also told you that between June 2002 and April 2004, we have documented 9,660 children as being rescued and placed in various trauma centres. What happens is that the same child passes through the trauma centre more than two to three times and we still record them again. So, I hope you understand.

He also raised the issue of facilitation on the youth and women councils. The youth and women councils all over the country have been raising the issue of facilitation, and this Parliament has also been debating that every year when we are talking about the budget. I am happy to tell members that Shs 1 billion each has been budgeted for the women, youth and the disability councils. We have already written to the districts that the women councils have to open accounts. We are going to launch this officially and invite the women Members of Parliament. It will be the same thing for the youth and also the people with disabilities. 

And we do not want people to mix up the fact that the districts want this money to go to the districts. This money has to go to the account of the women council, the account of the youth council and the account of people with disabilities council. Nobody is to tamper with it and we are going to allocate it per sub-county. So, it is a conditional grant and nobody is going to tamper with that money. The one at the district will be purely for supervision and for the office at the district level.  

My brother also said that we have centres for children but we are not catering for the adults. I think one of the things is, when we look at priorities, these children are supposed to be the generation who will take over from us and if we destroy our children today, 20 years down the road, we can be sure that we cannot have a generation who would take over from us. So, it is very critical that we focus our meagre resources on the children and the youth. At the same time when the adults also come, we take them through a process where they are also counselled.

My brother said how do you cater for those people who are living with relatives? I take note of it. I will find out how they are doing that, whether they are going for the normal services within the area where they are situated or not. And I also reported here that we have the Commonwealth and ILO coming to support us. I hope some of these can be covered in the programmes, which will be coming soon.

Hon. Okupa, I think I have answered your question.  I said these figures are correct and I am not about to change them. Hon. Lolem has talked about the language. I appreciate what you are talking about. Communication is very critical and I take note of it. I will follow that up with my ministry. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Minister for Gender.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Speaker, I am sorry. I am feeling very uncomfortable - not on the issues we have just raised. The temperature is becoming a concern to me in particular, I do not know whether I should go out because - others might be very comfortable but certainly I cannot –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you feeling very cold?

MR ANANG-ODUR: Are there blankets so that –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not know what to do. When it was very hot you said I should provide cooling facilities. Now I have provided them, but maybe we should just regulate it. We are going to make it a little bit warmer, hon. Anang-Odur.

5.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Ministry of Education has distributed copies and I may have to summarize a few paragraphs here and there, assuming that the members will be able to follow. I am presenting the response to the report of the Select Committee on the Humanitarian and Security Situation in Acholi, Lango and Teso sub-regions. These are general observations first. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports, Madam Speaker, appreciates the report made by the committee on the subject, and we concur with the committee’s observation on the wide extent of the insurgency in terms of duration and area. Indeed some of the districts affected have also themselves been hosting persons from other districts thus compounding the situation. The ministry further concurs with the committee on the far-reaching and destructive effect of the insurgency on education resulting into loss and destruction of books, desks and other services in North and Eastern Uganda in the short and long term. 

Madam Speaker, the unique characteristics of the conflict, whereby children are particularly being targeted and being used to kill and maim other children and adults, are particularly disturbing to the Ministry of Education. It is also true that the dropout rate and absenteeism are very high. The ministry appreciates that the report recognizes that the solution to the problem in the North and Eastern Uganda requires the collective effort of several stakeholders and sectors, including Education.

As you have already listened to other reports, you have appreciated that we are working with other sectors and other departments to provide services to the children in the North. The Ministry of Health’s report and that of Gender have been very specific on this collaboration. The ministry further concurs with the observations made by the committee about inadequate food, challenging school sanitation and challenges in the management of sanitary needs of adolescent girls, who happen to be in schools, inadequate water supply as well as the need for more learning centres. 

We have, however, as a sector and a ministry, taken a few steps as we indicated in paragraph 2; we have taken some administrative steps. It is to be noted that during the past three years the Ministry of Education and Sports took the following administrative steps to lay the foundation for more focused action in rendering educational services in the North and Northeast.

We have established a desk at the Ministry of Education trying to focus our intervention and collect all the data, which is required for the specific intervention.

We are co-ordinating activities and meetings between ministries and NGOs because, as you would see from the annex, they are interacting with over 20 NGOs. So, we are co-ordinating those meeting and programmes to see how best we can render the services.

On page 2, we supported and nurtured a regional standing committee or forum on education. This includes district inspectors of schools and NGOs in the affected districts, established for the purpose of compiling information, co-ordinating and making recommendations for appropriate interventions. This committee has produced reports on the status of the displaced pupils and students in the area, and they have given us information on other educational requirements and challenges.

The ministry has been co-ordinating meetings between the standing committee and the NGOs involved in the education activities in the district affected by insurgency as well as the representatives of Ministries of Planning, Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Prime Minister’s Office. We have been holding meetings and indeed we are trying to find out how best we can give education services. The organizations have been involved in planning and implementing some of the activities recommended.

The ministry has carried out studies and field visits in order to improve the sector information. The ministry further commissioned the survey of the situation in Katakwi, Soroti, Apac, Pader from 8th to 11 December 2003. Meanwhile a consultant supported by USAID has visited Lira and Pader to assess the impact of the insurgency and to assess needs. 

One would say, “Why do we need a consultant?” Madam Speaker, as I will be stating later, this insurgency is not only in Uganda. Many other countries in Europe and all over the world have gone through insurgencies. So there is now a global data bank, which we are trying to capture in Uganda so that we can share the practical approaches other countries have used to make interventions, here. That is why we are even going to a level of consultancy because people have worked in the former Yugoslavia and other areas even in Africa.

During the education sector review last year, one group of participants visited the districts affected by the insurgency in Northern Uganda. Madam Speaker and dear colleagues, I was one of the members on that team and we visited quite a large number of areas. In addition, a working committee discussed and made recommendations on how to handle the challenges in Northern Uganda in respect of insurgency and education. The education sector review includes donors for education known as EFAGA. Both political and technical arms of the ministry have visited the area and have come down with recommendations on what to do.

The senior ministry staff are right now planning to go to the North to give specific guidelines to the local implementers so that they can improvise and handle, or address some of the specific problems.

Madam Speaker, after the general comments on page 3, we are giving specific responses to the recommendations of the select committee as follows:  

Free secondary education; the recommendation was that these children, after primary school, are unable to continue and they should be given some free secondary education. Madam Speaker and dear colleagues, yesterday I informed this House that the ministry has secured Shs 1.3 billion to facilitate 23,506 students who are living in camps or who are affected in those districts. Cheques will soon be going to those schools and we shall inform all of you which students will be benefiting from that sponsorship. I think that is a big success because these children were missing their education without that sponsorship.

The credit line for tertiary students; Madam Speaker, we are responding by saying that it should be noted that government is planning to meet the cost of education in tertiary institutions in the insurgency area. But I am happy to say that Primary Teachers’ Colleges have already been sponsored:  Ainimuloro in Apac, Gulu Core PTC in Gulu, Gulu Christ the King Teachers’ College, Kitgum Teachers’ College and Colonel Lawrence in Lira. The students there have their fees waived or met by Government.

Quota system; Madam Speaker and dear colleagues, the Prime Minister yesterday was kind enough to clarify on that issue and as soon as Cabinet comes out with the policy or position, you will be informed accordingly.

On page 4, affirmative action; Madam Speaker, affirmative action has been carried out for the last two years particularly in placing students in secondary schools. Those of you who have got the copies you would see that at senior five admission level many students, even with less scores, would be placed in schools so that they can continue, on affirmative action. It is, however, true that some pupils cannot afford to pay the fees in those schools. Like the case I mentioned above, at least efforts have been taken for the last two years to address this.

Grants for displaced children; Madam Speaker, I would like to inform you and the House that the UPE grants especially secondary grants are allocated according to the number of children in certain institutions. So, children are followed with the required services and grants wherever they are and grants are released according to the pupil population. Right now with data from learning centres, money is being calculated according to the population.

It was recommended by the committee that for dropouts, alternative vocational and relevant skills training be provided. Madam Speaker, you said you have come to our rescue and we have a study to support that recommendation. However, I have a list of technical and other institutions, which are accommodating some of the children who can access such training facilities.

The committee is calling for more monitoring to make sure that the Ministry of Education is felt in the affected areas. The idea is not that the ministry should be felt but the idea is that monitoring should be done. So, what we are saying on page 5 is that the Education Standards Agency - this is the organization or agency that replaced what we knew traditionally as the Inspectorate. As early this year in April they went through the area and they have made recommendations and findings, which will help us to look at the curriculum as it applies to those people and the methods of teaching. Remember these are experts who have looked at the teaching in the learning centres and their findings are going to be very useful for staffing and teaching methodologies and so forth. Of course more visits and inspections will be carried out.  

Unutilised funds; Madam Speaker, we are responding by saying that as soon as the situation normalizes in these institutions, which have not been able to utilize funds, the ministry will accord them priority during allocations of funds so that they can catch up with the rest of the areas by putting in place the required facilities.

The committee is recommending that un-coded primary schools and secondary should be coded so that they can accommodate some of these children. In response, we have a list of 65 primary schools that have been coded for exactly the same reason and one secondary school, Acaba in Apac District, has also been coded or grant-aided for the same reason.

On page 5 there is a recommendation on construction of additional structures, provision of scholastic materials, increase flexibility in SFG excreta.  

On page 6, Madam Speaker, we are replying as follows. For the need for clean water supply, the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment has provided some and currently UNICEF and a number of NGOs also have provided some water tanks and boreholes. As I said earlier on, there is a list of over 20 or 25 NGOs with whom we are collaborating on these issues.

Sanitary materials. Madam Speaker, there has been a lot on sanitary materials and we are responding by saying that owing to financial constraints the Ministry of Education and Sports has not been able to supply sanitary materials to pupils who need them. However, from the information we get from our collaborators in the areas, some organizations have been helping us in this area and we are very happy to learn from the Ministry of Health and Gender that they are also going to address this issue.

Some institutions have been hosting others and what we are saying here is that the ministry is agreeable to this and we make appropriate budgetary provisions for those institutions, which have not yet been assisted. But at least I am happy to say that Lira UTC has already received Shs 25 million towards that activity of repairing and reinstating some of the facilities.

Page 7, compensation for the lost time. We are responding by saying that the Ministry of Education and Sports has handled these cases. Schools in Lira were granted permission to teach during holidays. I would like to add that further effective interventions are being planned. What I am trying to say here is that we do not just want to see children in such situations roaming up and down. If we are to allow them to get occupied academically during the holidays, it has to be effectively done because even here in Kampala there are children who leave home during holidays, they go around towns and then they go back home in the evening. If we are to give this type of service it should not be haphazard because the results will be counter-productive. So, we are looking at a system whereby if we have some few days for holiday study, it should be effective. 

On the other hand we are dealing with traumatized children and if we occupy them 365 days a year we might get the wrong results. So, we are looking at the scheme and then we shall see how to regulate it to avoid counter-productive reactions. 

We respond to the feeding needs by saying that the World Food Programme has been providing food for schools in Gulu and Kitgum Districts. They are extending to Teso area but the ministry, together with government of course, has put aside some money for areas where we want to pilot. We are to start with the insurgency areas on the school-feeding scheme and some money has been put aside. Madam Speaker, I am sorry I do not have the figures here but when we come to discuss the budget for the ministry we shall put the figures so that the House knows that government is coming up with that scheme in those areas where we have a problem. But of course World Food Programme has done a wonderful job.

Update on data; we are saying that this is partially true. The committee is right, however, there has been steady progress in developing data and information through field visits, consultative meetings, reports from schools, districts, NGOs, the standing committee and UNICEF.  

The data has tended to be incomplete because of the constantly changing situation. Madam Speaker, those of us who have been there, and I believe the committee has been there; the population of these children is up and down. What you take today might not be true tomorrow. The situation changes every now and then. But the fact that the war has particularly targeted children has compounded the problem. Whenever the parents or guardians move, children will also move. So, we have a problem of ascertaining the figure but we are going to do so through the districts because we have our implementers there.

On scholastic materials, Madam Speaker, we are saying scholastic materials include quite a lot as you see there and the Ministry of Education and Sports has also liased with donor communities, district local governments and CBOs to provide candidates with basic materials such as exercise books, rulers and so forth. So, the ministry further intends to purchase such materials. But the problem, dear colleagues, is that we have the financial regulations, which are very stiff. Right now if we are to touch the UPE grants, which grants are according to the stated income for the local governments, we have to go through a bureaucratic process. 

However, I am happy to say that we have started the negotiations with the relevant ministries so that we can have this money kept at the centre and that will give us flexibility to provide what is needed in schools. But it means we have to look at the regulations existing and see how we can make that out.

Clean water supply. Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Water and Lands has taken some action, UNICEF has done quite a lot in this and many NGOs have helped us with water tanks and boreholes in learning centres and some of the operating schools.  

Staffing. As much as possible the Ministry is ensuring that teachers do not move from the area. We are trying to ask them to stay around so that they do not leave a vacuum behind them. At the moment the ministry does not permit transfers from that area not because of any other reason, but because we fear once they leave a vacuum behind, it will be very difficult for us to transfer teachers from other areas to go and serve up there.  

Secondly, we are authorizing them to recruit A’ Level leavers who can teach in the learning centres.  

Paragraph 19, learning centres: UNICEF and other NGOs have put up temporary structures. For this, Madam Speaker, we are very grateful. These include tents, toilet facilities and other temporary classroom facilities. But if we can break through to a flexibility of utilizing the UPE capitation grants, we shall use the money to put up more facilities.

Paragraph 20, alternative vocation and relevant skills, a study was undertaken early this year and as I have already said, we are going to look at that and see how we promote the community polytechnics and complementary education programmes in the area.

Finally, paragraph 4 has the other actions taken by the ministry. Psychosocial support, we are using Gulu Core PTC to train teachers in those skills. Madam Speaker, many of us were trained as teachers but we did not have traumatized children at that time. So, this is a new situation and many teachers have to be re-trained and re-tooled to handle these people. I am happy that the Ministry of Gender is doing it and we are in collaboration.

Construction of boarding schools for war orphans; we have put aside Shs 1.375 billion towards that scheme. I am happy to say that the Government of Belgium is helping us with some counter-funding.

For textbooks, we have already put in place what we call conflict area supplementary of education materials in Gulu and other areas. There is a particular company contracted to make supplementary educational materials to make teaching easy in those areas, and they are doing quite well.

Provision of sports equipment, Madam Speaker, the National Council of Sports donated sports equipment to the internally displaced people but of course we need more than what was available at that time. So, the districts should continue to receive grants and facilities but what we probably need is further monitoring and guidelines on how to flexibly put to use such materials.

In conclusion, Madam, the ministry will continue to work with other stakeholders to create awareness of the challenges to educational services caused by insurgency in the North and Eastern Uganda. Guidelines will be drafted to create the necessary flexibility to enable the local leaders to address the identified gaps in the delivery of education services in the insurgency areas. 

I am happy to say what did not go on that page is that the Commonwealth and ADEA have included Uganda in their project on education in areas of emergency. And two weeks ago my Commissioner and I went to Mombasa for a four-days seminar where we were being guided on how to handle such issues, as many other countries have gone through these, and they have experience from which we can learn. 

The rest of the paper, Madam Speaker, just gives an annex and information, which I do think I can go through.

Once again we would like to appreciate the work of the committee. We concur with them in many of their findings  -(Applause)- but I want to assure this House that we are doing our best and we shall continue to do our best. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank the Minister for that response; I thought it was so well answered that you would not raise –(Interruption)

5.46
MRS MAGOOLA ZIRABAMUZAALE (Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the Alaso Committee for the good report that the Ministry of Education is responding to. The committee made a very good report that extensively covered what we ought to have known about the Northern region in conflict.  

Madam Speaker, I want to raise a few points on what the Minister of Education has said. It has been revealed by both the Minister for Gender and the Minister for Education that a lot of money is being poured into the districts, which are in insurgency. My problem here is whether this money is reaching the people. When I compare it to areas where there is no insurgency but the money has not been spent the way we would have wished it to be spent, I fear that if no strict measures are taken, that money may not reach the people to give them the service that it is meant for. I appeal to the ministries concerned to ensure that strict accountability is asked from the people concerned, and to make sure that service is given to the people through this money, which was sent to them. Experience elsewhere tells us that a lot of money has been diverted.

My other point is about the food, which they are going to provide. Like money, food can be diverted. I request that the Ministry of Education does everything possible to ensure that food reaches the hungry children. We know that as food goes from one area to another, they are going to be disturbed by those who will want it more especially the Kony people. But I also think that if food is not well looked after for the people that it is meant for, it can even end up in the hands of those who do not need it as badly as those who are in insurgency – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am sorry to interrupt. You know we finished the general debate. Just ask specifically, if you have a specific matter you want her to answer, please. Otherwise, we cannot open the debate again.

MRS MAGOOLA: Alright, thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The coded schools, I have heard that many have been coded but there are those, which are un-coded. I was wondering whether we could give priority to the un-coded schools in those areas of insurgency so that people can benefit from the money that is given to coded schools? Thank you very much.

5.48
MR JOHN AACHILLA (Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have just come from my constituency where I have been for the last four days. The Karamoja fraternity appreciates the problem in Northern Uganda but while I was there with them, people were asking - because they have been following up these reports from the start and there is nothing that is related to Karamoja in this report except when they talk something about raids. 

In this report, the big question I was told to ask this House is where is Karamoja in the report, is it in Northern Uganda or Eastern Uganda?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, just a minute. I thought the instructions to the committee were specific. It is not a report about the entire Northern Uganda, West Nile and so on. It was about the humanitarian situation in the IDP camps. That was the mandate of this committee.

MR AACHILLA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just as clear as you have mentioned it, it is true that the IDPs are not only restricted to the districts named in the report. That is Kitgum, Pader, Gulu and Lira but I have IDPs in Kotido District also. In this report – yes, we have a number of children who are displaced who are in Kotido District and most of the education facilities in these schools have greatly been affected. To justify my argument, the performance of most of the schools like Kotido Mixed, which has been one of the best schools in the country, it is not performing well. But – (Interruption)

MR KABAREEBE: Thank you very much for giving way. Thank you very much Madam Speaker and honourable members. We also have children and old women who have been allowed to cross to Kigumba in Bunyoro and we also have children who have crossed to West Nile in Arua but I do not know whether they are included in this report. So, be informed they are also in other areas.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yesterday, the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees said she has some information and the programme of those additional areas where people go when they leave their homes. Yes, the Minister of Disaster said it yesterday.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I think, Madam Speaker, hon. Aachilla has a case because many people run from Agago County into Karamoja area. They are living in camps there and I do not think they have surfaced anywhere in this report. They have exploded in the UPE school facilities and it has overstretched the budget of the Karamoja area local governments. We have also visited them and they are in big camps. So, I do not think it is fair for this report to ignore the member, I think he has a case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But now what can we do? The visit was conducted; the report has been done made. What can hon. Alaso do now, with her committee? Yesterday a case was made for Nakasongola, a case was made for Masindi and many other districts; and the Minister said she has taken note of all those. May I suggest that those who are affected but were not included in the report, please pass your information to the ministers for planning so that they can include your schools, your food, your roads – all those things?

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform my colleagues that as Parliament we are soon receiving policy statements from ministries. Through thorough analysis and debate and discussion in the sessional committees, I think everybody will be considered. But this was a specific, select committee, which went to specific places. The policy statements will take care of anybody who is not there.

MR AACHILA: Madam Speaker, as much as we are saying the ministries’ policy statements will carry up information for all regions, this is the kind of situation, which Uganda underwent for many years in the former regimes. Whenever issues were raised, which were related to Karamoja and her neighbors, and as much as we see that Karamoja has remained a problem for the neighbors, we do not want to appreciate these issues and we say we shall solve problems of Karamoja in isolation. This has never worked. 

Madam Speaker, people are asking me to tell the members of the committee, and specifically the Minister of Education and Sports, why a research was carried out in the areas of Katakwi, Soroti, Apac, Pader and there was nothing that was carried out specifically for Kotido and yet we have over 500 IDP children in Kotido District? I want the minister to clarify on that. Thank you very much.

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, when this select committee was set up in this Parliament, it was given specific terms. It was given to carry out an investigation on the humanitarian and security situation in three areas: Acholi, Lango and Teso. I appreciate what my colleague is raising but, hon. Aachilla, you should have raised those issues when they were demarcating the terms of reference. A select committee has specific terms of reference and I believe that the committee tried to do their best. There is no way they could go to Karamoja region or West Nile or Masindi, which was not included in their terms of reference. So, I feel that you have a valid point but it should have come at the time when they were setting up and approving the committee’s terms of reference in this august House.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Aachilla, I do not want you to say that the country has always neglected Karamoja and this House does not appreciate your difficulties. The Ministry of Works was here was talking about what is taking place here and there, Kotido was also there. Let us do it this way. I will write to the Prime Minister informing him that you have internally displaced persons, there are others in Nakasongola, there are others in Masindi, all the districts that have been mentioned who are not in the report, so that special attention is paid and they are included. But it is not that we do not like you or that we do not care. Tell them that we care.

5.55
MS BETTY AMONGI (Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the Minister was reading her response, I noticed a pattern in her response and that pattern is commissioning studies on the status of displaced pupils and students, on the challenges of insurgency and other aspects of education requirements for planning purposes. I also noted that seven of these studies have already been done. 

One was the regional standing committee, which conducted a study on the issue, which was commissioned on 22 September 2003; a survey was done between December 8th to 11th 2003; the other one was a working group committee, May 2003; the other one a consultancy supported by USAID; the other one was in April 2003 by the Education Standard Agency; the other one by the senior ministry staff and funding agency will again visit the district to do the same.  

I want to know whether this is going to be the order of the response. Will it always be a study and how many studies - these are already seven - how many studies do we need to carry out before we respond to the problems of education in this region? Many times the studies end with studies and the budget ends with studying?

The second issue is a response to free education by the committee, where she is talking about the Shs 1.3 billion already paid out to post-primary schools for students in internal displaced persons’ camps. What I understand with this money is that the Government is giving out between Shs 47,000 and Shs 77,000 and if you are studying in a school charging beyond that amount, it is the student or the parent to add up or to top up. Most of the IDP students are saying, “Is this free education?”  That is because they have to top up. Most of the schools charge between Shs 80,000 to Shs 150,000 in that area. So, I do not think this answers the question of free education that the committee is raising. Can we get your answer on free education, not the partial commitment of government to the IDP students?  

5.57
MR NYEKO OCULA (Kilak County, Gulu): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity again. I am really sorry we have to get up frequently because some of us, our constituents are all living in camps and when you are discussing such a report, it affects the kind of people we represent.  

I would like to add a little to what has been already presented. First and foremost, it was a very good gesture on the part of government to consider payment of fees for students who are in IDP camps. I appreciate it so much because many of us were already overstretched. For example I was supporting 29 people in secondary school, and this is really a great relief. 

Secondly, I would like to request the minister concerned, because I was made to understand that school facilitation grants to many of those affected districts have been suspended and the money has been diverted to the works on security roads. However, if you travel in the area you find that in many of the camps the population of the students in the schools is overstretched. I will request that part of the school facilitation grants be directed to the making of these temporary structures. Like of recent I was in the school in my village - actually it is the primary school I attended, called Olwari. They have nine classrooms but they are about 2,300 pupils trying to squeeze in there. So, I am requesting for more of the temporary structures.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to advise government that it would save a lot by opening up secondary schools in some of those camps other than trying to pay for the children in other schools in town here. If I give an example of my area because that is what I am well versed with, in a place called Amulu you find a community has already put up a classroom block but they cannot manage to pay teachers in the school. So, why can the Government not pick up the bills for the teachers in those schools so that those students can study from there?

Finally, on the issue of the teachers’ recruitment, many of the schools in those villages lack teachers. If the teachers could be provided in those villages, I think there would be no need of even these pupils coming to towns. Those are the few remarks I would want to make. Thank you very much.

MS NAKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I wanted to inform the honourable member that local governments were very instrumental in requesting Government, through His Excellency the President when they met him, that the unused money should be taken back to them so that they can use it. Therefore, they were very instrumental in deciding where this money goes. It was the district authorities, the district councils that set priorities for which to use the money, which is returned to them. So, I do not think the centre or the Ministry of Education can tell them how to use this money because they were given this opportunity to choose the areas for which this money can be used.

6.01
MR JOHN ODIT (Erute County South, Lira): I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, but I think this response from the Minister of State for Defence is what is worrying us. The Government should clearly explain how this money, which was recalled to the centre and taken back to the district, is being used for it is very unclear. There must be a clear statement about that because in one instance, some districts are complaining that the money was called back here and somehow it has been diverted to security roads, which is correct. If that fund is really under PAF, I do not know whether those who have provided these funds will be comfortable. 

But my main area of clarification to the Minister for Education is about the 23,506, the number of displaced children in camps. This is a very precise figure and I wanted to know from her whether in the course of carrying out this survey government was aware that there were some children who are in private schools but because of displacement, some of the children also found themselves living in camps with their parents but they are studying in private schools? Because the parents are also displaced, they are helpless as those who are in Government schools and are now in camps. So, does this 23,000 cover also those who are in the affected areas who are studying in private schools? We would like to get some kind of clarification to that effect. 

Otherwise, we are grateful for this Shs 1.3 billion. This is very good news for us, and it is our prayer that this money can be sent out immediately so that it can relieve the parents. Why do I say this? Two weeks ago I was literary pleading with the headmasters who were almost sending the children home. I told them to wait for Government’s position because there is an arrangement for them to cater for these children. So, this is a very timely piece of information and I believe that Government will also be able to inform the parents and the head teachers of the affected areas that this arrangement is in place so that the children can have peace of mind and the parents as well can stay in peace so that education is not affected as much as the social life in villages. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether the minister or the Prime Minister can arrange an internal ministerial meeting on this question of the money that went and it came back and who took the decision. Perhaps you could arrange for a meeting to sort out that matter?

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I need a clarification from the honourable minister on page 5, point No. 9 on the recommendations, because the committee was here concerned about the un-coded primary schools and non-grant aided schools. There is need as a matter of urgency to code and grant aid to the schools but the response I get here is about the past. I think the committee’s request was that those currently un-coded schools in these areas need to be coded and grant aided. 

Kasilo County being one of those peaceful areas, which were not attached by Kony, is hosting a number of them and I have been trying to push for two schools there to be grant-aided. One of them is Kadungu Secondary School, such that it takes care of these children who have run to that area. I think that is a request the committee is making and a request I am making that we need this un-coded school and grant-aided schools to be grant-aided. That will enable the schools to absorb these children because it becomes expensive for them to move to other places even if we give them this money.
  
Then our other concern, when we passed the supplementary budget of this Shs 1.3 billion we were given a figure that each child would be provided with Shs 150,000 to Shs 200,000 and now we have been given the figure here. I have done quick mathematics. If we took the lowest figure of 150,000 multiply by the number of children, we get Shs 3.5 billion but we have been provided with Shs 1.3 billion. So, I am seeing a problem there. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the comments made by the members of the House. I will start with hon. Zirabamuzaale and her concern over the food. Actually the pilot scheme for feeding these children is provisionally to be implemented by the Ministry of Education directly. So, we are working out modalities of how to implement this scheme and when the policy statement discussion comes on the Floor, this matter will surface again.

Karamoja area, well, it has been explained that it was not under the terms of reference but I inform my colleagues again that the Ministry of Education, working with other NGOs, has tried out - we have the famous well known Alternative Basic Education for Karamoja (ABEK). Of late we started on a project of early childhood education and I personally last year went to launch an integrated programme, which involves training of teachers in that Karamoja region. So, quite a number of programmes have been out there in which the Ministry of Education has participated. But the fact that it is not in this report, I think it is outside my mandate to answer that. Otherwise, something had been done and we shall continue to work on this.

Hon. Amongi is wondering why we are commissioning studies and more studies. Madam Speaker and Members of Parliament, I would like to inform you once again that especially basic education, which is primary education, it is a fully decentralised service. So, under that provision of the Act, it should be implemented by local governments. With that in mind, why are we carrying out studies from the centre? This is because under the Decentralisation Act there is no provision for reports to come to the headquarters. I have been asking them but they are not obliged to send any report to the headquarters because it is a fully decentralised service, whatever gaps are identified are addressed by local councils. 

With that type of background, which is a statutory background, if we at the centre want to know more we have to go down and say: “What did you do here? What do you have here?” That is why there are all these studies because so far since decentralisation and UPE started, we have no record. Either we go there or we are not in the schedule of those who should get reports from the local government. I think this applies to many other departments. So, if we are now to come in with central intervention, we have to go and fish out all these reports and then try to see what interventions will be appropriate. And this applies to monies and grants. The money for education at primary level is a district council matter. If we want to reverse that status we have to renegotiate and see how the centre can have a say or control the utilisation of money. 

This is a bureaucratic process where we have to work out and waive or flex the statutory regulations and try to see how we handle this. So, Madam Speaker, these studies just provide an entry for the centre to go and fish out what information is available at district level so that we can advise on any central government intervention in this area. That is why we are really carrying out some of this.  

But I mentioned that many other countries in Africa and outside Africa have gone through these insurgencies. They have quite a lot of experience; they have the know-how and capacity to identify the gaps. So, we are working together with these consultants and finally, as I stated, we are going to learn from other coping strategies from Sierra Leone, from Yugoslavia, from Pakistan, now we have Iraq and so on, and we shall see how we can effectively also tackle the issue of education in insurgency areas.

The same honourable member mentioned the top-up issue. I would like to inform this House that the Shs 1.3 billion is an emergency grant in our financial year 2004/05. We are going to again provide money. Right now the money we have is for second and third term and that is the money, which was available as emergency. But when we streamline this vote, we shall have the money to – because it was Shs 59,000 now we are planning to pay Shs 46,000. It is less but at least it is a good beginning. So, next financial year this money is going to be budgeted in the amount, which is calculated, and then we shall be able to pay the amount needed.

The question of school facilitation grant has been well answered by my colleague, the Minister of State for Defence, and I am glad that it was the local people who say, “What do we need most now?” Because when you fly over that area, which I have done several times, you see abandoned SFG schools, just in the wilderness; you see the white roofs and very wonderful buildings, but with no people around. So, if the local people decide to use the money as a quick measure to end insurgency, probably they are right. But I am glad my colleague here has answered that very well.

Opening secondary schools in camps, yes, that is a wonderful idea. We may have to come to that. But the idea is; are the camps going to be permanent? If we put permanent schools there, what will happen next? But good enough we have started with temporary learning shelters for these primary school kids. However, that suggestion is very good and I am glad about it.  

Teacher recruitment. As I said in the statement, we have got five primary teachers’ colleges in that area to promote the numbers we need in the area. But with insurgency, educational institutions are very vulnerable, the children scatter and the teachers scatter. So right now, we are as I said, encouraging teachers to stay around and proposing - this I must put in brackets – (that probably such teachers should get new incentives) but this has got financial implications where the Ministry of Education has to go into negotiations and consultations, and mobilising the resources, if that suggestion is to be put into practice.

Hon. Odit on explaining how SFG is being used, it is PAF money. Yes, it is PAF money but we have to look at priorities. PAF money has a Government of Uganda contribution. So we are picking on the Government of Uganda’s contribution to see what we can do in the area to really address the issues. We are in dialogue with our funders and supporting agencies on this matter.  

Children in private schools; that is a new idea. But I think let us handle the emergency. As we mainstream this sponsorship many other children might be considered because, Madam Speaker, yesterday and even today many Members of Parliament talked about host districts, which I think is a viable idea. Moroto, Kotido areas and so on have had this problem of being a host to these dislocated children. So, those are all ideas, which we are scrutinising and that is one other reason why we are carrying out a lot of studies on this matter. 

Coding of schools: my colleague, hon. Okupa, this is not the first. We are talking about 65 in 2003 and 2004. It is not passed, it is an action taken to address an emergency. But the idea of granting more aid is a good one and definitely we shall pick it up but we have names of schools, which have been grant-aided. We shall circulate them to the Members of Parliament from those areas.  

Hon. Odur had no opportunity to ask on the Floor but he is asking about page 3, the credit lines for tertiary students. “Why not implement education loan?” Madam Speaker, in the policy statement we talk about this. Then non-grant aided school in my constituency is a secondary school without – but we are looking at that and the policy statement will say exactly what we are doing in some of these areas raised by hon. Odur. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you for the work you have done today but because of the communication I made in the beginning that three of our colleagues have lost their close relatives, two of the burials are tomorrow; I would like to release you members so that you can go and help hon. Syda Bbumba, hon. Wabudeya and hon. Dora Byamukama. And for the same reasons we are unable to have a sitting tomorrow. I think it will not be understood if I hold a sitting here when there is a funeral in Mbale and a funeral in Luweero, and maybe in Kamwenge. So, the House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much for your patience and for the work you have done.

(The House rose at 6.19 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 6 July 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)


