Thursday, 8th July, 1999

Parliament met at 2.36 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

MR. KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to put a question to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business.  

Drought has badly struck Nyabushozi County in Mbarara and all the surrounding counties in Mbarara District and other surrounding districts like Ntungamo, Bushenyi, Rakai, Sembabule and others.  Could the House be informed about the steps being taken to address this problem so that the lives of people and domestic animals are saved?  Thank you.

THE RT. HON. PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, on June, 22nd 1999, I received a question from hon. Elly Karuhanga, MP, Nyabushozi county, Mbarara District regarding drought.  The question has been read, so I do not need to repeat it.  

Hon. Members, I would like to inform the House that since November, last year, many parts of the country have not received reliable rainfall.  The rain started late and ceased early.  Consequently, many parts of Uganda have been afflicted by drought.  Further more, River Nile blocked and therefore, water is flooding in the neighbouring districts.  Consequently, human lives, animals and crops are endangered.  
Effect of the drought:
1.  The affected areas have faced acute shortages of food.  
2.  There is an acute shortage of water for human beings, animals and crops.  
3.  The health of the people, animals, birds, et cetera is also endangered.

These problems are affecting the whole country in different dimensions.  For example, whereas some areas have little food, others lack it. I want to emphasize this issue that this matter is affecting the whole country, but there are people who have been manufacturing stories that I am only concerned with some parts of Uganda.  I am the Prime Minister of the whole country and I use a holistic approach in addressing the entire body politic and economic.  

Solutions:
There are what we call "immediate solutions" because in the short run, we are dead.  The Government has availed funds for emergency measures to address the following issues:
1. To repair all known functioning bore-holes in the areas affected by the draught.
2. Money to sink new bore-holes in the affected areas.
3. Money to purchase and distribute relief food to the affected population.
4. De-silting of dams and valley tanks in the cattle corridor.
5. Construction of valley tanks.
6. To plan buying cattle from the badly hit areas and take them to the districts that need restocking.
7. Local governments must make by-laws making production of surplus food and storage of the food compulsory.  So, there is the issue of production and there is the issue of storage.
8.Further more, harvesting of water must be facilitated and made compulsory because whenever it rains, people forget the problem whereas the problems persists. So, we must also acquire a capacity to handle a persistent problem.

In addition to mobilising and sensitizing the population to cope with effects of draught, technical teams have been sent to quantify the problems so that Government may allocate resources to solve the problems.  In addition, Government will appeal to the funding agencies and civil society to supplement its efforts.  It is, therefore, important to quantify and categorise the problem because districts are not afflicted in the same manner so that we may prescribe the medicine.  Meanwhile, food has been sent because even the short run must be handled urgently.  Also, people have been allowed to go to district areas like Mburo where there are water sources.

There are also what we call, long term measures. Hon. Tom Butime, the Minister in charge of the Department of Disaster Management in the Prime Minister's Office shall produce a major plan regarding disaster preparedness.  He must of necessity interface with many stake-holders and produce that plan for disaster preparedness.  He will also submit a Cabinet paper concerning a policy on disaster management by 9th October, 1999.  

This policy will, inter alia, enable Ugandans to distinguish between a problem and a disaster because sometimes there is a problem but people baptize it a "disaster" in order to get quicker attention.  But it is essential to have a policy where you have a criterion to be used in order to declare a district a disaster area and then it receives the necessary resources and skills to cope with the disaster. The same Department must expedite putting into effect a Disaster Preparedness and Management Commission for Uganda, fulfilling Article 249 of the Constitution of Uganda.  Educational institutions and homes must instil into Ugandans the culture of anticipating disasters and of working closely with the State - and I should have added the civil society - to overcome them.

To expedite the existing plans of acquiring modern equipment to remove the sudd - that is, the floating vegetation - from the river Nile, we need to have the right equipment.  We got some equipment - I think from Egypt - to deal with water hyacinth - the word which is very difficult to pronounce - but now we need also this equipment to deal with the sudd, the floating vegetation which blocks the river Nile and water floods.  

There is also the question of dealing with the people who have been flooded because their family life has been disrupted.  The Prime Minister had requested hon. Butime, the Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, to inform the nation through the mass media and other methods, of the problems and the proposed solutions because it is not enough to be handling a problem; we must inform people of what we are doing because if someone is suffering, but that person knows that you are handling the problem, that person gets the psychological satisfaction and the desperation decreases.  So, I made it clear to him that he must communicate to the nation at large what is being done.  For example, when Karamoja was afflicted by famine, we took food to Karamoja and the matter was communicated to the nation.  

Welcome advice:
Because these are intricate problems and our resources are scarce, please contact Mr. Kaggwa, Commissioner for Disaster Management on phone 236967 for advice because we need to put our heads together and handle this complex matter and especially to cope with the persistent dimensions of it.  I thank you, and I shall be circulating this Statement.  You will find copies in your pigeon holes so that the process of re-internalising what I have said is maximised.  I thank you.

MR. TOM BAGALANA(Bunya South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am rising to ask the Prime Minister to clarify what constitutes a disaster because some areas in the country faced what we call the "cassava mosaic" and the "army worms" and these places, in addition to the draught, they have been suffering a very severe food shortage.  In places like Busoga, especially Bunya South where I originate, people are badly off as far as food is concerned and when a small draught hits the Western region especially Ankole, it comes up very seriously in Parliament.  I want the Prime Minister to clarify what constitutes a disaster to see whether people in Busoga also can be considered.

When he was enumerating the solutions to the question which hon. Karuhanga asked, I wanted him to give us the details of how the districts which are affected by the draught shall benefit and to inform this House which districts have reached his office which are going to be catered for because in the solutions, it seems that these solutions are only focused on the Western region.  Thank you very much.

MR. JAMES MWANDHA(Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The Prime Minister referred to the blockage of River Nile and said that there is some equipment to come from Egypt, I think, to clear the water hyacinth.  I want the Prime Minister to relate this blockage to what could happen if we licensed an independent power operator and the flow of the water was affected by the blockage of the river Nile; whether indeed we would have to guarantee the levels of the water on river Nile.  Thank you.

MR. MANUEL PINTO(Kakuuto county, Rakai): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, indeed if the Prime Minister was defending his classification as a lecturer when he was near the microphone, he would see how he is giving a piece of lecture on how to handle the matter of drought.  

In Rakai we are equally affected and very badly too.  At one time I brought a problem here when we had the El Nino and that was the gross over-flooding even before the rains started.  You remember the then Prime Minister told me that I should remember how Kijanebalola came; but there was no solution from Government until the whole country went through this big problem of El Nino and there were no funds. 

Now, the river we know as Bukola known in Koki as Kibale and Rizi in Mbarara is drying up.  That is one of the main rivers of the tributaries that feeds Lake Victoria.  A very big river known as Kagera which originates from Burundi via Rwanda via Tanzania into Lake Victoria is drying too, and it is silting at the mouth where it enters Lake Victoria and those of you who have had the opportunity to cross the lake or to go by air, you can see that it is in fact river Kagera  which cuts through Lake Victoria and finally comes out as river Nile.

Now, what are we really doing in practical terms?  These rivers which are a lifeline are drying up and the waters, mainly in Lake Victoria, will subsequently dry up. I was wondering whether I would hear from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister - and I have hope because now we have new management in the Ministry of Agriculture - whether we are going to start planting drought resistant crops; whether we are going to try and learn from our neighbours.  Countries like Nigeria and Ghana all feed on yams and these are underground crops that could easily survive in this country and be used because they are readily available.

So, the kind of theories about bore-holes and new valley dams and valley tanks, what good are they if there is no rain?  We need them to be there to catch the rain!  But now, what are we going to do if we really have this persistent drought?  I would have wanted to hear from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister that in the Ministry of Agriculture they are going to try new methods of training our animals to eat hay and silage because when we have rains we have a lot of grass.  Most times it is just burnt up.  People could learn to cut it and bale it and maybe use it in this dry time.  But this population is fed.  Why can we not learn from that?  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I remember you were supposed to seek clarification.  You are not supposed to debate.

MR. PINTO: I am seeking clarification so that he can give me answers because the problem seems to have been narrowed.  It is far wider than that.  I read in a magazine one time that the layer which protects us from being burnt by the sun, the hole in it is as big as the size of Europe which indicates to us that this weather is going to continue global warming. New methods must be brought! 

Currently, Mr. Speaker, there is a bumper harvest in the country in certain areas that produce maize.  If today we do not buy out that maize from the farmers and store it in our silos and keep it properly for a rainy day, others will buy it. It think Kenya is going to buy it from us.  In two, three months, we will be importing maize, maybe from Kenya or from Europe.  Are these methods available?  All our silos are empty!  We have silos in Kyazanga, we have them in Kampala, we have them in other places. Why have they not got food?

Lastly, could the Prime Minister comment on an article I read in The East African  newspaper of the 5th of April?  It reads: "An American science publication known as "Popular Mechanics" reports that because of imperceptible land mass movement observed by satellite, all of Djibouti, Kenya, Somalia and Tanzania and parts of Ethiopia, Sudan and Uganda, Malawi and Mozambique will eventually form a new island continent of their own and a number of towns, including Kampala, will be port cities on the Indian Ocean."  Do not forget the Arabian peninsula was once a part of Africa and broke away in the same way.  While it may be a little distance off, are we on top of the situation, Mr. Speaker?

MR. WILSON OTAGE (Usuk County, Kaberamaido): I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to get clarification from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister.  In his reply, he has stated that the rainfall pattern has been very poor from November up to now, therefore meaning that the overall precipitation over the productive period has been below average. I would like to know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, to what extent have you organised for the anticipated disaster over the coming year?  It is a common phenomena that when you have had El Nino, you expect a period of dryness and we should have anticipated this and prepared for the consequences!  

Secondly, I would like to find out from the hon. Prime Minister.  In this era of technology, to what extent have we linked and utilised the current technology like the satellite facilities existing in other regions to be able to determine promptly and timely how fast the disaster is spreading?  

Thirdly, I would like to get clarification from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister.  What is the current feed-back from the district disaster management committees on the extent of disaster anticipated in the country?  Because, I can see a situation starting from the western end but following the rainfall patterns of the second rains, extending to other parts of the country.  And lastly, I would like to know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister what concrete plans have been made to go beyond the cattle corridor in this intervention by government to mitigate the effects of drought on livestock?  I thank you.

MR. DICK NYAI(Ayivu County, Arua):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  First of all, Mr. Speaker, allow me to extend my gratitude to hon. Elly Karuhanga for drawing government's attention to this very important matter. It looks like if he had not asked the question, government was oblivious of the suffering of the people.  Mr. Speaker, in this matter I must also be grateful to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for now consolidating the matter as a national problem.  Now, since the matter affects the whole nation, I wish, from his reply to seek the following clarification Mr. Speaker.  

One, has the Prime Minister quantified how much it will cost this nation to repair all non-functioning boreholes and to drill new ones? Secondly, a side issue to that one; how does he intend to deal with the issue of ground water levels which have sunk as a result of the drought?  Maybe he will drill and not get water at all; because if the cost is going to be so horrendous as to make our budget proceedings unrealistic, maybe he can indicate to this Parliament now, before we go into the budget, how this will affect our national budget.  

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to seek from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, an explanation which I hope he has got from the veterinary surgeons and veterinary practitioners.  In (6) he says government plans to buy cattle from the badly hit areas and take them to districts that need restocking.  My district is one of those which needs restocking but I am not so sure that you can restock with cows which have almost died of lack of water and lack of fodder.  Are those districts going to become dumping grounds?  If government wants to save the farmers where the animals are dying, I think they should be bought and slaughtered for meat!  Maybe he has a better explanation, Mr. Speaker, I will leave that to him.  

Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, last week the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness in the Rt. hon. Prime Minister's Office was quoted in the national media to say that at the moment, government has only 400 bags of beans in the stores; and this matter affects the whole of Uganda and the Prime Minister has  assured us here very emphatically that food is already going to the affected areas.  Can he tell us how much of these 400 bags have been distributed for the 45 districts of Uganda, and in what quantities?  I thank you.

DR. OKULO-EPAK(Oyam South, Apac):  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to thank hon. Elly Karuhanga for raising this question in the House. I would also like to thank and appreciate the concern of the Members of Parliament from Ankole who are very alert and have woken up to the disaster facing their areas, and to blame those Members of Parliament who have been suffering disaster but have never met to seek solutions from Government or otherwise.  

There are some disasters of common and regular occurrence. One would presume that a government which is responsible for a more global solution to disaster problems takes that responsibility.  I am also glad, Mr. Speaker, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister said disaster should be anticipated, except, if I heard him correctly, he thinks society should be taught to anticipate disasters. I would, however, wish to appreciate that government should not merely anticipate but should move and put in position disaster mitigation measures.  

Because of those observations, could the Rt. hon. Prime Minister not consider it right that since disaster is almost like an aggression meted out on the society who deserve to be protected by the State, that in future, governments which neglect to put in place disaster measures should pay remedies to the communities who get affected by disasters through the neglect of the government?  

MISS NAOME KABASHARIRA(Woman Representative, Ntungamo):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also join others to thank hon. Karuhanga  for raising this question and I thank the Prime Minister for the solutions that he has given us but, Mr. Speaker, in some of these parts which are affected, especially Ntungamo and Mbarara, one of the solutions could be tapping the water in some of those mountains by gravity and there are so many sources. I have seen the short-term solutions and the long-term measures. I do not see anywhere where the Prime Minister intends to tap these sources so that people can get even better water than this dam water.  I would request that the Prime Minister also includes it on his list of the long-term measures - even in the short term because there are some projects already in place but which are lacking funding and maybe if the government could come up, some of these areas could supply good water.  Thank you.

MR. BITAHWA (Igara West, Bushenyi):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would also like to begin by thanking hon. Karuhanga for posing this question but at the same time, I would like to ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister; must the government wait until a Member of Parliament has pointed out such a serious question?  This is a very serious issue in areas which have been mentioned and the most common question which everybody is asking himself is, when are the rains coming?  Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister in position to tell the nation today when the rains are coming?  (Laughter) 

Another point I would like to observe, Mr. Speaker, is the question of boreholes.  In the areas that have been mentioned and from the answer from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, there have been boreholes which were established not very long ago, some of them maybe one year old.  Most of them are out of order, they are non-functional. Are we going to throw more money in drilling more boreholes instead of repairing what is existing?  Probably the mistake lies in the fact that these boreholes were of poor quality because I cannot imagine that boreholes which are expected to last for more than ten years can break within three months!  

I would like also to ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, what concrete measures his office is taking to address the question of disease because directly connected with drought in the areas where we come from is the question of disease.  A lot of children are suffering from malnutrition and when disease comes, the situation is even worse.  So, I would like to get clarification from the Prime Minister; what measures are in place?  Thank you very much.

PROF. GILBERT BUKENYA(Busiro North, Mpigi):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I also rise to ask for a few clarifications from the Prime Minister and to thank hon. Karuhanga for raising this issue.  I think the issue of drought is not only in Nyabushozi.  I have just been in Masaka, I was in Kyanamukaaka, Kalungu, Sembabule, there is extreme drought there and I think if the Prime Minister has to do something, he must have a compound plan to address the whole issue in the whole of the country.  

The clarification I am seeking is, Mr. Speaker, during the last session of Parliament, we lamented about the seed distribution system up to parish level. Now, when I look at the solutions being given here, the issue of distributing seeds, selling the seeds to the local people at reduced prices so that somehow we can afford to harvest enough cereals for storage is not being addressed. So can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister inform us as to what the government has in place for multiplication and distribution of seeds?  

Secondly, I know that government some time ago purchased a number of silos.  Can he tell me; what storage system have they put in place so that the government itself can have a system of preparing itself for disasters rather than simply asking local governments to pass by-laws requiring everyone to store food?  Our home storage systems are very primitive as you know. Why does government not have a silos system for storing these seeds? I have just been to Eritrea which is 75 per cent desert. They have a food mountain to take them up to three years and this is stored by government.  Why can our government not do the same? 

Thirdly, I want the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to indicate to us  why strengthening the meteorological department so that it can really forecast the rainfalls and drought more adequately is not one of the solutions. In most countries, the meteorology department is not only based in one place but it is decentralised to districts so that monitoring at district level can take place.  Can I be informed as to why this is not a major problem for the government?  Thank you very much.

MR. ANTHONY BUTELE (Madi-Okollo, Arua):  Mr. Speaker, I am not going to refer to any political programme at the moment because I have not got the latest of the "Fifteen-Point Programme" - (Laughter). Mr. Speaker, I would like the Prime Minister to confirm to this House that there are enough funds because on page two, he said government has availed funds.  You can avail funds but are those funds enough to cater for all this?  The answer will be no!  In the supplementary here, Mr. Speaker, the Prime Minister's Office was only given 100 million shillings.  

I thank hon. Karuhanga for bringing up this issue.  We in West Nile have this problem of water pollution.  The then Third Deputy Prime Minister wrote to the Minister of Water, Lands and Environment and also to the Minister of Health to go and help those people. Mr. Speaker, when you contact any of these Ministries, especially the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness on this telephone number the Prime Minister has given us, the answer will be, "we do not have funds". This statement of the Prime Minister implies that things in Uganda are equal; Mr. Speaker, this is not true. We had to spend most of our time to handle security because without security - security is a more serious disaster than anything else.  So, the statement is alright but now we want to see, when we are discussing the Budget of this, whether there is enough funds to cater for all these.  It is true these ministers sometimes go there -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, you are debating a statement;  I thought you were seeking clarification from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. 

MR. BUTELE:  These ministers go there but they go empty handed!  When you go to the home of somebody who died, do you not go with mabugo?  So, Mr. Speaker, we want this thing to be put in practice.  We are going to watch this Financial Year.  Thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I know this is a very touchy issue, it is dear to the hearts of most of us, and I am sure we could spend here a day or even two to seek clarifications and so on, but I know that there are two occasions when you will be able to say almost anything that you wish to say, namely;  the general debate on the Budget and also the President's statement - State of the Nation Address. There are those opportunities.  So, I would like you to take that into account so that you do not feel as if this is the only chance and, therefore, all of us have to seek these clarifications.  May I, therefore, suggest that we get only two more questions from hon. Members to allow the Prime Minister to respond to these many questions.  

MR.GEOFREY EKANYA (Youth Representative, Eastern):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to thank hon. Elly Karuhanga who has promoted the youth struggle even before we came here.  Is the hon. Rt. Prime Minister aware that His Excellency the President has been promoting a fund for the Youth Credit Scheme to involve them in agriculture, and recently in his programme of a countrywide tour to promote household income, he assured the youths that there is money?  Is the hon. Prime Minister aware that according to this Budget, the Budget has only provided Shs.500 million, and is he aware that the youth are not engaged in agriculture now because they are waiting for their Youth Credit Scheme Fund to help them to engage in agriculture? Is the hon. Prime Minister also aware that as a result of that, the food production has declined?  Thank you. 

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE (Army Representative): I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to seek clarification from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister on the emergency measures, the immediate one in particular, bearing in mind that food security is the first security for any country.  If there is no food security, there is no security.  Hungry people are an angry people.  Secondly, knowing that our inflation mainly depends on the food prices and;  thirdly, knowing that the Defence budget has a big component on food - if it doubles, the Defence budget could be affected in a very serious way, when I look at the measures that are being proposed, I do not seem to see a specific measure that hurries to mobilise and save the available food wherever it is, and keep it while the prices are still low.  

Secondly, if I look at number six; "to plan the buying of cattle from the badly hit areas and take them to the districts that need re-stocking", I would really want to hear the specific plans because, if another two or three weeks pass before animals are actually saved - and this is a natural reserve of food, knowing how difficult it is to raise cattle; once they are dead it will take you many years to raise them, and knowing that Uganda is still short of milk and beef among the other foods on the ratios, I am wondering how quick these plans are to save the herds of this country. I am also wondering whether these cattle could not be moved to other areas and government ranches which still have some water and are along the river like Kiryana, like Kyempisi. 

I would want to hear specific plans to save the herd, otherwise, I do not see the reason of having even gold reserves when we do not have food reserves because by the time the gold reserves are transformed into money, it will be double the cost.  I really want specific plans on saving the herd of this country and saving food for the Army in future.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Karuhanga, you asked questions;  the hon. Prime Minister is going to respond. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to thank honour Members of Parliament for raising these very pertinent questions because I am richer now as I handle these questions.  
The first point I should make is that, Government has not only responded because of hon. Karuhanga's question.  I want to inform you that before you, you have a bureaucratic and technocratic Prime Minister.  I will not be moving a lot. In fact, I have cancelled many invitations for functions.  I usually work up to 3 a.m.  Yesterday, I slept at 3 a.m. and by 5.30 a.m, I was up! I am also working with colleagues because team-work is the answer.  I am working with colleagues - political and bureaucratic - to handle your questions.  Therefore, many of the issues were already handled!  

For example, we had already taken food to Karamoja before that question was raised.  The Department of Disaster Management has been busy grappling with this problem but to plan for or to handle such a large problem is intricate.  So, I want to make that very, very clear. I also I want to make it clear that there are plans in the ministries, especially when you take the Ministry of Agriculture, and some of the plans will be articulated to you by the relevant sector ministries.  

Now, with regard to the issue of what is a disaster, it is a matter which the Department of Disaster Preparedness is handling but, I must mention some of the basic characteristics of a disaster. They involve a loss of capacity to solve a catastrophe and, therefore, you require answers external to the victim.  Because the catastrophe is so large, there is the quantum and there is also the depth of the problem.  

When the problem impairs one's capacity to find a solution and it requires answers external to the victim, it is a disaster. External problems could be external to the victim but being Ugandan problems. They could also be external to the body-politic and, therefore, you interface with the global village in order to handle that problem.  So, there is depth, there is quantum, there is the scale and there is also the time frame for recovery.  When the problem is so deep, you may be crawling for, say, two years until you start limping.  So, all these are necessary ingredients of a disaster.  

When it is a mere problem, it means that a person is afflicted by a difficulty but he or she may need a simple pushover and solve. The essential point is that the victim solves the difficulty.  So, in terms of assistance, sometimes you may simply need skills or you may need to re-skill.  In other cases, you may need food, for example, because in the short run you are dead. You may need water; you may need the quality of leadership required to tackle a problem.  It is a multifaceted problem.  There is also the issue of the appropriate technology to handle the problem or the disaster, but it is a matter which we shall be addressing a little more deeply. As I said, the Department of Disaster Preparedness is handling it, and when it handles it, it is interfacing with other ministries like Agriculture.  

For example, in the Ministry of Agriculture, one of the criterion for handling disaster was that really there may be some areas where they may have actually had the opportunity to grow food, but they may have sold it. Therefore, they need strong by-laws to prevent them from selling the food, only to starve if, for example, the problem persists for some time like a drought.  So, all these will be important issues!  

With regard to mosaic tolerant seedlings, again, this matter has been addressed, for example, by districts. There are many districts which now even have a budget to distribute mosaic tolerant cassava seedlings, and that has reduced hunger in some areas but it will also be necessary to address the soils because certain plants may not grow in certain areas. 

Now, I was asked to guarantee water levels when I tamper with blockage, but this matter is what might be described as force majeure;  it is a factor beyond our control.  In the short run, we lack the technology to handle water levels, but we also need to interface with the people tampering with the water flowing in an area because they affect other levels ultimately.  So, some of these questions are international.  For example, if you tamper with River Nile, you affect neighbouring countries, and you affect water levels.  So, you must interface globally with other countries in order to agree on the question of harnessing the river so that you do not affect the critical levels of the river.  

Now, again we are told about drying rivers, and what I would say here is that, I do have an answer and the answer is that some of the rivers may not be emanating from that area and, therefore, it may not necessarily cause ultimate drying up but when it happens, there are people who are more competent to handle the matter. It is not my area of specialisation, and I would hesitate to deal with such matters. There is a whole Ministry of Water, and it was specifically created during restructuring. His Excellency the President insisted that it be created and it was created and it is handling matters of this nature  -(Interruption).  

THE SPEAKER:  You see, you want to ask a supplementary question;  let him finish and then your supplementary question will come.  That is the procedure, otherwise he will not finish. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Thank you, Sir.  Let me read the answer.  Most of the water which flows into Lake Victoria is not from Ugandan rivers, hence, the drying up of two rivers would not have an effect in the long term.  Drought is recurrent but in the interim period, there can be extreme precipitation.  The long term average does not indicate reduction in the level of precipitation.  

Now, on the issue of global warming, I am glad to learn that it is being addressed, but it is an international problem because there are some people who are practising what we call environmental terrorism. These people damp very dangerous gasses into the atmosphere;  others damp waste which is very dangerous into our environment. This subject is a global matter which is being addressed globally; and we cannot address it as a periphery country, it is much larger.  

On the issue of special crops which resist drought, there is an organisation called NARO which is already addressing that question, and it is also addressing the question of taking these technologies to the peasants. How?  For example, you start with sub-counties where we created arrangements enabling people to actually travel to the countryside using motor cycles. It also lies in strengthening people who visit the peasants so that they do not practice what we call "administrative tourism".  These are people who go to villages, they look at the problem for a few minutes, they return to their hotels. Such people practice "administrative tourism".  We want to stamp administrative tourism from the people who interface with the peasants. We must address the issues of appropriate technology.  

On the issue of environmental terrorism as depicted by The East African magazine, again these are very important scientific matters which NARO, Makerere University and other tertiary institutions are handling.  I would require a whole day, and I suggest we have a whole day to discuss these issues and we must have proper papers.  I am willing to spend even two days whereby I bring the experts, the plans and so on, so that this matter is exhaustively discussed.  

Now, how do you anticipate disaster? First of all, we have been getting persistent problems.  So, you first ask; why does this problem persist? We normally ask this question in Political Science - and this is why we call it, for example, Political Science - why is it that whenever I am, for example, going via Mr. X or via that dog, it always barks at me and does not bark at another person?  Then you try to establish the persistence of that problem and the related relationships - (Laughter).  

After establishing the relationship between the persistent problem and the various factors, then you are able to analyse, anticipate and prescribe.  You must also use technology to solve the problem; you must use weather forecasts.  You must also determine how many families you have had, and their frequency.  All this data is essential so that you can plan accordingly but sometimes, I should say, we lack disaster preparedness and, therefore, the disaster persists.  

I think it was hon. Dick Nyai who said Government was oblivious to the plight of the people. Far from it!  The Government in Africa is very weak.  Why is it weak? Because everything is a priority - (Laughter).  When you take a country like Uganda, it actually died. Uganda died for all practical purposes.  We are coming from the grave, and when you are coming from the grave, you cannot say that there is not enough light!  But the point I am making is that, we are overloaded with problems. Wherever I look, there is a problem.   

The Government has very, very scarce resources.  In fact, as a former Minister of Public Service, what I was advocating is that we should have a national seminar so that we return many of the entitlements which were given to political leaders like Members of Parliament, Ministers and Public Servants. Many of these entitlements are not there, we simply supply air!  We inherited a lot of entitlements which the State cannot give and it compounds our problem.  If I had power, I would also reduce our Public Holidays from 14 -(Laughter and Interruption)

MR. NYAI:  Mr. Speaker, hon. Elly Karuhanga the Member for Nyabushozi addressed a question which affects all of us here and all our constituencies, to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda.  Now the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is attempting to answer those question.  Mr. Speaker, my worry is, is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister in order to say "if I had power" as if he has no power?  What is he doing here? (Laughter)  Is he in order to say that he has no power and pretends to answer  on behalf of the Government of Uganda and yet he is the Leader of Government Business? Is he in order to say he has no power?

THE SPEAKER: My understanding of the situation is this:  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister made a preface to this recent part of his presentation with this statement that Uganda has been dead and he said, when you come out of the grave, can you complain that there is not enough light?  So, he has found himself in that environment.  I think he is in order to lament the way he did -(Laughter).

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker for that propitious ruling, but I want to say that in Political Science, power is the capacity to make a person do what that person would not otherwise do.  For example, if you are coming here as a Member of Parliament and I say "go back" and you go back, I have power.  But if I tell you to go back and you do not go back, I do not have power over you - (Laughter).  So, by definition, even a Leader of Government Business cannot purport to have all power, not even the President because power is an elusive phenomenon which you acquire democratically, if it is to persist, or you may use autocratic means but that one is short-lived because it is dependent on force.  So, I was really saying, there are limitations. I would have reduced, for example, Public Holidays from 14 to about 3 because we over celebrate in this country - (Laughter).  

Now, there was an issue of the quantity of non-functioning boreholes.  I want to inform you, and I am delighted to inform you that we brought in technical people and they are in the field quantifying the problem. As I made it clear, unless you quantify the problem, how do you prescribe the medicine?  For example, we do have areas where there is flooding because the river Nile is blocked.  Now, I have demanded from the relevant Ministry to know the exact number of the people who have been affected and also the  categories of the level of suffering so that we may prescribe the solutions.  In other words, we are quantifying the problem, but it is not easy to do so. You require resources and skills to quantify the problem because some people exaggerate the problems in order to get more than others.  Indeed, we are quantifying the problem.  

With regard to the issue of buying emaciated animals which may not be acceptable to the receiving areas, we are gravely aware of this problem, and we are also aware of the politics of moving cattle from one area to another. For example, according to the culture in some areas, long horned cows are not wanted so the people there may object to receiving them.  

So, what we are trying to establish is; is the person selling willing to sell? For example, I am also a dairy farmer.  We people who are herdsmen are very conservative.  It takes a disaster to enable us to let animals go.  So you have to handle that one issue carefully.  The second issue is; is the recipient willing to accept that animal?  We have also to establish the state of the health of the animal.  So, it is not an easy question.  So, all these factors must cohere in order to put into place re-stocking. 

I am given to understand that Shs. 18 billion was allocated for re-stocking some parts of this country but you must get the politics correct, you must get the cultural traits correct for the supplier and the receiver to cohere and handling this problem does not take a day.  

Someone mentioned that the Department of Disaster has only 400 bags of food and I am glad to note that we are realising the problem of scarcity.  We are surrounded by scarcity but you first quantify the problem.  You also indicate the available resources and then you invite for assistance from external donors and from civil society.  

Only recently, I met a civil society institution -  is it World Vision? They came to see me and I asked them; "can you assist us on this question?"  But they always ask; what is the size of the problem, what have you done?  Because if you show that you have done nothing, then you may not deserve a lot of help.  So, of necessity we must quantify the problem and categorise the problem, and take the necessary decisions.  

There is an Article of the Constitution - I think it is 110 - where it may be necessary to declare an emergency but you do not just declare an emergency like that because it has also political dimensions.  You must first find internal solutions and get the appropriate law to declare a disaster.  

Tapping water by gravity is an excellent proposal and we shall embrace it.  When are the rains coming? (Laughter)  I am given to understand that areas under stress now are entering the normal dry season, that is; western and south western districts.  Dry conditions will persist until early to mid August. 

In the northern areas where you have above average rainfall, rains will start early to mid July and good rainfall is expected.  So, in the Northern areas generally, early to mid July, good rainfall is expected.  In the north eastern areas, although the rain started late, by mid July rain is expected with slightly above normal rainfall.  

In the central districts, we are entering the dry period and certain rain will not set in until mid to late August. The eastern districts have had a good season and the dry season is setting in to allow drying of crops.  Rainfall will resume in early September. 

As you know, the Department of Meteorology gives a monthly update on these forecasts but I think I will be asking that department to market these figures.  I hear by direct that all Members of Parliament be given these figures in writing; and I am also requesting the Members of Parliament to become vectors of this information in all areas of Uganda, and we should ask the mass media here present to disseminate this information because, under Article 41 of the Constitution, they are entitled to have this information.  

We are told of unreliable bore-holes but again, I want to make it clear that we have a poor maintenance culture.  We need to address our maintenance culture and this work is largely done by the districts because under Schedule 6 to our Constitution, the centre is largely given the role of dealing with policy, apart from Foreign Affairs and Defence. Most of the functions were given to the districts, by the way, because under Article 189, the residue belongs to the districts; and people were asking, what is this residue?  If you look at the Local Governments Act, that is where you will discover the residue.  We are largely dealing with policy, that is, the framework. 

So, a lot of these functions were given to the districts but they lack the capacity but as the Minister of Local Government will inform you, the capacity is being worked out.  He is required to have the framework of creating the capacity and of defining the capacity in terms of manpower, in terms of skills, in terms of good leadership so that they can receive the power given to them under Schedule 6 to the Constitution.  

Now, problems of health: These are also grave. For example, cholera. This matter is being addressed by the Ministry of Health. It is also being dealt with by the civil society that is, institutions which enjoy political and administrative space from the State by interfacing to handle that problem.  

With regard to seed distribution, we did discuss this matter and we do have a Minister here - are you around?  Is there any  Minister of Agriculture here to answer that question?  If you would come and answer that question - with your permission, Mr. Speaker (Laughter).  Mr. Speaker, seed distribution is a very important issue. 

THE SPEAKER:  Rt. hon. Prime Minister, just in case the Minister is not ready - I do not know but if he is ready, I have no problem.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Dr. Byaruhanga F):  We have money in the budget for the development of seeds; that is for crops, for animals and for fish but, we are not in position to give out these seeds free.  So, probably the Minister of Disaster Preparedness will solicit for funds so that he can purchase the seeds which we shall have produced and distribute it to the people. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  So, again, it is a  question of affordability, and I think what we have to do here is to increase the affordability of seeds because this is a very important issue.  
On silos; as we speak now, many of the silos are actually empty because there is the question of who will send his food to the silos so that the food can then be marketed across the borders within Uganda under a liberal economy.  What I have gathered from the Minister of Agriculture, is that you cannot prevent the selling of food in a liberal economy, but you might appeal to the people not to sell the food so that you might acquire money to buy that food. So, there is the issue of budgeting for that food. 

THE SPEAKER:  The Right hon. Prime Minister, I do not want to interrupt you unnecessarily, but we have another question, I think, for the Minister of Finance.  So, if you could summarise.

PROF. NSIBAMBI:   Okay, let me summarise.  I think there was the issue of strengthening the department which forecasts the weather. It is a question of skills and the appropriate technology and it is at hand and of course, hon. Butele was right.  We do not have enough funds but we have the goodwill and that goodwill has enabled this country to be irrigated  financially and in terms of skills  by various friends. 

The Youth Scheme is not very relevant to the question in the short run but in the long run, you need the youth also to address the question of knowledge, the question of skills and they could also help us to handle the current disaster.  The money given to you may not be enough but the question of scarcity is ubiquitous, it is widespread.  Take that little and use it exhaustively, it will multiply.  

Now, on the question of food security, the Ministry of Agriculture is addressing this question but I wanted to point out that inflation has been very well controlled because you must not print money and we are not printing money. That is a very important cause of inflation by the way. I did a bit of Economics for Part (I) of my degree, and although I have forgotten some aspects, I do know that printing of money is a terrible cause of inflation. Also, food scarcity does affect inflation and that is why we are addressing it systematically.  

Now, I want to thank all Members of Parliament, I want to thank the civil society and I want also to ask that we pray to the Creator that he may assist us in our plight but ultimately, we need to acquire the culture of anticipating disaster and of putting into place plans to cope with disaster.  That is why you need prompt laws for harvesting water, prompt laws for producing surplus food, prompt laws for preserving food and storing it.  I thank you, let us keep each posted so that we may tackle this problem in a persistent manner and I know we shall.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Karuhanga, your supplementary question or you are moving to the next question?

MR. KARUHANGA:  Just a small supplementary. Mr. Speaker, as it is obvious, we are paying the price of crimes committed by past political leaders in the Ministry of Agriculture, starting from the days of hon. Ssekitoleko, the Vice President and all. 

Now what is disturbing me is that, while we used to argue that the Vice President should not be Minister of Agriculture and we thought we had succeeded, then we got somebody who had a Ph.D in Pastoralism, and we have been going round celebrating his appointment but we have never seen him in this House.  While the Prime Minister is addressing this question, the Minister has not been sighted in Parliament for a long time and I have information that, in fact, he is now taking on another job and he is a lecturer at Makerere University.  So, we have another situation of a Ministry which is not properly steered.  I think there is a curse in that Ministry!  

Could the Prime Minister address the question of Ministers attending, not only Parliament, but also running their Ministries and not taking on jobs; reading for other courses abroad, lecturing in Makerere University but concentrating and taking on their sectors seriously? Because, the poor people who have sent us here, when they have a situation like they have, they expect that we, Parliamentarians and Government are going to really, attend to them!  How can this type of situation be allowed to continue willy-nilly? 

The second question is the Karamoja money.  Yesterday, the Prime Minister was here when we were told that shs. 3.6 billion had been passed as supplementary and I was one of the people who thought so and defended it.  It is not the case, that money has not reached the Ministry of Water.  Could that matter be looked at and could the Prime Minister confirm that the money will now go to the Department of Water so that it can address water problems in Karamoja?

Thirdly, I have a letter here from RDC Ngoma Ngime in Mbarara, addressed to hon. Kisamba Mugerwa, Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and copied to all Members of Parliament from Kisoro, Kabale, Ntungamo, Mbarara, Bushenyi, Rukungiri, Kasese, Kabarole and all LC V Chairmen; talking about seeds and that since the death of Dr. Akimanzi who was in charge of Potato production, that Department has collapsed. The seed we used to get from Kabale, the place has closed and there is no seed available for those in the whole of the areas mentioned by Ngoma Ngime.  Is the Prime Minister aware of such a situation in the Ministry of Agriculture?  While we are addressing the problem of drought, these are the problems.  I would like to table the letter of the RDC Ngoma Ngime here for the Prime Minister's attention and when he finds the Minister of Agriculture, finally, he should give it to him.
PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Mr. Speaker - (Interruption) 

MR. KARUHANGA:  One more, Mr. Speaker, about another Minister.  It is unfortunate for me to start mentioning Ministers, but it is annoying because we have a serious situation.

MR. MUKASA: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for a Member of this House to persistently make allegations that he has not provided facts to?  To the best of my knowledge, I sit here and I always see Dr. Kisamba when he is in town, come and sit there. Mr. Speaker, the reason I put it this way is that Dr. Kisamba of all the Ministers is one who has been consistently going with the President on tours and for somebody to make allegations that he is lecturing in Makerere and yet he has been holding seminars and other educational projects or programmes in different places - these are facts and I find it - he was here this morning, Mr. Speaker, some Committee members will tell you in the Committee of Agriculture.  Is it in order, Mr. Speaker, for wide sweeping allegations damaging to a Minister to be made in this House?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:   Hon. Karuhanga, if indeed the hon. Kisamba Mugerwa was here in Parliament appearing before a Committee and has been going around holding seminars, I think it might not be accurate  to say he is persistently not in the House unless you have contrary information.  Otherwise, that will be out of order.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, I have information that the hon. Minister is lecturing in Makerere University.  All I am requesting is that Ministers are not free to come here and go and attend seminars and follow the President anywhere they want, but if they are taking on other jobs, I am objecting to that and if that is the case, yes, he is right - (Interruption).

MR. RWAKOOJO:  Thank you very much, for recognising me.  I am not a member of the Agriculture Sessional Committee but this morning, I was in Parliament at 10 o'clock and hon. Kisamba Mugerwa walked into Parliament. He stayed with the Committee which I attended until 2 o'clock.  So, to say that he has persistently not been here is not accurate.

DR. RUGUNDA:  Mr. Speaker, it is also right to say that hon. Kisamba Mugerwa is one of the few Ministers who have been accompanying His Excellency the President in his country-wide tour and he was selected because agriculture, as you very well know, is the mainstay of our economy, and his accompanying the President enriched the Presidential visits and tours in educating the people in countryside. So, hon. Kisamba Mugerwa has substantial cause for having been away in the few cases he has been away from the House. 

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, I wish to withdraw my statement in light of the statement I have been given and I beg you to understand the reason for a Member of Parliament from the Back Benches to go to those type of levels.  It is because of the  desperate situation we are facing at home. When we go to face the peasants, we really have a problem.  I withdraw the statements about the hon. Kisamba Mugerwa but I hope that finally, we now have a full-time Minister of Agriculture who is going to deliver and address the questions in that Ministry.

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Let me also add that when hon. Dr. Kisamba Mugerwa is not here, one of his Ministers of State is here and that it has been accepted that if the senior Minister is not around, he can send a Minister of State who can handle the issues on his or her behalf.  So, that is extremely important and talking about the performance of Ministers, I want Members of Parliament to realise that these Ministers are expected to be in the field; they are expected to attend Parliament, attend Cabinet, attend relevant conferences. So, they have an overload of functions and I want you to be understanding.  They cannot be everywhere.  That is why we have Ministers of State to assist senior Ministers.  

I do not think that it is  fair, when you do not know their schedule and you do not know the quality of their work, to start making allegations.  It is not fair because you must have a scientific method and I am glad to hear that he is withdrawing his objection.  Can we hear his withdrawal on the microphone, Sir, with your permission?  

THE SPEAKER:  He has already withdrawn it.

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  I am very happy.  I am also informed by hon. Dr. Fabius Byaruhanga that there are seeds at Kawanda, Masindi and Kasese and in order for the hon. Member to prove what you are saying,  I have directed that he be taken to Kawanda tomorrow to look at these seeds physically with his own eyes because some people do not believe until they see the scars -  You remember in the Bible.  

So, the issue here which we should note is that, we are working together and we also need your assistance because many Members of Parliament have assisted. Describe the problem correctly and give us information, and we shall work together.  We are very proud of the teamwork.  It is a team which works very hard. Sometimes we work until very late at night, dealing with Bills and other work.  Yesterday you threw out a Motion for a Resolution because you wanted the Electricity Bill. We have had to sit at that Bill, sometimes until the small hours of the night.  The task is large and we have the commitment.  We need your support.  I thank you.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, I wish to ask the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning, the following questions:  Article 125 of the Constitution provides that there shall be a National Planning Authority whose composition and functions shall be prescribed by Parliament. Could the House be informed when this is going to be implemented? So that the whole Executive can be complete, because we think that all these problems; failure to plan for drought, failure to make any serious plans, is because we do not have a plan for our country?

MR. OPIO:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to report as follows, on the question being asked by hon. Elly Karuhanga: Firstly, that the principles of legislation have ben submitted by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to  Cabinet and they will be discussed soon.  Secondly, the next stage will be for the draftsmen to draft the Bill for discussion by the Cabinet before the Bill comes here for debate and enactment into law after the assent by the President. Thirdly, I expect that the law is to come into force within this session  - (Interjection) 

MR. NYAI:  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking this clarification because it looks like the hon. Minister of State for Finance, first of all, knows the duration of this Session which I am quite sure, Mr. Speaker, is in your discretion, and the Business Committee, under your guidance has not yet determined the duration of that Session.  Can the Minister be forthright with us that the Cabinet will have discussed these proposals by a week X, and by four weeks after that, the legal draftsmen will have reduced it to   a draft bill and by this time, the First Reading will be in Parliament?  Can he do that instead of saying before this Session is over?

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Speaker, thank you. Can the Minister clarify on what basis the Government has been planning for national development in the last three years or so since 1996 after the general elections,  without this National Development Authority assisting with the overall national development plan?  In other words, in the absence of the National Development Authority, has the Government been having an all encompassing national development plan rather than this ad hoc, yearly thing where today you say you are going to have a tarmac road from Soroti to Lira and then after three years, you decide that it is no longer important, you are going to have another one which is going from Arua to Kisangani because it has become more important?

Furthermore, is the absence of this National Development Authority and a National Development Plan a deliberate policy so that it is a plan not to plan as hon. Mao is putting it?  Is it a deliberate policy so that actually you do not know what the Government is going to do therefore you do not bother, yet the Government knows that it is coming on an ad hoc basis for specific interests?  Thank you.

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Speaker, the need for a National Planning Authority has been discussed in this country since the NRC days and it was a very tough debate in the Constituent Assembly.  We have raised it here on many occasions.  Hon. Kaijuka who was then the Minister of Planning and Economic Development and his successor hon. Kutesa said in this august House that the Bill for establishing the National Planning Authority was in Cabinet.  It is on record.  

Mr. Speaker, it is now surprising because I did challenge hon. Kutesa here that my investigation shows that there was nothing like such a Bill anywhere in the Executive.  Hon. Dr. Opio has been fairly honest, but this is a serious matter. Development is a very serious matter!  In fact we are here to ensure equitable distribution of development throughout the regions of this country, and we are sure that cannot be done without a National Planning Authority which is going to co-ordinate all development needs from all corners of Uganda.  

So far, we have been planning through memoranda.  Wherever His Excellency the President goes, there are memoranda; wherever hon. Dr. Okulo Epak goes, there are memoranda; wherever Honourable MPs go, there are memoranda! This planning by memoranda was initiated by Amin.  He had no Parliament and therefore that was the best way to do planning.  I am sure that we do not wish to have another Amin in this age.  

Mr. Speaker, because we have not been told the truth previously, I would therefore like to get a firm commitment from the Minister responsible for Planning and Economic Development as to when we will move from the stage of a Bill, to the stage of the Bill to Cabinet and the stage of the Bill to Parliament.  We would like to be assured or; is it possible for the Minister to give us that time table with commitment?  

Secondly, we have spent millions of dollars and utilised participation from all corners of Uganda and I happen, unfortunately, to be a Member of the task force for the preparation of the Vision 2025  which was prepared in anticipation and on condition that there will be a National Planning Authority which will translate it into operations.  Could the hon. Minister tell us; in the absence of a National Planning Authority, how shall we convert the visions in the Vision 2025 into a national development focus?  I thank you.

CAPT. GUMA:  Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  Yesterday when we were going through the figures for the supplementary expenditure, you could see Poverty Eradication Programme activities under various sectors of Government; IGG, Local Government, Health, and under different recurrent and development budgets.  I thought that was a very serious indicator that even on a very serious social phenomenon like poverty which seems to be an area where Government is putting a lot of its focus, there is no nationally accepted or created team to co-ordinate matters. Mr. Speaker, it also seems to me that there is no nationally accepted focus and way of going about poverty eradication in the country. All that seems to be there is "adhocing" - (Interruption)  Yes!  

So, can the hon. Minister of State for Finance, hon. Gabriel Opio, really tell us in specific terms when this Planning Authority is going to be established? The question of saying that it will be there this session, we know the session will end, with your permission, somewhere around March and April, 2000.  We would want to see this Authority in place so that it can co-ordinate very serious matters in respect to planning.  

Because hon. Gabriel Opio has been a lecturer in a field related to money, he knows that planning is a very important ingredient and function in respect to resource utilisation.  Otherwise, this "ad hocing" here and there really creates a lot of inefficiency, disuse and misuse of resources.  Can he be more specific so that he tells us that by this time the thing will go through the drafting stage and so on, so that when the time comes, we can really demand for it, rather than saying the session which is going to end in the next millennium?  We would want to have the Planning Authority even before we go for Christmas.  

MR. CHEBET MAIKUT:  Mr. Speaker, in the budget for the current financial year, there is a provision for effecting the equalisation grant to districts which are marginalised and one of the provisions in the Local Governments Act provides that the local governments commission, in taking a decision on how this money should be disbursed to districts, has got to consult the National Planning Authority. May I know from the hon. Minister of State for Planning how the provision under the current budgetary provision for equalisation grants is going to be disbursed to districts in the absence of the National Planning Authority?  Thank you.   

MR. OPIO:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The first question was raised by hon. Dick Nyai.  He is wondering how, within this session, we shall bring the Bill and therefore enact it into Law.  I would like to assure the House that as we speak now, the principles are with the Cabinet and within a short time, they will be discussed. Immediately after that, it will be the job of the draftsmen to make sure that they draft these principles into a Bill and once the Bill is ready, we will be ready to bring it here in the House for discussion. Therefore, we are committed that we should bring this Bill here for discussion within the session which is up to March next year.  

Hon. Omara Atubo, it was in his area,  maybe a conjecture.  He was saying that these things are happening, when shall we know what is happening?  I would like to assure him that there has been the Ministry of Planning and Economic development which has been doing the planning and now it has been turned into a department. Therefore, there is that organisation which is continuing to plan for this country.

Now, the area which was mentioned by hon. Okulo Epak; first he emphasised the point raised earlier that we need the National Planning Authority and we do agree with him as Cabinet, and  Parliament has raised this concern as well.  I am glad to hear that he is a former planner and he knows how useful a planning organisation is and we adhere to that advise and we shall make sure we work according to that -(Interruption). 

MR. DICK NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I am sorry to interrupt the Minister's eloquent reposit but I do know, Mr. Speaker, from personal experience that hon. Dr. Okulo Epak, the Member of Parliament for Oyam is and still continues to be and will be until the Lord calls him, a planner.  Is it in order for the Minister to refer to him in the past tense in matters of planning? 

THE SPEAKER:  I did not hear that so I cannot rule on that.

MR. OPIO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Hon. Dr. Okulo Epak was also lamenting that in the past, during Amin's time, there was no plan, there was only memoranda and that we are continuing with memoranda.  I would like to assure him that we are not continuing with memoranda; we have a Minister who is in charge of Planning and Economic Development and we are getting plans which are approved here. Every time we read a Budget, that is part of planning.  What is a Budget?  A budget is putting into figures what you have planned to achieve.  And some of these projects are for many, many years, others are medium term, others are long term and, therefore, as far as we are concerned, the Budgets which we approve here are plans for the running of this country.  I accept that what we need is a holistic approach, and this holistic approach is going to be strengthened by the creation of the National Planning Authority.

Now, when it comes to the question on Vision 2025 by Dr. Bachou, I would like to inform the House that we are about to launch it, and we would like to make a point here that Government is committed to launching it for it spent money in preparing it and together with UNDP. The operationalisation of the Vision 2025 will be by the Government and, specifically, Ministry of Planning and Economic Development which is now a department of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Hon. Capt. Guma has raised an issue that what we are doing under the PAF - Poverty Action Fund - is hap hazard.  I would like to assure the House that we have been planning and we have identified six major areas which we must attack under the poverty eradication action plan:  Water, agricultural extension,  primary health, primary education, feeder roads and major roads. These are the areas which we think we must give priority to make sure that we alleviate the poverty of the people of Uganda.  And when you see various organs going to investigate, supervise and monitor, it is according to pan. 

To be able to carry out these activities, we must have money.  This money is for people to go and cross-check whether the money we have sent is doing the job for which it was sent.  So, when you see in our supplementaries money sent to the districts to go and investigate how money which is supposed to be for education, for health, for roads etc is being used, that is not a sign of being hap hazard, it is a sign of commitment or of making sure that  people account for the money which is released for specific jobs.  So, I would like to assure Capt. Guma and the House that this is part of planning.  When you plan, you must have what you call control centres and you must therefore go and reconcile the achievements with the plan and that is what we would like to continue doing, even under the National Planning Authority.  I thank you.

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

SUPPLEMENTARY FUNDS FOR The FISCAL YEAR, 1998/99

VOTE 001 - OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

THE SPEAKER:  I now propose the question that a total sum of shs. 2,317,921,000 under VOTE 001 - Office of the President be provided for as Supplementary Expenditure.  I now put the question that a total sum of shs. 2,317,921,000 under VOTE 001 Office of the President be provided for as Supplementary Expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 004 - OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now propose the question that a total sum of shs. 100,000,000 under VOTE 004 - Office of the Prime Minister be provided for as Supplementary Expenditure.  I now put the question that a total sum of shs. 100,000,000  under VOTE 004 Office of the Prime Minister be provided for as Supplementary Expenditure.  

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 005 - MINISTRY OF PUBLIC SERVICE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.159,501,000 under VOTE 005 - Ministry of Public Service be provided for as a Supplementary Expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 006 - MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.124,900,000 under VOTE 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs be provided for as a Supplementary Expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 008 - MINISTRY OF FINANCE PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.4,633,191,000 under VOTE 008 - Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development be provided for as a Supplementary Expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 013 - MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.200,000,000 under VOTE 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports be provided for as a Supplementary Expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 014 - MINISTRY OF HEALTH

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.36,200,000 under VOTE 014 - Ministry of Health  be provided for as a Supplementary Expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 015 - PARLIAMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.3,262,880,000 under VOTE 015 - Parliament be provided for as a Supplementary Expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 017 - AUDIT DEPARTMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.440,000,000 under VOTE 017 - Audit Department be provided for as a Supplementary Expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 019 - BUTABIKA HOSPITAL

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.266,000,000 under VOTE 019 - Butabika Hospital be provided for as a Supplementary Expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 021 - MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.514,442,000 under VOTE 21 - Ministry of Defence be provided for as a Supplementary Expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 025 - MINISTRY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.50,000,000 under VOTE 025 - Ministry of Local Government be provided for as a Supplementary Expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 031 - INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.278,400,000 under VOTE 031 - Inspectorate of Government be provided for as a Supplementary Expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 050 - ARUA DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.299,423,000 under VOTE 050 - Arua District be provided for as a Supplementary Expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to)


VOTE 051 - GULU DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.129,744,000 under VOTE 051 - Gulu District be provided for as a Supplementary Expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 052 - LIRA DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.118,676,000 under VOTE 052 - Lira District be provided for as a Supplementary Expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, we did some good work in the General Debate and at this rate, we may stay here for quite sometime. I propose to invoke one of our Rules, that is Rule 113 sub-rule (10) paragraph (g) so that the question is put on the rest of the votes on Recurrent Expenditure and you pass them at a go.  Do you have any objection? 

MR. KARUHANGA: Except that I was waiting for a detailed explanation when we get to the Karamoja District, to satisfy the question I had asked the Minister earlier about the 3.6 billion shillings. It is not very clear to me how it has been handled.  If the Minister could just clear that, then we can go. I do  not know whether he understands my question because we have discussed -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, can you clear that before we continue? - (Interruption)  Yes, can you repeat the question, in case the Minister  has not followed?

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, the question I would like the Minister to address is the 3.6 billion shillings which is supposed to be available for dams in the districts in Karamoja.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, which was a sticky point?

MR. KARUHANGA: Yes!

THE CHAIRMAN: Correct!

MR. KARUHANGA: I would like the Minister to correct the impression that the Members of Parliament have, and to know the fate of that money and whether the money has been transferred to Water or it is sitting in Finance because Water says they do not have that money, that they only had very little of it.

MR. OPIO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to summarise the problem and the solution as this:  First, when the President was visiting Karamoja and other districts, there was an issue of dams and the issue went to cabinet. The Cabinet decided to remove that part of the Ministry of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries to Lands, Water and Environment.  

There were some funds under a scheme in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to the tune of 300 million shillings and that money was also technically transferred to the Ministry of Lands, Water and Environment.  At the same time, a friendly Government in the names of Austria recognized the problem of water in Karamoja and the Austrian government went ahead, working in conjunction with the Uganda Government, to provide money to the tune of about 3.6 billion for the construction of dams in Karamoja.  

Now, this was being done nearing the end of the Financial Year, which is March so, the Ministry of Finance decided that they could send some of the money to the Ministry of Lands, Water and Environment. They had wanted to send 510 million shillings.  However, as we speak now, only about 270 million shillings have been sent to the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment and for this amount, the Ministry will give a report on what they have done with that money.  

The bulk of the money is still on the Consolidated Fund and the Minister of Finance is awaiting the criteria for the disbursement of this money.  So, I would like, therefore, to state that the bulk of the money is still unused, only about 270 million has been disbursed to the Ministry of Lands, Water and Environment.

MR. KARUHANGA: So the questions which the Members have should be addressed to the Department of Water to see why they are not coming up with plans to Finance. Thank you.

MR. PINTO: I seek to ask a question, Mr. Speaker, for the Minister to once again clarify to us. Is it 279 million or is it 510 million?  There seems to be some conflict of information.  Yesterday, we were told 510 million, now the hon. Minister is revising this figure downwards.  Could we get the exact amount?

MR. BAKU: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My clarification is in the area of financing NGOs Health Units.  I have seen in some of the districts there is a provision to support lower level NGO health units and in others, it is not there.  So, I would like to be clarified on the policy of how we fund or support NGO health units.  Do we only give support to hospital units, or we give even to the lower health units Grade II, originally called dispensaries, or we have a level where we stop in supporting health units which are built by NGOs?

MR. MUTEBI KITYO: I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want it to be recorded that the allocation of funds from the contingency fund to cater for roads, road maintenance was unfairly done because bigger districts were allocated the same amount like the smallest district.  For example, Kalangala was allocated 100 million and Mpigi was just allocated 130 million.

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: I wanted the Minister for Planning to explain to us why El Nino money for Nawekeke road in Kamuli District has totally been ignored.  It is now two years and we are still begging for it.  Secondly, in this supplementary, Mr. Speaker, the percentage taken by the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development is far higher than we expect for the other ministries and yet this is really a service ministry rather than a productive ministry!  The current Minister himself used to accept that it was unfair but now he is also joining and saying that it is okay! I would like him to explain why we are continuing the policy whereby Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is number two in spending money and yet there are other service ministries like those which are in charge of roads and those in charge of production; why is this continuing as a policy of the government?

MR. OPIO: Mr. Speaker, I would like, again, to make a statement on the amount of money for the dams in Karamoja as hon.Pinto would like me to.  I would like to again repeat what I said yesterday.  The 510 million shillings was released by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, however, the report from the Ministry of Lands, Water and Environment is that they have only disbursed about 270 million.  So, they are the people to answer why they have not disbursed the rest but we, as Ministry of Finance, released 510 million shillings.

Now, the other question was about some NGO hospitals which have not received any funding from Government. I would like to state that the  Ministry of Health has been working out agreements with various NGO hospitals and those are the hospitals to which government has been sending money. Government is continuing to discuss with various NGO hospitals for such arrangements.  When  agreements are reached, Government will also begin to send funds to them.

Now, the other question raised was that for some districts, some money is released for feeder roads while others are not given. What we do is, we work with the Ministry of Works:  The Ministry of Works  identifies priority areas and then they request for money from the Ministry of Finance. So, as far as the requisition is concerned, it is by the line Ministries.  So, I would like to emphasize that the line Ministries provide the criteria and we in the  Ministry of Finance release the money.  We do not decide where to take money unilaterally. The Ministry of Finance is  involved in the discussions but once a decision is reached by Government, it is the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance to release that money.

About the unfairness of the Budget of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I would like to state here that the Ministry of Finance sometimes acts as the holding Ministry.  So, when you see the bulk of the money in the Ministry of Finance, some of this money is being held there pending the decision by line Ministries.  I would like to give you an example of the 12 billion shillings which was disbursed to various districts under the UPE Programme.  When we passed that money here, it was under Ministry of Finance.  When we pass money under PAF, you will see how that money will be disbursed to various districts and ministries.  

So, I think what we need now is to give more education to Members of Parliament with regard to all this money which you see under Ministry of Finance so that it is not seen as the Ministry of Finance money per se.  But, you know, as a financier at home, you always do not disburse all the money, otherwise, when a visitor arrives or when a disaster strikes, you need to rescue the situation.  Actually, some of the money is for contingency.  As we speak now, we have two million as contingency funds for equalisation grants.  I would like to repeat here that I think  we should follow up this point with more discussion with Members of Parliament to see what really constitutes what you see under the vote of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

MR. RWAKOOJO: Mr. Chairman, for purposes of better accounting, instead of lumping the money in the Ministry of Finance and it is reflected in the Budget of Ministry of Finance, would it not be better to take it to the line Ministries so that you are able to equate expenditure with income?  Because, if the expenditure is reflected in the line Ministry and the income or the budget is reflected in the Ministry of Finance, there is going to be a disparity that cannot be explained!  Would it not better if it is in the same Ministry, for purposes of accounting?

MR. KIYONGA F: Mr. Chairman, I am still uncomfortable about this issue of money for dams in Karamoja.  May we now know from the Ministry concerned where the Shs.270 million is because as we speak, there is nothing which has moved from Karamoja about the dams?

MR. KIKULUKUNYU:  Mr. Chairman, at times I get defeated  when the Minister says that it may not be proper for a father not to have money on him because there could be a disaster or a visitor may come and there is nothing to use at home. Imagine a situation whereby there is a kid at home, he wants money to go back to school but you are keeping money for a visitor who might come; he will starve! In other words, he wants something from you but you are saying, "I am waiting for a visitor to come" or "I am waiting a disaster to come!"   What I am trying to come to is that, it defeats our understanding as the youth of Uganda.  You know, at times we talk as if we are lamenting but we have a point because at times we know what we want -(Interjection).

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, I want to remind you about our Rules of Procedure.  When we reach this stage of our deliberations, you would not raise policy issues; you can raise points of clarification on specific items.  Now, the matter of debate  on policy issues was concluded, we are now in a different stage and the Rules restrict us to look at items, if you want, specific item, address your mind to them, seek clarification and things like that.  

MR. KIKULUKUNYU: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am trying to seek clarification along a side a statement made by the Minister in respect to what he thinks he has as being kept for a visitor yet to come or for the draught being anticipated.  So here, I am only saying that last financial year, there was no money given to us on the ground that there was no money and when you say that you are keeping some awaiting a certain disaster to come, then it challenges our understanding.  Can you make further clarification on that, because when you say there is some money kept and here we are starving, we do not understand it as people of the same home?  I thank you.

MR. OPIO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to state here that part of the money you see in the Ministry of Finance is for PAF - Poverty Action Fund. If you read the Speech by the Minister, we have placed under that fund  over 85 billion shillings. From this we shall disburse money for water to the to the Ministry of Water; the money for Primary Health Care will go to the Ministry of Health; the money for Primary Education will go to the Ministry of Education; the money for feeder roads will go to the Ministry of Works; the money for extension staff will go to the Ministry of Agriculture.  So all that will be disbursed.

Then we have money for domestic arrears which, as we said, this year is 261 billion shillings.  Part of this money will be disbursed to line ministries to clear their debts.  There is money for external debt repayment. That money will be used to for external debt repayment.  Then you have money for URA which will be disbursed to URA as far as our Statute is concerned.  Then you have some money for contingencies, that is the money I referred to as money for unforeseen situations.  The bulk of the money, as I said, is already there but they need to be released according to the criteria which will be released by the line Ministries.  

To repeat what I said about the dam money, we are saying here that we have the money in the Consolidated Fund, except that of the 510 million shillings which was to be released, the Ministry has only requisitioned for 270 million shillings.  So, as far as we are concerned, even when we released 510 million shillings, the Permanent Secretary who talked to me from the Ministry of Lands, Water and Environment only used 270 million shillings and this can be got from the relevant Minister of Lands, Water and Environment.

THE CHAIRMAN: In terms of Rule 113, sub-rule (10), paragraph (g), I now put the question that the total amounts under Votes outstanding be provided for as specified services as outlined in the Supplementary Schedule No.1 of 1998/99 and Supplementary Schedule No.3 of 1996/97, as Supplementary Expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply considered the following Supplementary Expenditure and passed it with no Amendments:  Supplementary Schedule No.1 of 1998/99 and Supplementary Schedule No.3 of 1996/97.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Report of the Committee of Supply be adopted.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have now come to a stage where this should really conclude our  business for today. And that being the case, I will adjourn the House until Tuesday next week.  

(The House rose and adjourned until Tuesday, 13th July, 1999 at 2.00 p.m.)


