Tuesday 6th July, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

PAPERS

The Paper was laid on the Table

The Audited Accounts of the Uganda Tea Growers Corporation for the year ended 1991; by the Minister for Agriculture and Fisheries.

BILLS
FIRST READING

The following Bills were read a First Time:

(1) THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1993
By the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

(2) THE TRADITIONAL RULERS (RESTITUTION OF ASSETS AND                             PROPERTIES) BILL 1993
By the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER FOR LAND, HOSUING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Dr. Adriko): Mr. Chairman, it will be recalled that the Turyamuhiika Report and the recently concluded Public Service Review Commission recommended that Government divest itself from the responsibility of housing Civil Servants in the way it is at the moment.  When we undertook a National exercise to discuss shelter policy that resulted into the National shelter strategy, copies of which have been distributed to Members, this same subject was discussed at both District Regional and National Workshops.  There was overwhelming support that Civil Servants, like other employees should be facilitated to build, to rent or to buy houses for themselves instead of the present system of pool housing. The present stock of poor houses excluding institutional ones, occupied by Police, Army, Teachers, Nurses and others is only 2,259, yet the Public Service as of April this year has a total of 174,838 employees.  Even if we were to reduce this figure by deducting teachers Police and Prisons for certain reasons there will still be a figure of 28,391 for the so called traditional civil servants.  A figure that is still much higher than the existing pool houses.  The conclusion from this, is that only a small fraction of about 8 percent of the traditional civil servants are actually housed.  This means that the present system is inequitable, unfair and unsustainable, the solution to this would be to build houses for all civil servants.  Again this is unaffordable and no longer desirable as a policy, the national shelter strategy which has been adopted by the government hinges on “Enabling Approach” which means, having policies which makes housing markets to work and to move away from production, financing and managing housing, to instead improve market efficiency and housing conditions of the poor.  Housing Policy making has therefore, moved away from the previous narrow focus of Government being involved in direct production of houses.  If will instead guide the performance of the housing sector as a whole both formally and informally with strong emphasis on its overall interest in national economic development based on the private sector.  Housing is therefore, to be seen and applied in a programme package for economic development. Mr. Chairman, apart from the inequitability of the present system of housing a few civil servants, the housing stock under Government control is deteriorating at a very fast rate to the extent that some houses are already catching fire and some are collapsing due to structural failure, all of which is a loss of national asset and investment.  The Government currently does not have enough resources to put these houses in the best repairable conditions as it has been estimated that, to repair a medium class house would cost in the region of 20 million shillings.  

Since my Ministry is now in the stage of implementing the programme arising out of the national shelter strategy, the Government through my Ministry will participate in housing through the installation of the infrastructure availing of land, housing development in terms of planning the organisation of construction sector and material industry, and involvement in financial mechanisms for housing production.  Policies will also be directed towards security of tenure, development of real estates by the private sector so that they may be used as security for further funding and stimulating demand in housing rural estates that will encourage the investors to be interested in this particular type of investments.  

Government has now decided to implement its decision to divest itself from the responsibility of guaranteeing housing or providing housing for civil servants.  The existing ageing Government pool housing would be sold at market value to the sitting tenants. When the sitting tenants fails or is unable to buy such a house within one year, he will lose the right of occupancy and the opportunity will be given to another civil servant who may not be housed in a pool house or who has not previously bought a pool house.  This offer will also last for one year after which all the houses that will not have been purchased by civil servants as mentioned earlier will be opened to any member of the public to purchase on cash basis. The implementation of divestiture will, therefore, be in full swing within 3 years.  The proceeds of sale for these houses will form the seed capital for a revolving fund to be set up in the Housing Finance Company of Uganda Limited in addition to the funds that may be contributed directly by the Treasury for this scheme or from donors.  The revolving fund will be able to repay to the Treasury after a period of time.  The civil servant who will not have had a chance, and there are many of these, to buy the pool houses, will then have access to funding by borrowing from the revolving fund with a reasonable repayment period of at least 15 years.  A Board of Trustees will be appointed to oversee this entire exercise.  Land there has already been ear-marked in most major urban centres, for this scheme and the Government will plan and look for resources to install the necessary infrastructure to service the pieces of land which will be allocated to public servants while other civil servants will get leases on some vacant plots currently owned by Uganda Land Commission. Other types of assistance depending on the availability of resources will include schemes for the provision of cheap but durable building materials, architectural designs and other technical assistance for those who would wish to build.  These who want to buy will also be facilitated financially to get mortgage; in other words the private sector will now play a big role in housing civil servants like any other citizen, and this will boost housing market in terms of constructions or letting of houses.  The removal of provision of pool housing will be replaced by consolidated housing and other allowances a matter what will be dealt with by the Minister for Public Service.

Finally, I wish to inform the House that a few houses attached to particular posts like the President, Prime Minister, Chief Justice, Commissioner of Police and a few Ministerial houses will now be turned into institutional houses associated with those offices.  The duties of the measures I have outlined above are contained with a document entitled ‘The Civil Service Housing Scheme Trust Deed and Guide lines for procurement of Government Traditional Pool houses and acquisition of plots with the scheme’ which I now Table here.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. OKELLO LUWUM (Chua County Kitgum): On the policy of sale of government houses which the hon. Minister has been reading, I want hon. Members to note; that this policy is illegal, because - until a law or a Bill is brought before us here repealing some of the provisions of the 1975 Land Reform Decree; because the 1975 Land Reform Decree, Mr. Chairman, abolishes the sale of public property specifically section 2(5) abolishes it.  So, Mr. Chairman, is it in order for such a policy to be brought before us to endorse before the 1975 or that section of the 1975 land Reform Decree is repealed, Mr. Chairman? (Applause)

MR. ADRIKO: Mr. Chairman, the subject of my intervention before the House this afternoon was a Ministerial Statement and according to the Rules of Procedure I had not expected the Member to rise and make comments on the thing but, Mr. Chairman -(Laughter and Interruption)

MR. BUTAGIRA: Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is the hon. Minister in order to misquote the Rules of Procedure that we have no right to comment on the Ministerial Statements, when rule 28 empowers Member to seek clarification and that is what we are doing, Mr. Chairman.  

THE CHAIRMAN: That is in order that is why I allowed him to explain it.  Continue, please.

MR. ADRIKO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I will proceed to comment.  The point raised by the hon. Member, has been taken into account and fully discussed before I took the decision to bring this information before the House.  I did mention that in this scheme a Trust Deed will be set up and it is the Board of Trustees who will sell these houses, but the Uganda Land Commission will still list the rent out to the Trust.  So, we have had advise from the office of the Attorney General and we are quite certain that we are within the Law.  Thank you.

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House resolve into the Committee of Supply for consideration and approval of supplementary estimates for the year 1992/93.  I beg to move Sir.

MR. MANZI: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wish to second the Motion for the passing of the supplementary estimates for 1992/93. In seconding this and supporting this passing of the supplementary estimates I wish to mention one or two things, that I wish to thank the Ministry of Finance for having put in Motion and in process Policies that ensured that inflation was controlled and brought to near Zero at least on a monthly basis and creating a situation where we had a less than 10 percent inflationary drive in the economy.   

I also wish to say that while supporting that inflation should be controlled the theory of tight money management should also be relaxed a little bit so that the economy has got a way it can move.  So that the business community, as we are privatising an liberalizing, has a way of breathing and being able to actually make the economy pick otherwise if we over stick to tight money management we may actually strangle the economy we are trying to build.  I also wish to say that I appreciate and I notice that money supply was going up, so while we are controlling inflation money supply was still increasing - in a manner, which I do not quite support in that Government was buying from the private sector and not paying back immediately.  

So, I think in this coming financial year I wish to propose that the Government should relinquish all its debts to the private sector, because the only way we can have the private sector pick and participate effectively is to pay back what they have supplied to Government. Otherwise, if you look at somebody who borrowed at 50 per cent in 1991 and has not been paid back - 10 million now the banking system requires that he pays 30 million and that means he may sell his property and yet we have no provision in our current financial laws that allows Government to pay interest on what it has not paid, and probably when we get a chance to move Private Members Bill, this Financial Year we shall move that Government also pay interest if it does not pay in good time. (Applause) 

Mr. Chairman, therefore, I wish to support that these supplementary estimates should be passed but in future if we are going to have supplementary estimates we should also consider having an item in the Ministry of Finance paying back the debts to the private sector, so that the private sector enjoys and participates effectively in the liberalisation and privatisation of the economy.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. PINTO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I also stand to support the Supplementary Estimates. I would like to note in the developments of Supplementary Funds an amount of 120,538,000, which is a short form on Government contribution to the project of the Uganda Essential Drug Management.  I think; we have known all along that drugs are very essential for our people.  We have had a programme of support from Danish people in the Essential Drug Programme.  It is regrettable that for a long time, Government has not been meeting its share; and I think these people when they come here to sign an agreement we were trying to rush into this House a Bill and other requirements to suit the Management of the Essential Drug Programme.  I am happy it is coming as a Supplement.  I think it is important to know that these are on going projects, and that we should Budget for them, meet our obligations, otherwise, is I understand correctly, the Essential Drugs Programme has been curtailed, maybe reduced in volume, because we were not able to meet our obligations in time.  With these few words, Mr. Chairman, I beg to support.

CAPT. BABU (Central Division, Kampala): Mr. Chairman, I thank you very much.  I welcome all Members back from this recess; and Mr. Chairman, I want to ask your permission, I am not very happy with the Statement read by the Minister for Housing, but I think we will have time to discuss it later.  As a chairman of Sectoral Committee on Housing, we are extremely unhappy that is thing is being pushed in very quickly without referring it to the Members of this House. When we go in the Sectoral Committee, we will demand that this is brought to us, and we would like to assure the Minister that we are going to give him all the co-operation he needs, but he should come to this House.

Going to the Supplementary I stand to support, but I am a little bit unhappy with the Statement read by the Minister for Education. While supplementaries are being asked for other Ministries, our teachers and our students re already in this town demonstrating for non-payment of allowances or their salaries. And if we are going to approve these supplementaries, I think we should put more emphasis on the payment of salaries of these people who do such a noble job; and supplementaries for the Ministry of Education, especially when it comes to salaries of teachers.  I know there is nothing in here, but we are being asked to approve supplementaries for other Ministries and for example, the Constitutional Affairs Ministry. You know what has been happening with the Constitutional Affairs.  There is - if you go to the development side, the Constitutional Affairs Ministry has got a supplementary, and we have approved a supplementary for that.  And I would like that these areas be looked into, while I agree with the private sector which has not been paid, I would like to bring a message through you, to all the Ministers concerned, that the people in the Private Sector, some of them have gone bankrupt because of non-payment from Government.

I would like to ask them kindly to go back and make sure that people in the private sector are paid for; promissory notes are not enough.  They have to start paying them in reasonable time so that the people in the private sector can improve.

Mr. Chairman, with that I stand to support.  I thank you.

MR. ELYAU (Kalaki County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I also stand to support the Supplementary Estimates.  There are some areas where I would want the Minister for Finance to clarify, in certain parts of employees, moreso, the former East African Community.  For example, in the Ministry of Works like in Soroti Flying Academy.  These people up to now they are complaining that they as civil servants have not been normalised in a normal way.  They do not know whether they belong to the Uganda Government Civil Service or not.  And as such, up to now some of their releases have not been done.  For example, this year in January, the release has got lost somewhere; it is not seen. Even June salary, they say they are not getting.  This is a very serious matter, since Soroti Flying School is one of the best examples we have in Africa, if we are to survive as Africans today.

MR. BUTAGIRA (Rwampara County, Mbarara): Mr. Chairman, looking at the Supplementary Estimates, it is obvious that what we are being asked is to approve what has already been spent.  I recall that sometime last year we suggested that this House should be involved when the Ministries are departing from the figures we approved in this House. This could be done through the Committee on the Economy that should be involved at looking at this.  If we do not do this, it makes the whole exercise of sitting here, approving the Budget, and then somewhere you go on a spending spree, beyond even what we had approved, far beyond, even doubling, so that there is no accountability to this House.  

Just to quote two examples looking at these figures.  If you look at State House, the figure we approved which is 4,712,917,000; those are billions and what was spent is almost equal to that figure.  Either there is no skill in focusing on budgeting or nobody cares about the expenditure.  It is ridiculous to come and seek a sum for Supplementary Estimates that almost surpass the original money that was approved in the House.  Now, I begin to wonder about the officers who are involved in budgeting; have they no ability to focus or they just take figures at random?  While we appreciate that the State House has a lot, especially on the part of the President, to contribute by way of traveling to various countries and he has done a lot. I must commend him.  He has done quite a lot in his travels to enhance the image of this country, and also to stimulate development in this country.  

At the same time, we should also be - should take an example, to other Ministries that, what we preached, tightening our belts, had being mindful of our expenditures is also practiced at the top.  I believe much as there is a need to travel, I believe also there is a need to curtail some of the traveling somewhere.  I want to commend those Ministers who have not incurred anything; they have just strictly adhered to the figures in the Budget Report.  Either departments like Mulago. Despite the fact that drugs are not there.  I wonder whether really they have adhered to what was approved or whether there is some inefficiency somewhere.  If you look at Police, for instance, the figure we are asked to approve even is more than the figure we budgeted for.  Now, have they substituted themselves for the role of this House? What is the purpose of sitting here and approving the Budget, and then the Ministry goes on and spends and doubles, and comes here, and it hopes that we shall approve the supplementary estimates.  I think people concerned should be brought to order, Mr. Chairman.

Now I want to comment lastly on Law Reform Commission.  Now, this Commission, to me is really moribund.  Moribund means it is dead.  We passed a Statute in this House, we set up a Law Reform Commission, with enthusiasm because most of our laws are fake, and hoping that this Body when put in place will do something, but up to now, it has not been appointed.  Now the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, surely this is a case where he should have over-strengthened a little and asked for Supplementary Estimates.  He never, and I do not think this is a compliment to him, I am urging him through this chance of debating Supplementary Estimates, to put in place a machinery to have a Law Reform Commission put in place.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KANYOMOZI (Kajara County, Bushenyi):  Mr. Chairman, during the last Budget, the President warned us that we are going to have a squeeze, and that squeeze meant - those Ministries which had no money, if the money was not there, they were going to sack, others who did not have how to travel, would have to walk.  

Now, I am surprised as to which Orders we are listening to, when I see the amount being asked for, up to the tune of nearly 20 billion. I would understand productive ministries asking for more money.  I would also equally understand Social Ministries, especially, Education and Health asking for more money.  I find it very difficult to justify expenditures on both 1, on both 2 on both 21 after retrenchment, on both - okay; the Police maybe, one could allow but these, Mr. Chairman.  Given what we were told here, I find it very, very difficult to understand.  What is the need of the Budget?  A Budget is to give us Estimates and we try to live in our means and the deviation should not be in excess, it is possible of 5 to 10 per cent.  Why am I saying that, we have a minus we were told by the Ministry of Finance, about a week ago, introducing the Budget.  We cannot justify this in case of inflation because inflation is now minus 1.3, so it cannot be the cause having risen because the prices of goods and services rose, and the inflation has gone down; it is minus.  Then what is the cause of this? 

I am pausing the question and I hope the Minister for Finance will be good enough and courteous as usual to give us that necessary explanation as to what could have happened in light of a declining price, in light of retrenchment, in light of the President on Statesmen that we are going to tighten our belts and live within our Ministry’s budgets.  If you look in the details of these requests starting from 25, and you look at what happened, I am going to start from the top going down.  We also get even more worried because we have been told that releases are restricted.  Nobody spends more than what is released.  Yet the explanation in the remark quorum gives you a different story.  I am wondering, what is the use of setting out the rules of the game and not following them. You see, the game is that nobody gets money in a sense of what he is supposed to get.  So, let it be an exception and it would not be fair to those Ministries, especially those of us who are on both Ministries that we regard as crucial like Education and People’s Health.  Which are touch of resources and others are allowed to get them as shown in these details.  

Let us also go back to the pledge given to us in this House, we have got a pledge that, in any case you feel to become extra-ordinary, the condition the economy would be called to assist the Ministry and discuss those issues which we needed to modify.  I wonder whether my hon. Colleague, was requested and was unable to attend.   He has been diligent if you would spend so much time on PERD, I am sure he would have spent as much time on this one since it means spending resources where they were not allocated for.  

I am requesting while the money is already spent, we cannot cry over spilled milk, but it is a problem; and unless we get a solution to this, I can see more strain on our resources in sectors much as they need them.  There are other sectors that need these resources more and my emphasis would be on people’s health and then people’s Education.  I thank you.

MR. RWABITA (Ibanda County, Mbarara): I stand to support the Supplement - but I have got two observations for which I need an explanation from the Minister for Finance.  One is on delaying or paying of the arrears of Government suppliers and contractors.  It is okay to try and reduce inflation to even a minus figure.  We must also consider the economy.  The economy must move and the people involved in supplies to Government must be considered.  These suppliers and contractors would not mind if the last Financial Year’s expenses were carried forward to a New Financial Year.  You find, they have about two years arrears.  

Now, this is equivalent to Government getting a free loan from the public, because these suppliers buy these items, supply them to the Government and they have to wait for two to three years without being paid.  I would like to know which measures the Minister for Finance is putting forward to pay these arrears because these suppliers and constructors definitely need their money in order to survive, in order to be useful.  Again to the government, supply more and to do more business with government.  

Otherwise, if you are not paid over a long period I think they will be stuck in their business.  The promissory notes that we have paid some of them given to these suppliers for the coming six months.  Now, that is again another period where the customer has to wait without interest sometimes.  So, Government should try and clear all the Bills, and I will suggest that these Bills should be charged to Consolidated Funds, because when they are charged in a new budget, of a ministry or a department, it makes that department even weaker.  They will never fulfill their plans or their Budget for the New Year, because most of that money will be eaten away by the arrears.  

So, although we are fighting inflation, we must allow the economy to be viable.  Now when we have these overdue payments, there are a lot of problems with our economy.  This reduces capital to these business people.  The business people loose interest if they had put this money in the bank, they would have at least earned some interest.  And this also curtails development in the economy.  So, though we are passing this Supplementary Estimates, in the New Budget, the Minister for Finance should look for money to pay these arrears so that our businessmen are not accusing Government for giving services we are not paying for.  Thank you, very much, Mr. Chairman.

BRIG. MOSES ALI (East Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am not of course going to waste the time of the House, I am back; and those who wanted me not to come back I am sure must be sorry. I must assure people that I am very much going to stay here.  So, I want to add my voice on the issue of supplementary, especially on the point raised by the last speaker or hon. Member.  I want to ask a question perhaps to inform us and the country as to the extent of the debt to the Private Suppliers.  What is the overall, how much do we owe to these people that are now turned into promissory notes.  This is money that has been spent and Supplementary is equally money that has already been spent.  So, to halt paying these people without interest is undermining them, is weakening their capacity, is over burdening them because they borrow this money and the interests in the bank are accruing and moreover compound interest.  Now, who is going to be responsible?  This man or this woman has already paid or supplied you with whatever, all the ministries, with whatever goods.  Now you take them at random, to pay them at your own terms, that they must have promissory notes.  

So, this is very unfair, and I think the Government is actually undermining itself; because if these people have now being denied this capital which they borrowed, and which is loosing value from the time to now and they are also incurring expenses in terms of interests, I do not see how the Minister for Finance can compromise his State that, now inflation is below zero, when you have not paid people.  Suppose you pay them now all the money, what will be the situation of inflation?  So, I think let the country be informed and let us also be realistic about our situation of inflation.  Because these people, even if you pay him now, or her now, whatever you pay will not cover the interests.  

In fact the Government should cover even the interest from the time you are supplied.  You cannot just sit here and begin to issue promissory notes and people have not gone to school because they can no longer get money, and people do not get loans these days.  So, a lot has been hidden to the public and which is unfair and we are here talking on behalf of the people; we must know how much and what is the burden and should not drag it too long.  You bring it in the Supplementary, then we are the situation of inflation.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO (Ruhama County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. First of all, allow me to welcome you bank from a trip because I noted when the Budget was being read, you were not in your Chair as usual; but I can see you very warm and helpful as in the past.  The matter of the Budget, is a very serious matter and the decision of this august House is also another very important matter. The Minister for Finance, I believe, is fully aware about his limits and about the authority referred to this august House.  I will take another opportunity, to make yet another appeal to the Minister for Finance in the management of public finance in this country.  

Last year, the Committee on the Economy involved as many people - even the public - in the debate about the expenditure that was going to be incurred out of the taxes they were going to pay.  We gave the endorsement here of the figures.  We also gave recommendations as to how the management of public finance in this country should follow.  In December, that is six months after, and following upon our recommendation in this House, we had discussions with the Ministry of Finance.  Our role, that is the role of the Committee on the Economy on behalf of this august House, was to try and understand the problems of the Ministry of Finance and do a bit of counseling, so that we keep on course.  

At the beginning of this year, I called for the report on the implementation of the Budget for last year.  I must report and I must reluctantly report that despite having given an ultimatum that was copied to other offices, one of the people who ignored the ultimatum was a Minister for Finance.   I indicated that if the ultimatum was not adhered to, the Ministry concerned, would not have a clean Budget this year.  When time comes I will make available to the Committee concerned the correspondences between your committee that is the committee of this House on the Economy and the Ministries concerned.  

I must, however, record lots of appreciation for the Ministries which responded some of them showing the problems and having even incurred excess expenditure in their Budget allocation. I have been forced to mention this problem not because I have an inherent problem with the Ministry of Finance but because I think that there is the management of finance in the Ministry of Finance assumes that they are the final authority and therefore, they do not need anybody to chip in.  So, I want to make it clear that I as the Chairman of Committee on the Economy, while we may wish to assist, I do not find it very pleasant working on behalf of this Parliament to have our warnings ignored.  That I as the Chairman of Committee on the Economy, while we may wish to assist, I do not find it very pleasant working on behalf of this Parliament to have our warnings ignored.  I will leave it at that, because when time comes for the debate of the individual Ministries, the Ministers concerned will have to satisfy the Committees concerned as to why they never responded.  On the debt, on the issue of the debt, I do recall hon. Kafumbe Mukasa as a Deputy Minister for Finance, offering a system that he said was going to solve the problem of private suppliers not getting paid.  This system, was local letters of credit.  The Minister for Finance should avoid a situation of accruing debts beyond our approval by using means which are not easily checked; because now, we have changed from a commitment Budget to a cash Budget and the cash Budget can hide many things because it is just related to the inflows of cast and to outlets of funds.  

So, I would like us, in this House, to insist that the Ministry of Finance become more co-operative because even the Committee on the Economy which was supposed to have been involved, together with the sectoral committees, in designing the current years Budget expenditures, all the same, I was also ignored.  This evening we will probably get the report of last year’s proceedings in this matter and when Members come to debate, I am sure they will have gone through.  But Mr. Chairman, it is the first day of our resumption and I would like to be as soft as possible so that I again do not pose any roadblock.  I want, in future, to insist that the democratic process takes route and therefore, all the Ministries concerned, open up to this House.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I support this.

MR. KAYONDE (Historical Member): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I just want to give some information to hon. Kanyomozi who said the inflation has come down to negative 1.3. When the Minister was giving his Budget Speech, he indicated, if you take out food item, then the inflation would be about 7.5 per cent and I think this would explain partly why the cost has gone up or why the Ministry has had to have supplementary estimates.  I think the question of debt to the public has been on this Floor for a very long time and I think this House needs to find a mechanism of solving this matter.  First of all, it is this House which has got the power to approve this Budget.  Why cannot be, and I want to refer to the present speech.  At one time, he said, if some Ministries can stop, let them stop why do we not solve this problem to the public, so that if it means reducing on the expenditure of some Ministries; we do so.  Because the Minister is going to tell us, okay, if I include this expenditure in this Budget, I mean the debt, then, we are going to pump all money into the public and therefore, inflation will go up.  

Now, within this, the limits of the Budget presented, why can we not put this item and we get red of it once and for all.  Why should Government inconvenience the public? Why should a businessman be inconvenienced?  Because Government wants to control inflation? What about my inflation, as an individual?  So, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. KAFUMBA MUKASA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I had just waited to take advantage of my right to reply to answer some of the questions but now I fear that the debate is being derailed as if we have a crisis which government has created by taking advantage of the members of the public.  That is why I want to inform the members so that they can debate more responsibly. Mr. Chairman, in the last Budget, Government spent -(Interruption)

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Point of order.  Is the hon. Minister in order to imply that Members of this House are debating irresponsibly? 

THE CHAIRMAN: No.  Not at all.  Continue, please.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr. Chairman, I think we should be more relaxed really. I think people are excited and we may not follow each other. I want to inform hon. Members who care to listen, unlike hon. Tiberondwa that in the Budget, we spent Shs.33 billion to meet the public debt - private public debt locally for bills which had been proved and because we were not absolutely certain about our cash flows.  We went to the extent of committing ourselves when we issued promissory notes bearing bank interest, when our cash flows showed a better position, you all heard on Radio and the Media recall the people holding promissory notes to go to Bank of Uganda for them to be redeemed; to be paid cash.  Really, I do into think we should debate as if nothing is going on. I thank you Mr. Chairman.

MR. KAYONDE:  The reason why we emphasise this point, is that the verification he is referring to, we want to know how big is this debt? And how much has been settled in promissory notes and what is outstanding; so that it can go on record if it is necessary, we put it in the current Budget. Mr. Chairman, I want to  -(Interruption)


MR. KAVUMBE MUKASA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, for me, why I am asking Members - hon. Kayonde is fighting for a case I thought hon. Kayonde knows the figure of the people who have not been paid.  Why I sat quietly during this Bill, I waited from hon. Moses Ali; from hon. X to tell me that Government owes so much money to the members of the private sector. I have told you we called for people to whom owed money; Shs.33 billion was verified, we issued payment in form of promissory notes with interests and before we closed, we redeemed all the promissory notes worth Shs.33 billion.  If hon. Members have new cases, please bring them to us and we handle the situation.  But let us not blow the case out of proportions.  I thank you.

MR. KAYONDE:  Mr. Chairman, let me -(Interruption)

MR. RWABIITA:  Point of information. I want to inform the Minister for Finance that in the Directorate of Construction, we have an outstanding bill of Shs.403 million verified, and so they have not been paid.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.  Proceed, please.

MR. KAYONDE: Mr. Chairman, I think here, we are representing the public and definitely, we know that there is an outstanding debt.  It is erroneous for hon. Kafumbe to come here and appear as if there is no debt to the public. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR. KAYONDE:  Mr. Chairman, this Motion has got two parts.  One was on supplementary expenditure and another one on Vote on account.  Now, everybody here, is very much interested to know on the Constitutional making process and everybody here is geared for December to go for a CA elections.  I am surprised, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MR. KAYONDE: Mr. Chairman, according to this Motion, it says, Government services until the expiry of four months, so Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.  Concentrate on the Motion, please.

MR. KAYONDE: Mr. Chairman, earlier on, I thought this Motion was being debated in two parts.  But my last point on supplementary expenditure, I think we must respect the rules we have set ourselves.  You were here, when hon. Kafumbe backed by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister said that they are not going to incur any - to send money outside without consulting this House.  It was a pledge made here and therefore, I think we need to know the rules - this House should know what limit could the Ministry of Finance spend without coming to this House; so that we give them at least some reasonable margin but otherwise, then the exercise of Budget control is useless.  Thank you very much.

DR. MAGEZI (Jinja Municipality, East Jinja): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would like first to start to congratulate the Ministry for Finance and Government for keeping the supplementary expenditure to a minimum.  I say so, because when I look at the current expenditure, we are talking about 7 per cent of what has been approved.  When we look at the jointly financed capital expenditure, it is about five per cent and when we look at the locally financed capital expenditure, we are again looking at about seven per cent of what has been approved.  I think that is commendable on two grounds. (Applause)  One, it means that, there is some sense in making a Budget. (Interjection) It means, yes because at times were here, when were almost approaching supplementaries equal to the actual Budget provisions. I do not in any way try to justify the failure of government to pay its creditors.  I think that, what Members have said in this House should really be taken seriously.  There are institutions that are collapsing because of failure of payment from government.  These include among others - National Housing Corporation, Uganda Airlines, People’s Transport, Uganda Railways, you name it; any parastatal where government has the majority shareholding, services are being taken and are not being paid for.  

Allow me to comment on the issue of the locally financed capital expenditure because there it seems government did what it was not supposed to do and left undone what it was supposed to do.  Particular reference is on Vote 110, Ministry of Agriculture.  The Sectoral Committee in this House passed a Resolution that the Minister for Agriculture should apply for Supplementary Vote to reimburse Shs.114, 000,000 to the Ranch Restructuring Board.  This matter was ably debated in this House and we expected the Minister for finance to recover this money from source.  This money has never been remitted to the Ranch Restructuring Board and a lot of activities of this Board have been halted.  In fact, the Board has been very ineffective over the last three months.  What is puzzling me even more, is that some time in September/October, Shs.32, 000,000/= was released from the treasury to the Ranch Restructuring Board. This Shs.32, 000,000/= was outside the provisions of the Budget that was approved and yet that money should be appearing here as a supplementary request that in fact they spent this money outside.  

Now, where did this money come from? Because there was no other vote expect that vote on other programmes and definitely, I saw the cheque of Shs.32, 000,000/= and I am just surprised that there is a zero entry here and yet the Shs.114, 000,000 was not paid.  Is there a little bit more to be said about the Schedule being presented? I will conclude this way - the people in the countryside are very poor.  Many of them are unable to meet their needs like educating their children, going to hospitals and we are being told that in fact we are doing very well.  Inflation is down. Within the same breath, the Uganda Electricity Board has gone on to increase their tariffs and the effect of these increases much as they may be justified should seriously be reviewed.  First of all, the reasons advanced by the UEB seem to be requesting for recapitalisation of Uganda Electricity Board by the present day consumers.  Secondly, there are very many industries that are using electricity, not so much as energy but as a raw material.  Thirdly, the method of raising tariffs as stipulated in the Electricity Act dictates that the matter of increases should be referred to this august House before any increases are made.  I predict that the figures of inflation we had last month at the Budget Speech will no longer hold because every other industry that is using electricity is going to go up by more than the rate that has been increased by Uganda Electricity Board and maybe the time has come when the issue of trying to keep law the level of inflation which is very important, must be questioned vis-à-vis the impact on the quality and quantity of life of the Ugandans.  I beg to support.

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI (Bujenje County, Masindi): Mr. Chairman, first of all, I would like to support this Supplementary Estimates for 1992/93.  While I am supporting, I would like to inform the hon. Minister for Finance that, I have received a lot of complaints from the member of the former defunct East African Community.  (Applause) They have not been paid their money.  Some of them have been retrenched from their employment and they have to shuttle between Kampala and upcountry places to come to Kampala to look for this money and the government has kept a deaf ear on this point.  We would like also to be informed why this money is not being paid and why Ugandans are being harassed for the money that they earned and which government got; after the break up of the Community, every state got its share.  Uganda also got its share.  I do not see the reason why this money should not be transferred to the beneficiaries.  (Applause) 

Therefore, there is a very big concern.  Some of these having been retrenched, they are no longer in active employment, they are using the little money which should be doing production to come to Kampala to look for the money and yet they are tossed around. So, this is appointing - I wanted to bring to the hon. Minister. Point number two, I would also like to sound an outcry from the public regarding the economic situation we are in.  If you move around today, say for example, I normally use the ‘Kikuubo.’ You will find business has completely stopped, and people are doing nothing.  They are not selling and they are accruing overheads, they are paying rent, electricity and water, they are bringing their goods and people are just sending away flies.  (Laughter) 

So, while I would agree with my Colleague, the hon. Minister, that it is good to control inflation, let us not kill this economy by following the tightest monetary policy because there should be some activity.  Money should be pushed in the economy so as to allow these businessmen also to operate; because we cannot expect to follow orders of the World Bank, IMF because they are the ones giving us the money, then we go on structural adjustments. Some of these policies are detrimental to our people.  So, really I do not want this government to be hated that the people are poor, that it has robbed people’s business.  Everyone should enjoy. Even the businessmen should be able to do their job.  Some of us we normally interact with the public so much that they go on asking us everywhere we are that what are you doing you people? So, this point should be noted and Mr. Chairman, for this I will be talking very much about it when we are discussing the Budget.  Thank you indeed.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI YEKKO (Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you Mr. Chairman.  I also rise to support this Motion before us but I would rather want to caution some of the Ministers that when placing their budgets and their proposals to the Ministry of Finance for coordination, they should take stock of what they need.  For example, if you look at the Ministry of Internal Affairs; Police.  We approved Shs.6 billion.  Out of nowhere they went and increased another Shs.6.3 billion.  That renders us here useless as a House. (Applause)  In the same Ministry, Prisons; this particular area, we need to speak on behalf of people who cannot now speak for themselves.  These are prisoners.  If you go to Murchison Bay; I went there but not as a prisoner to visit them.  This is a potential place for all of us anyway.  Prisoners are walking naked.  They are sleeping on the floor and yet we are asking for Supplementary Expenditure on the Headquarters and Administration. Some of the wealthy leaders like the President of Zimbabwe, gained some three or two degrees while in Prison.  When shall we make our prison a place where people can go and learn other than go dig and walk naked?  (Laughter) I will not be convinced about supporting by tradition because it is becoming a formality.  

Those Ministries can go and over spend them they report to us we endorse.  This is very bad if we are to approve whatever should go into these working of all ministries.  We need then, therefore, in these up-coming budget, to be specific so that as we go into whatever they need, we go aware that even if there is going to be supplementary budget it should not be more than what we had agreed upon and approved here; because I am saying this specifically on the Ministry of Internal Affairs, Lira Police Station was bombed in 1979.  We are ever approving Supplementary Budget -(Interruption)

MR. BUTAGIRA:  Point of information.  I would like to reinforce his argument by giving information.  When a so-called Supplementary doubles, exceeds or trebles the original figure, it is no longer a supplementary, but it is a surplus.

REV. ONGORA: Well, I hope the hon. Minister of Finance takes note of this new vocabulary that has come in.  (Laughter) I was on a point that we are almost going to the extent of bringing to the attention of Medical Officer of Health in Lira to declare this place condemned because it is not a place for any normal officer to operate from.  Unless this Supplementary figures coming in 1993/94 shall have found its way into the rehabilitation of such check out for this omission. (Laughter) 

Well, I thank you for your ruling that the hon. Member was out of order, and for your ruling that the hon. Member was a member of the Committee on discipline and for him to -(Interjection) I would like to conclude by just appealing as I have already done, so that that particular year should be a year where prisons should be looked at not as a place of the outcasts.  These people are relegated.  They need our concern so that they come and enjoy normal life, not that they were there as people who were totally out of place but should be people who should be re-designated into a life that is befitting of any citizen of this country. Thank you Mr. Chairman.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA (Deputy Minister for Finance and Economic Planning): Thank you very Mr. Chairman.  I would like also personally to welcome all hon. Members from the short recess they had and I want to recognise with pleasure the return of my Brother hon. Moses Ali who was unlucky to be hospitalised when he was performing his Hija. (Applause)  I am glad he is here with us.  I want to thank hon. Members for their contributions but also I want to follow the example of hon. Elly, the Chairman of the Economic Committee that since it is the beginning of the Session, we have to be soft with each other so that we do not spoil the game.  I do not think it was necessary to point out but now let me just briefly, before I respond to a few cases bring to the attention of the hon. Members the following. The Supplementaries we are talking about in respect of 92/93 happened basically by reallocating within the Budget.  We have not spent more money in this Budget than the money you authorised as a House to spend in totality.  That is very important; but in the course of the year, the minister found it economically prudent as the Law allowed him to allow some ministries to reallocate expenditure within the approved estimates in order to tackle anticipated projects and so on as you will see.  So, that is very important to note; and therefore, your total sovereignty as NRC has not been impeached upon.  Secondly this was made possible - (Interruption)

MR. BUTAGIRA:  Point of order.  Is the hon. Deputy Minister in order to confuse this House by saying they were only reallocating within approved Budget?  Then what would be the purpose of calling it Supplementary Estimates?

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr. Chairman, if really we could give each other time to finish, one can build up a case.  That is why I begged that if we get less excited we can listen to each other.  I am building up a case to show you where these things happened.  Give me a little time, Sir.  This meant this was possible because we were running expenditure according to revenue realised; because we are not going out to print money or borrow from the Central Bank.  This meant that there was no over expenditure on the Budget as a whole.  I am putting up my point; you listen.  It is estimated because at this time you cannot be exact now on account, these are estimates.  It is estimated that total expenditure for the year 1992/93 was Shs.773 billion which it is estimated must have been financed by Shs.558.5 billion from Revenue, meaning Shs.287 billion from our own revenue and Shs.281 billion from grants; net borrowing from the external sources amounted to Shs.625 billion leading to a repayment of about Shs.35 billion.  Because also you may see these figures but you are also repaying some of the debts that you thought you could not have paid if you did not realise increased revenue. The liability would still have remained with our country.  

Hon. Members, you will recall that there used to be supplementaries given to various Ministries, for example, Ministry of Defence, the supplementary given to Defence the last Financial Year was a technical one which involved reallocating from the Development to the Recurrent Budget of the Ministry of Defence, but that one must be indicated to you to know exactly what happened.  We in the Ministry of Finance, and Economic Planning, would like to extend the Ministry to the Ministry of Defence, and all the Ministries for the spirit of cooperation given to us in the course of the year.  Really, we may not be giving complementary but we should recognise that as for as financial discipline and management is concerned, the last financial year was exemplary.  

You will note that one of the sizable supplementaries in the Recurrent Budget is what hon. Kanyomozi and hon. Butagira have dwelt on State House.  But Ladies and Gentlemen, in our current situation, how do you exactly be sure when you are budgeting to know which countries will treat your Head of State in esteem so as to invite him to their countries?  There have been Heads of State in this country which no reputable governments wanted them to visit them.  So, we must not be negative, there was time in this country, when the Heads of State here could not be invited, or even allow them to invite themselves to these States. 

So, how can you exactly say our reputation can be gauged that America would like President Museveni to go to visit them, therefore, provide for money.  It is not true that a President can create such a reputation that another State feels pride that, that man goes to visit that country.  Secondly, how can you be exactly sure if you are in charge of Budget, that Heads of States in the execution of their duties of other countries will choose that they want to visit Uganda?  So that you can be exact on how many days they will stay there, you put it in the budget and so on and so forth.  

We should be proud as a country that this country today, its Head of State can visit any country and that country’s Head of State is proud, and that after the Pope visited here shortly, he found it necessary to visit again that this country you know it is very expensive to create this situation, but we should not be negative as if the President is irresponsible or the President is not conscious about expenditure. For me, I will comment from an economic point of view, I have thought about some of these statements by hon. Kanyomozi and hon. Butagira some are political statements, and I am not going to comment on them.  The overall expenditure controls were extremely tight we must admit last year, as the Budget was operated on cash basis.   This was necessary in order to avoid the indiscipline of spending what we do not have.  This, however, has born fruit as you have seen from the fall of inflation and the stable exchange rate.  

I want to add on that the President should not be quoted out of context, the President in his speech said, we must do everything to control inflation, even if it means closing down government departments.  I do not understand the quarrel now, we have done everything to control inflation and people are saying you have controlled it too much.  When can one ever be right?  

Allow me to thank hon. Members for all observations they have made and my Minister and I and my Colleague the Minister of State have taken notes to continue to get your experiences to get complaints and continue to address the situation. The Minister for Finance and his Colleagues are not claiming either that they have done wonders and they have arrived, we are saying we think we are in the right direction, please let us work together and move from there okay?  

Now, hon. Manzi has said that, the inflation control is too tight we should loosen, if you see from the Budget proposals, Government has decided to put money to make Budget issues wider to spent more money on primary education, primary health; to spend more money on feeder roads; to spend more money on Police; to spend more money on Judiciary; IGG, Auditor General.  In that process, in the Budget, we are not trying to achieve one per cent inflation.  We have said, we would like to achieve 7 per cent inflation which means spending and realising more money than what you are doing now which has put us at minus one by providing a target of seven, it means we intend to realise more money for expenditure to particular sectors, and hon. Manzi also was concerned with hon. Moses Ali and hon. Kayonde.  Hon. Kayonde even went to great length to support local suppliers to be paid as if he had figures of money not yet paid.  But I want to say that in the last Budget, the Ministries had consumed people’s services and goods outside their Budget provisions over a period of about 4 years.  

So, the Government went to all Ministries and collected and put up a committee composed of the office of the IGG, Auditor General, Solicitor General and Treasury to verify local suppliers who were owed money.  As at that time, figures of Shs. 32, 000,000,000 billion was ascertained as accumulated debt for four years.  Government, Cabinet approved that everything be done despite cash constraints to pay the Shs. 32 billion and Shs. 32 billion we spaced this money out depending on the cash flows by issuing promissory notes and because of interest; these were interest bearing promissory notes.   

Now, the cash flow was better before we ended the months than we had anticipated.  So, we redeemed the Treasury Bills that would have matured within four months in order to allow the suppliers to participate in the economic activities of the country.  I am glad hon. Rwakakooko remembers, I have also asked Ugandans, for us to control the Budget, for us not to commit ourselves outside our provision, you allow us, let the suppliers first be assured that the Ministry placing the orders with them have money in the Budget to pay them, and they do this by opening a local letter of Credit before you supply your goods which they cannot do if they have no money in the vote in the Budget, this will help us to stop irresponsible officers because by opening a Letter of Credit, the Auditor General has to certify it, and all other people have to come in, and, therefore, there is already instant auditing going on.  This will help us to control the Budget, and also Government is considering which officer commits legally the Government because, it seems in every Ministry, by issuing Local Purchase Order, Government gets committed to pay, without reference to the Budget provision.  These are matters which go along to encroach on your authority than the Minister for Finance, because now you are saying pay these people, the Minister says, okay, can I pay supplementary, say who are you to issue supplementary?  So we better try to work together and solve this problem.  It will be the Ministry for Finance that will be last to deny people participating in the economy to have their capacity to do so, it will be the last Ministry and I can assure you for the time being that there is some relative soberness among the people who are in charge of this Ministry. Okay, hon. Pinto just recognised that the Government felt obliged to meet its obligation to contribute to the essential drug management.  

Hon. Kabuubi raised the issue of East African Community. The Government is committed to pay all the staff who were working for the East Community -(Interjection.) You listen, however in the process of ascertaining the actual figures as claimed, we have sought guidance of the Solicitor General.  On our obligations because things have changed.  The exchange rate was different because these people were not paid in Uganda shillings. Secondly, there was a change in the currency.  

Thirdly, there has been a change in the rate of interest.  So, the Solicitor General is legally studying what is this Government’s obligations on those elements that have varied and immediately this is ascertained, which will not be very far, these people are going to be paid.  I do not think this is just an excuse, if I were hon. Sibo, then people would just walk in and pay, maybe, okay, that is the position. I know some of the Members here are hurt because they are beneficiaries, but this is the explanation. Action is being taken and very soon this matter will be resolved.  As I said, really with due respect to my friend whom I respect very much because of his seniority in parliamentary matters, hon. Butagira and hon. Kanyomozi, to me really as I said in the beginning, I do not want to make political comments.  I took their statements with a lot of political challenge, but I have explained to you the economics and financial aspect of the expenditure in State House. Hon. Rwabiita, we shall continue to find out all these people who have genuine outstanding bills having rendered service to Government.  Please bring them up, because they have been a lot of funny things with these bills, I do not want to continue to verify any outstanding bills as you are saying now in this construction unit, we want to address them.  It is very difficult for me to say that I want to invite, Ugandans you tell them you are inviting them to bring bills, you are creating problems for yourself.  All those who have a legal case, as far as supplies are concerned to government, let them bring their legal cases to us, we shall address them as we have done to the past cases, so that the Government is a clean place.  

Now, hon. Rwakakooko, I would still want him to help as Chairman of the Economic Committee.  The use of local LCs will go a long way to help Government and officers committing government beyond budgetary provision.  Now, there is a problem of a continuing debate that our Ministry of Finance, hon. Rwakakooko said, he thinks it is important, it is the one who does not do this, I want to correct this wrong impression. Our Ministry like all Government Departments, believes in the rule of law, there is nothing the Ministry of Finance does, that is outside the law. I want to visit the law and until you go to that Ministry, you may think or you may not think of the practical implications of handling supplementaries.  The people who are in the government they know and they do not like us very much about matters of supplementaries.  We do not give supplementary where it is not absolutely clear that this is absolutely necessary and that you are ready to defend the case before you.  

As I said, hon. Ladies and Gentlemen, you cannot anticipate a supplementary, I cannot be here and imagine that famine will come now in West Nile, therefore, I have seen this and call you, alright; but also after we have implemented some of your decisions, a supplementary always arises out of the decision you make as Parliament, when you say, you have agreed government should send soldiers to Somalia, that decision alone implies that since it was not taken at the Budget time, it will be inevitable not to spend some money! So, do not get offended as if it is your powers being usurped, your government is trying to be efficient, and for that, all of you, have got a lot of respect now in the country.  

I have replied to hon. Moses Ali, hon. Kayonde, I have also replied to hon. Dr. Magezi.  Government as far as parastatals is concerned which we owe them, we all know that Government has sank a lot of money on credit to parastatals, we have agreed to operate accounts with these parastatals against the money we advanced them.  It is not fair that Post Office does not pay Government, its money due to Treasury but Treasury continues to pay.  We have had meetings with UEB, with Post Office, with Railways, with Water Board, so that we can square our accounts and whoever now owes the other, pays the cash to move.  

Now, with hon. Magezi, I want to say, that government would also like to do all the things you want Government to do. Pay debts, local foreign and so on, but the only secret is, raising revenue.  We are trying to raise much revenue in order to settle all these obligations.  So, I appeal to Members as you are pleading to Government to pay debts, also plead to tax payers to pay their taxes.  We cannot do this single-handed; at one time you are happy to tell taxpayers.  They should be handled with all a leniency but the same people are owed money by government. Government must pay it speedily.  We must balance, and, therefore, the Ministry believes that you are now so committed to government meeting its obligations that you will help government to meet its targets of revenue collection.  This is the appeal I am making to you hon. Members.

DR. MAGEZI: Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would like to clarify to the hon. Deputy Minister, that the tax he is talking about, I think is tax due in the last Financial Year; but the debts we are talking about, Government has owed these people for the last five years and therefore, the onus is on who owed when! So, in fact, you should first pay debts of five years ago, then those who are already directly paying for this year, they will also be able to pay.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr. Chairman, I am happy we have agreed that we are going to get people to pay taxes, although we shall not back date the tax paying, at least from now let us pay the tax but we shall back date these payments.  These debts should make a drive to collect revenue that will also help us to meet our debt obligations. 

I would lastly, hon. Kabuubi - I do not know  - is my best Friend but sometimes he does not tell us the facts.  (Laughter) Facts have shown that the people in your Constituency are working so hard in production and I have met a maize producer from there who has - and I was so pleased with him - grossed Shs.60, 000,000 from his maize growing in one season and when I was going around to meet these people, the D.A. himself who is stationed at the Headquarters raised Shs.5, 000,000 from his own small maize activity.  So you should better share your experiences with other Members to know how the people can make the money than you keeping quiet to say people are dying and so on. (Laughter)  The people there are doing very, very well, and I want you to share your experience with other members so that they can know how to tap the money.  

With these few remarks, Rev. Ongora Atwai; I took the Rev. Ongora’s remarks about the Prison, the Budget as you see it is giving prisons more money, if you agree so that conditions can be improved, be better in the Prison Service.  I have taken your remarks.   With these remarks, I beg to move that the House dissolve itself into the Committee of Supply to consider the supplementary estimates for the Year 1992/93, I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to).

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

RECURRENT EXPENDITURE FOR 1992/93

VOTE 001 - PRESIDENT’S OFFICE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a Total sum of Shs.1, 848,346,000/= under Vote 001 - President’s Office be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

VOTE 002 - STATE HOUSE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a Total sum of Shs.4, 706,747,000 under Vote 002 of State House be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

VOTE 003 - OFFICE OF THE VICE PRESIDENT

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that a Total sum of Shs.121, 543,000 under Vote 003 - Office of the Vice President be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

VOTE 007 - JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.251, 480,000/= under Vote 007 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

VOTE 009 - COMMERCE AND CO-OPERATIVES

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.824, 485,000 under Vote 009 - Ministry of Commerce and Co-operatives be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

VOTE  010 - AGRICULTURE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.105, 980,000 under Vote 010 - Ministery of Agriculture be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

VOTE 011 - JUDICIARY

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.564, 440,000 under Vote 011 - Judiciary be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

VOTE 015 -NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.97, 817,000/= under Vote 015 - National Assembly be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

VOTE 017 - AUDIT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.180, 000,000 under Vote 017 - the Department of Audit be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

VOTE 021 - DEFENCE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.2, 530,000,000 under Vote 021 - Ministry of Defence be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

VOTE 027 - PUBLIC SERVICE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the Question that a total sum of Shs.22, 089,000/= under Vote 027 - Ministry of Public Service be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

VOTE 028 - TOURISM

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.239, 163,000 under Vote 028 - Ministry of Tourism be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

VOTE 030 - WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, YOUTH AND CULTURE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.200, 000,000 under Vote 030 - Ministry of Women in Development, Youth and Culture be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

VOTE 038 - POLICE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of shs.6, 375,601,000 under Vote 038 - Department of Police be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

VOTE 039 - PRISONS SERVICE

THE CHAIRMAN: It is not put the question that a total sum of Shs.867, 614,000 under Vote 039 - Department of Prisons Service be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

TOTAL RECURRENT SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a sum of shs.18, 935,305,000 be provided as a Total Recurrent Supplementary Expenditure for the Fiscal Year 1992/93.

(Question put and agreed to).

DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE

HEAD 101 - PRESIDENT’S OFFICE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of shs.66, 000,000 under Head 101 - President’s Office be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

HEAD 104 - OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.42, 145,000 under Head 104 - The Office of the Prime Minister be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

HEAD 106 - FOREIGN AFFAIRS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.36, 413,000 under Head 106 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

HEAD 107 - JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.45, 000,000 under Head 107 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

HEAD 108 - FINANCE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.200, 000,000 under Head 108 - Ministry of Finance be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed).

HEAD 109 - COMMERCE, CO-OPERATIVES

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.680, 684,000 under Head 109 - Ministry of Commerce and Co-operatives be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

HEAD 118 - INFORMATION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.33, 000,000 under Head 118 - Ministry of Information be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

HEAD 125 - LOCAL GOVERNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.120, 538,000 under Head 125 - Ministry of Local Government be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

HEAD 128 - TOURISM

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.56, 000,000 under Head 128 - Ministry of Tourism be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

HEAD 138 - POLICE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.371, 655,000 under Head 138 - Department of Police be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

TOTAL SUPPLEMENTARY DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE

 THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.996, 328,000 be provided as a Total Development Supplementary Expenditure for  Fiscal Year  1992/1993.

(Question put and agreed to).

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR FINANCE (Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee report there to.  I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to).

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

DEPUTY MINISTER FOR FINANCE (Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa): Mr. Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House considers the 1992/93 Supplementary Estimates and passed them without any amendment.  I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE
OF SUPPLY

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR FINANCE (Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to).

(The Title settled and the Bill passed).

(The Council rose at 5.00 p.m. and adjourned until 2.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 7th July, 1993).

