Thursday, 05 July 2007 

Parliament met at 2.48 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

Mr Issa Amiza Otto 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. In a special way I want to welcome our new Member, hon. Otto representing the Oyam South constituency. I want to congratulate you for the confidence displayed in your election campaigns, and I am glad that the constituency now has a representative. Your constituency is an important one, which used to be represented by a very illustrious son of Uganda, the late Yefusa Okulo Epak who was a very hardworking person and a nationalist. This constituency was at one time also represented by the late Abdul Nyuru. 

You have now come in and you should emulate these late Members of Parliament who represented this constituency. Elections are over, you are now here representing all people in the constituency irrespective whether they are of your party or not. Please, be an example and serve your country as others have done. I am sorry you went away without getting the instruments of your power but I will present them to you; that is the Rules of Procedure and the Constitution. You have sworn to uphold the Constitution and you will carry out your work in accordance with the Rules of Procedure. (Applause)  

Honourable members, you should note that this is a colourful day. I, therefore, take this opportunity to welcome the leaders of the Uganda Peoples’ Congress party, led by Maama Miriam Obote. They are in the strangers’ gallery. (Applause) Others include Hajji Badru Wegulo, UPC National Chairman, Mr Chris Opio, Vice National Chairman, Mr Chris Opoka, my learned friend and the Deputy Secretary General, Mr Patrick Aloma, UPC Communication-in-charge, Mr Johnson Engole, District Chairperson Oyam, Mr Kasirye Mayanja, Secretary for Districts and constituencies and several voters from Oyam who are on this side. You can see that the attire of hon. Members of Parliament especially on this side has also changed. You are all welcome. (Laughter) 

On this same occasion we want to welcome our children, pupils of Kampala Parents’ Primary School who have come to see how our proceedings are conducted. You are most welcome.

2.56
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In my capacity as the Leader of the Opposition, I would like to welcome with great pleasure hon. Issa Otto who has joined us on the opposition side. The campaigns for the replacement of hon. Okulo Epak pitted UPC against NRM and against an independent candidate. FDC didn’t have a formal candidate but as was known, hon. Okulo Epak associated very closely with FDC and those who supported us requested that FDC have a representative during the campaigns. 

I would like especially in the spirit that we have shown this country and particularly as regards hon. Angiro Gutomoi escorting hon. Issa that when elections come, the legitimate thing is to contest and when the contest puts you in different camps, you are not enemies but simply contestants. 

I would like, therefore, to congratulate hon. Issa Otto upon winning the elections and winning the support of the people of Oyam County South. As you rightly said Mr Speaker, the elections are over and a representative of the people of Oyam County South has been elected. We will work with him as the representative of those people and we would like to assure the people of Oyam County South and UPC that we in the Opposition and as Leader of the Opposition, I will serve this country and participate in the affairs of this Parliament with hon. Issa Otto without any distinction or discrimination. We, therefore, ask them to give him all the support. I welcome him.

2.59
MS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to welcome my brother hon. Issa Otto and to congratulate him upon having won that very hotly contested election. I was not personally involved in the campaigns because I was in China on official duty but I was closely monitoring the happenings in my constituency. Hon. Issa Otto happens to be my constituency MP because I come from Oyam South and I am happy that he was able to win that seat. You may be surprised as to why but you see Lango is the home ground of UPC so it should not be very surprising that hon. Otto went through. 

Oyam is going to be a test district because we have a combination of NRM, UPC and Independents. I can assure you that we are going to set a record in this country and show that you can belong to different political leanings but in matters of leading the people and ensuring that there is a change for the better in the lives of the people we lead, we can work together. Our people have been in camps; over 80 percent of the people in Oyam have been in camps. Therefore, it becomes critical that as elected leaders we join hands for the good of our people. In that spirit, I welcome my Member of Parliament, hon. Otto and pledge to work with him for the benefit of the people of Oyam. Thank you.

3.01
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to congratulate hon. Issa Otto for winning the hotly contested Oyam County South elections. I was there personally and it was hot. (Laughter) Therefore, it is my pleasure to welcome him to represent the people of Oyam South, Lango sub-region and Uganda in general. The Lango Parliamentary Group Chairperson would have been here to also give him a welcome but hon. Ben Wacha, who has taken up the seat, is down with Malaria and the vice-chairperson who should also have been here to give him a welcome is in London for a conference. 

Therefore, on behalf of Lango Parliamentary Group, I have the pleasure to welcome him and assure him that we shall work together for the development of this country, Lango and Oyam South in particular. I have been requested to put forward the apologies of the chairperson and vice-chairperson of Lango Parliamentary Group who have not been able to come. 

However, Mr Speaker, permit me to report to you and the honourable House the anomalies in the distribution of iron sheets in Lira District. You are aware of the President’s pledge to give 30 iron sheets to each household that is able to put up a structure? It is unfortunate that the office of the RDC, Lira and particularly one Ms Joan Pacutho and her team have not been performing to the expectation of the poor IDPs in Lira District. Right from the beginning of her work, there have been complaints that some mabatis were not reaching the poor especially those who had put up structures and that some mabatis were reaching the sub-counties where they were supposed to be distributed only to be reloaded onto the lorries to Lira Town. It is also claimed that these mabatis never reach the stores. 

These complaints had been going on until the 13th of last month when in my sub-county of Aromo the distribution exercise proved to be a fraud. Many people who had succeeded in taking photographs of their structures failed to receive iron sheets yet the records say that those who had no structures benefited from these iron sheets. We are requesting the minister concerned to take up this matter seriously because that day I received almost 50 phone calls from people complaining about the manner in which these iron sheets were distributed. May I take this opportunity to report to you and the august House about the anomalies that are taking place regarding the distribution of iron sheets in Lira District? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Is this under the portfolio of Disaster Preparedness? Then let the minister investigate.

3.04
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to bring to the attention of this country, this Parliament and the Executive the double tragedy that befell the people of Mbarara Municipality who I represent. 

On the 14th of last month, a market in Nyamityobora, Kakoba division was gutted down by fire. This market is predominantly run by low income earners and I informed the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and the Minister of Local Government. Recently on the night of 3rd another fire gutted the central market. You will remember in 2002 that this market was burnt down completely and it was later renovated. 

Fortunately, the fire was not as extensive as the one in 2002 and not as severe as the one of Nyamityobora. In Nyamityobora, over Shs 100 million worth of goods, not excluding the structures, was lost. Then on the 3rd of this month in the central market, about eight shops on the main road were burnt down by fire. They suspect that it was electricity that caused the fire. We have accordingly informed the Ministry of Local Government and I call upon the Executive to intervene and assist especially in the low income earner market of Nyamityobora. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

3.06
MR ROBERT KASHAIJA (NRM, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Do not mistake me to be a member of UPC because of the way I am dressed up -(Laughter)- but I just intended it to welcome another youthful Member of Parliament by the name of hon. Otto. Nevertheless, he promised me that in the next one month he will give consideration to the idea of crossing back to the Movement.

I am here to seek clarification from two ministers. Unfortunately, I do not see them around: the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Minister in charge of Youth. Last week there were press reports that ten young Ugandans in the youthful age were arrested in China. They were put in jail, are awaiting trial, and 90 percent chances are that they will be hanged. I would like to know the status of these young people in China and what Government has in place to protect them since this happens because of unemployment and idleness of young people in Uganda. 

Two, you recall that the Minister in charge of Youth reported to this House that these people were facilitated and enabled by Nigerians and I do not know what we have in terms of immigration policy to stop unknown Nigerians from coming here and influencing our young Ugandans who are innocent? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mwesigye, you are coming from China and so you have the latest information.

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not the Minister of Foreign Affairs, but recently I happen to have led a delegation to China and while we were there we got information from our embassy about the ten people who have been arrested in China having been caught with narcotic drugs. We brought that information; we have already handed it over to the Minister of Foreign Affairs together with the Minister of Internal Affairs and they are handling the matter. I thank you.

3.10
MRS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker for the opportunity. I would like first of all to welcome our colleague, hon. Otto, and thank him for increasing the number of the Opposition. We shall work together and you are welcome. 

I rise up on an issue of national importance –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, my colleagues are disrupting me. I would like to seek clarification from Government over the issue of Mabira. Since the saga of 12 April 2007, the country has been waiting patiently for what the decision of the government is. I remember that when that incident of 12th April happened, the government came up strongly saying the action was uncalled for and premature because they were going to inform the country. But that one had taken a long time from 11th August last year up to 12th April when the demonstration took place. Since then the country has been waiting and more disturbing are the press reports, which we are reading disturbing the minds of our people. I have been receiving calls from the public about what it all indicates. 

Of specific reference is the Sunday Vision where His Excellency the President was interviewed and his response - if we are to go by what the press has reported - there was a question asked about Mabira and the President answered giving the reasons why; I quote: “Part of the land of Mabira should be converted for sugarcane growing.” His Excellency gave the reasons and one of them is that land is next to the sugar factory and that other companies like Kinyara Sugar Works can have land elsewhere like in Gulu, but for Metha, their factory is next to Mabira and it cannot be relocated. 

Therefore, I would like to seek clarification from the government over the issue of Mabira. What is the position as per now? Ugandans want to know the government position. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can we clear that? She is inquiring whether it is still an issue or not; Leader of Government Business.

3.14
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Colleagues, it is true this matter has been with us for some time and the honourable member wants to remind us that it is still alive. 

Before I proceed with that matter I want to receive warmly hon. Otto. We have now received another Otto in the House. (Laughter) So, we are assured of very lively discussions and contributions. So, hon. Otto the second, if I may put it that way, you are most welcome and this side of the House warmly receives you. (Applause)  

To go back to the Mabira event, I would rather not call it a saga - this is a matter, which has been receiving a lot of consideration from the time it emerged and became a national issue. I suggest that the Minister in charge of Water and Environment comes here in the course of next week to clear the air about the issue. However, I would like to say, so far so good. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I think, let us wait for an answer.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I just want to appreciate on behalf of the party the warm welcome given to our party. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, since you are the Chief Whip for UPC, you can say something. 

3.16
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (FDC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of Uganda People’s Congress, I would like to appreciate and sincerely thank my colleagues for the warm welcome given to our new Member of Parliament, hon. Issa Otto Amiza. I would like to congratulate the new Member of Parliament, but in particular I would like to congratulate the people of Oyam County South for having seen the right thing to do. (Laughter) In UPC, our symbol indicates an open heart, open mind; we do our things openly, transparently and fairly. 

We shall bear no ill feeling towards anybody whatsoever considering the acrimonious electioneering that took place during the campaigns in Oyam County South. We shall work sincerely and honestly with everybody who chooses to cooperate with us to work with us. But I would like to appeal to my colleagues that we are now in a multi-party dispensation; the situation has changed from what had gone on for the last 20 years. It is incumbent upon us as Members of this Parliament to promote genuine and sincere multi-party politics. It is our duty. I would like to appeal to all Members of Parliament that we should do this and we should respect one another because without respect, we shall move with friction. When you are moving with friction, you cannot move very fast. I pledge on behalf of my party that we shall cooperate with all the parties on this side, even on the other side as we have always done, on matters that are common to both sides of the House. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

ANNOUNCEMENT OF SESSIONAL COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 160(7)

THE SPEAKER: We shall adjust the Order Paper for the Leader of the Opposition to make a personal statement later, but now as under rule 160(7), these are the committees of this new session. 

The Sessional Committee on Information, Communication and Technology:

1.	Mr Baliddawa Edward, Chairperson
2.	Ms Najjemba Rose, Vice-chairperson
3.	Mr Bahati David
4.	Mr Nabeta Igeme
5.	Mrs Wangwa Rutagye Erinah
6.	Mr Tinkasimire Barnabus
7.	Mrs Turyahikayo Kebirungi Paula
8.	Mr Kyeyago Jowali
9.	Gen. Tumwine Elly
10.	Mr Katende Sematiko
11.	Ms Tubwita Bagaya Grace
12.	Brig. Okello Francis
13.	Maj. Gen. Muhwezi Jim
14.	Mr Byamukama Nulu
15.	Mr Kajeke Wilfred
16.	Mr Oceng Alex
17.	Mr Otto Issa
18.	Dr Apiliga Moses 

The Sessional Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs:

1.	Ms Namayanja Rose, Chairperson
2.	Lt (Rtd) Jessica Alupo, Deputy Chairperson
3.	Mr Kizza Rwebembera James
4.	Mr Kibedi Zaake Wanume
5.	Mr Kamba Saleh
6.	Lt Mujuzi Pius
7.	Mr Abura Parir
8.	Mr Mbagadhi Frederick Nkayi
9.	Col Katirima Phinehas
10.	Mr Katongole Badhul
11.	Ms Achilla Margaret 
12.	Mr Kazibwe Tom
13.	Mr Nyanzi Vincent
14.	Mr Kiyonga Francis
15.	Mr Kyanjo Hussein
16.	Mr Bihande Yokasi
17.	Mr Fungaroo Kaps Hussein
18.	Mr Aadroa Onzima
19.	Ms Akello Judith
20.	Mr Latif Sebaggala

The Sessional Committee on Physical Infrastructure:

1.	Mr Byanyima Nathan, Chairperson
2.	Mr Byandala James, Deputy Chairperson
3.	Mrs Nyombi Sarah Nansubuga
4.	Mr Bartille Toskin
5.	Mr Amooti Otada
6.	Mr Looki Peter Abrahams
7.	Mrs Baba Diri Margaret
8.	Mr Kabagambe Mugarra
9.	Mr Busima Cosmas
10.	Mr Lukodo Simon
11.	Ms Kisira Margaret
12.	Mrs Kwizera Eudia
13.	Mr Pajobo Bruno
14.	Mr Balikowa Henry
15.	Mr Oleny Charles
16.	Mr Mabikke Micheal
17.	Mr Kabuusu Moses
18.	Mr Omolo Peter
19.	Mr Amuriat Oboi Patrick
20.	Mr Okupa Elijah

The Sessional Committee on Labour and Social Development:

1.	Mrs Ssentongo Theopista, Chairperson
2.	Mr Katuramu Hood, Deputy Chairperson
3.	Mr Nokrach William
4.	Mrs Nakwang Chritine
5.	Mr Obua Dennis
6.	Ms Kabanda Peri
7.	Mr Muwuma Milton
8.	Mrs Kayagi Sarah
9.	Mrs Kasule Lumumba
10.	Brig. Makumbi James
11.	Gen. Aronda Nyakairima
12.	Mrs Lukwago Rebecca
13.	Ms Auru Anne
14.	Ms Acen Rhoda
15.	Mr Kawuma Muhamed
16.	Ms Aciro Concy
17.	Mr Oyet Simon
18.	Mr Balikuddembe Joseph
19.	Ms Nampijja Susan
20.	Ms Nalubega Mariam

The Sessional Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development:

1.	Mr Tindamanyire Kabondo, Chairperson
2.	Mr Wamakuyu Mudimi, Deputy Chairperson
3.	Ms Akol Rose Okullu
4.	Mr Kakooza James
5.	Mr Balyejjusa Julius
6.	Mr Kaddunabbi Ibrahim
7.	Mr Banyenzaki Henry
8.	Cpt. Guma Gumisiriza
9.	Lt Kyomugisha Grace
10.	Mrs Magoola Zirabamuzaale
11.	Mr Wasike Mugeni
12.	Mr Sejjoba Isaac
13.	Mr Oketcho William
14.	Mr Emigu Julius
15.	Mr Oduman Charles
16.	Mr Nandala Mafabi
17.	Mr Ogwang John
18.	Mr Birekerawo Nsubuga Matia

The Sessional Committee on Social Services:

1.	Mr Kubeketerya James, Chairperson
2.	Dr Serunjogi Lastus, Deputy Chairperson
3.	Mrs Sinabulya Sylivia
4.	Mrs Museveni Janet
5.	Mrs Seninde Rosemary
6.	Mr Gudoi Yahaya
7.	Mr Kaahwa Erisa Ammoti
8.	Mr Elioda Tumwesigye
9.	Mrs Nalule Juuko Safia
10.	Dr Baryomunsi Chris
11.	Mr Kasole Bwerere
12.	Mrs Alisemera Jane
13.	Mr Byanagwa Samuel
14.	Mrs Barumba Beatrice Rusania
15.	Mrs Angufiru Margaret 
16.	Ms Alaso Alice
17.	Dr Epetait Francis
18.	Mrs Bako Christine Abia
19.	Mrs Aol Betty Ocan
20.	Prof. Anokbongo Willy Washington

The Sessional Committee on Foreign Affairs:

1.	Mrs Kiryapawo Loi, Chairperson
2.	Mr Onyango Kakoba, Vice-Chairperson
3.	Mr Kaliba Stephen
4.	Mrs Boona Emma
5.	Mr Matte Joseph
6.	Ms Kyatuheire Jacqueline
7.	Ms Mugerwa Sauda
8.	Mr Mutuluuza Peter
9.	Mr Balingirira Abdul
10.	Mrs Kwebiha Joyce
11.	Mrs Mugyenyi Mary
12.	Mr Muwulize Norman
13.	Mr Okumu Reagan
14.	Ms Akiror Agnes
15.	Ms Kiiza Winfred
16.	Ms Nakawuki Susan
17.	Mrs Ogwal Cecilia

The Sessional Committee on Presidential Affairs:

1.	Mrs Okurut Mary Karooro, Chairperson
2.	Mrs Tuma Ruth, Vice-Chairperson
3.	Mr Kasozi Joseph
4.	Mrs Mugisa Margaret
5.	Col Butime Tom
6.	Mr Olega Ashraf Noah
7.	Mrs Namoe Stella
8.	Mr Kashaija Robert
9.	Mr Kitatta Aboud
10.	Mr Badda Fred
11.	Rev. Bakaluba Peter
12.	Mrs Iriama Rose 
13.	Mrs Sempala Nabilah
14.	Mr Okello-Okello Livingstone
15.	Mr Kikungwe Issa
16.	Mr Opange Louis
17.	Mr Kibanzanga Christopher
18.	Mr Ogwel Loote Samuel
19.	Mr Ssekyanzi Ali Ndawula 

The Sessional Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs:

1.	Mr Nyombi Peter, Chairperson
2.	Mr Tashobya Stephen, Vice-Chairperson
3.	Mr Ndeezi Alex
4.	Mr Kiyingi Asuman
5.	Mr Niwagaba Wilfred
6.	Col. Kyamulesire Ramadhan
7.	Ms Akumu Mavenjina
8.	Gen. Tinyefuza David
9.	Mr Bukeni Gyabi Fred
10.	Maj. Mpabwa Sarah
11.	Ms Amongi Beatrice Lagada
12.	Mr Achia Remigeo
13.	Mr Ndawula Kaweesi
14.	Ms Namara Grace
15.	Mr Akbar Godi Hussein
16.	Mr Lukwago Erias
17.	Mr Odonga Otto Samuel
18.	Mr Njuba Sam
19.	Mr Wacha Ben
20.	Mr Euku Simon 

The Sessional Committee of Public Service and Local Government:

1.	Mr Wopuwa George, Chairperson
2.	Mrs Okori-Moe Janet, Vice-Chairperson
3.	Mr Yiga Anthony
4.	Mr Byarugaba Alex
5.	Mr Mulumba Meddie
6.	Mrs Byenkya Beatrice
7.	Ms Nyago Lydia Kibwika
8.	Ms Mpairwe Beatrice
9.	Mr Achia Terence
10.	Mr Mukose Moses
11.	Mrs Tuunde Mary
12.	Mr Mukasa Anthony Harris
13.	Mrs Bakeine Mabel 
14.	Mr Otekat John
15.	Mr Buchanayandi Tress
16.	Mr Arumadri John
17.	M Ringe Chan David
18.	Mr Nyeko Ocula Micheal
19.	Mrs Amuge Rebecca Otengo
20.	Mr Ekanya Geofrey
21.	Mr Ssoozi Kaddu Mukasa

The Sessional Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries:

1. 	Mr Bikwasizehi Deusdedit, Chairperson
2. 	Mr Piro Santos, Vice-Chairperson
3. 	Ma Wonekha Oliver
4. 	Mr Bagiire Aggrey Henry
5. 	Ms Nalugo Margaret
6. 	Mrs Rwakimari Beatrice
7. 	Mr Sabila Herbert
8. 	Mrs Hashaka Florence 
9. 	Mr Kasaija Stephen
10.	Ms Kiboijana Margaret 
11.	Mr Ssalabaya Haruuna
12. 	Mrs Ssekabira Florence Nayiga
13. 	Mr Kasamba Mathias
14. 	Mrs Kibirige Sekitoleko Juliet
15. 	Mr Tumwebaze Frank
16. 	Mr Odit John
17. 	Mr Wadri Kassiano
18. 	Mr Sebuliba Mutumba
19. 	Ms Kamya Beti Namisango

The Sessional Committee of Natural Resources:

1.	Mr Dombo Emmanuel, Chairperson
2.	Mr Kigyagyi John, Vice-Chairperson
3.	Mrs Oburu Grace
4.	Mrs Bangirana Kawooya Anifa
5.	Mr Ochieng Patrick
6.	Mrs Kasasa Faridah
7.	Mr Ngabirano Charles
8.	Mrs Kyokuhairwa Viccy
9.	Mrs Tete Chelangat
10.	Mrs Kavuma Ruth
11.	Mrs Masiko Winifred
12.	Mr Kyahurwenda Tomson
13.	Mr Kyetunda Elijah
14.	Mr Mukitale Stephen
15.	Mr Arapkissa Yeko
16.	Mr Ebong David
17.	Ms Atim Beatrice
18.	Mr Akena Jimmy
19.	Mrs Ekwau Ibi Florence
20.	Mr Kasigwa Harry 

The Committee of Tourism, Trade and Industry:

1.	Mr Ahabwe Pereza, Chairperson
2.	Mrs Munyira Rose, Vice-Chairperson
3.	Mr Menhya Gerald
4.	Mr Lyomoki Sam
5.	Mr Okot Ogong Felix
6.	Mr Lubyayi Sseguya
7.	Mr Bahane Silver
8.	Mr Nsubuga William
9.	Mr Mugambe Joseph
10.	Maj. Gen. Oketta Julius
11.	Mrs Bintu Jalia 
12.	Mr Sekikuubo Theodore
13.	Mr Sanjay Tanna
14.	Mr Obua Ogwal Benson
15.	Mr Kawanga John Baptist
16.	Ms Amongi Betty Ongom
17.	Mr Angiro Gutumoi Charles
18.	Ms Amali Caroline
19.	Mr Toolit Simon Akecha
20.	Mr Ekemu Charles Willy 

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Mr Speaker, hon. Nsubuga William is supposed to be on the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, not that of Tourism, Trade and Industry. While hon. Anthony Mukasa, according to the list I submitted, is supposed to be on the Committee of Public Service and Local Government.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, those amendments should be effected immediately.

MRS MASIKO: Hon. Arapkissa Yeko is supposed to be on the Committee of Natural Resources.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the list is adjusted.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you. Mr Speaker, yesterday I wrote to the Leader of the Opposition slightly adjusting the list on the Opposition side. The new Member of Parliament, hon. Issa Otto had been allocated the Committee on Information, Communication and Technology. However, I realised that that committee has many members from the Uganda Peoples’ Congress (UPC). So, we decided that hon. Otto be moved to the Committee of Physical Infrastructure.

THE SPEAKER: That is accordingly adjusted.

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Mr Speaker, as required by our Rules of Procedure and as an Independent Member of Parliament, I had indicated to the Clerk to Parliament that I serve on the Committee of Social Services.

THE SPEAKER: I accordingly allow you. (Laughter)

MRS MASIKO KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, according to our rules, each committee is supposed to have 20 Members of which 14 are supposed to be for NRM, four for the Opposition and two Independents. However, I notice that some of the committees are full and that is why some of my Members could not join committees of their wish. So, I do not know when Members will wish to switch, on the Floor of this House, from one committee to the other. I did indicate for hon. Nsubuga because there was space on the Finance Committee for NRM Members.

THE SPEAKER: No, that is your territory; this is not your territory. We have already agreed on your territory. I am doing this because this is an Independent Member and you know I take care of the Independents. (Laughter)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the names as they were being reading and I want to make some comments:

It has been a while since Parliament rented office accommodation at Bauman House. To the best of my knowledge the furnishings that have been going on are now complete. There is a tendency for Members of Parliament to transact business in the lobby, corridors and waiting rooms because of shortage office accommodation. I request to know when Members will start using the office space at Bauman House, bearing in mind the kind of loss this country and Parliament have suffered to rent those offices. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I have heard the committees being read out and I know that the Standing Committees are lasting for two and a half years. We also have other committees of Parliament like PAC and ACP. However, there is one missing and that is the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU). May we know when the IPU is being constituted, so that it can go in tandem with other committees? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: In the first place, we do not have a committee called IPU. What we have are delegates to that IPU and as far as I am concerned, I assigned that role of representation to my sister, the Deputy Speaker. We have always only tried to change and give exposure to other members periodically but we do not have a committee of that nature.

As for accommodation, yes, we got the office premises and there was a hand over to us. Unfortunately, we do not have the furniture yet. There is supposed to be a long procurement policy, according to the law, to secure that furniture. So, it is the furniture that has delayed. Otherwise, as soon as furniture has been obtained, that situation will be addressed; you will be more comfortable than you are now. 

MAJ. (RTD) MAGULUMAALI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am an Independent Member of Parliament. It is my request that I continue serving on the Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Committee.

THE SPEAKER: Well, as the person taking care of the Independents, I agree with you. (Laughter)

MAJ. (RTD) MAGULUMAALI: Thank you very, Mr Speaker.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on the point of office accommodation. I do not know when we were given the offices to start occupying. However, it is known that from the time they were handed over to us, we have not been using these offices and yet we are paying rent. I think that this is a serious negative expenditure. So, I want to point out that the person in Parliament who is responsible for this will be held responsible for wasting public resources, which should be put to maximum use. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not think there is a point in that. It is true the premises were handed over to us, but we did not have furniture. We could not buy mattresses or mats for you to go and sit on. Also take note that there is a procedure of acquiring furniture; there is the tendering system and so forth. True there was a contract and as far as the landlord is concerned, the premises at the time they handed to over to us, they were ready, but we could not use them without furniture. Now whose fault is it?

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Speaker, when we were acquiring the premises we knew they were premises without furniture and definitely the plan for acquiring it should have been put in place earlier.

THE SPEAKER: Would we get furniture without premises? There is no point; there is no point!

As I said, the hon. Leader of the Opposition had a personal statement to make and I allowed him, so let him make it now.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

3.40
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to make this personal statement.

Honourable colleagues may have heard from the broadcast media and also read in today’s newspapers about an incident that took place yesterday. In fact when I came to Parliament, honourable colleagues may have noticed that I wore the same clothes that I wore the day before yesterday -(Laughter)- if they did not notice then it was because the clothes were still quite clean.

The point is that at the end of the session last Tuesday, I had to suddenly travel to the North on an emergency matter. I in fact left Kampala after attending the Independence reception at the residence of the American Ambassador with some of the ministers. Yesterday at about 11.30 p.m., I and my driver left for Kampala with the aim of catching up with the session of Parliament, today. 

About ten miles from Luweero, at about 1.45 a.m. we met a convoy of Bank Of Uganda in which there was a bullion van, one escort Land Rover in front of it and two other escort Land Rovers behind it. Initially we tried to overtake this convoy and thought that there would no problem since we were travelling in an official vehicle. (Laughter) However, as we tried to bypass this convoy the last car, which was registration No. UG 0237F, with military police personnel, signalled to us not to, so my driver slowed down.

Later on, I considered the situation that we drive nearer the second car in which I expected to find the commander of the convoy so that I could talk to him -(Laughter)- let me just explain. It is important for me to make this statement so that people appreciate this. So I tried to go to that car with the idea that I would open my window and talk to the commander -(Laughter)- which I did. However, when I did that they insisted that I could not overtake them and we fell back. 

When we fell back, because I was really keen to come and be in Parliament on time, I decided I would call some of the authorities to inform them.  I, therefore, tried the telephone of the Inspector General of Police and when he was not available I called my office to call the Sergeant-At-Arms to talk to Bank of Uganda so that they know that I was not a thief trying to ambush the vehicle. I was the Leader of the Opposition trying to be in Parliament. (Laughter)

As I was telephoning and we were driving behind the last vehicle the next thing I heard was gun shoots and I saw dust in front of our vehicle. I did not stop. I kept moving and immediately called hon. Ruth Nakabirwa, who answered but was in Nairobi.  She said she did not have the number of the Commander of the Military Police but she immediately called her office and said she would get back to me.  

When we were fired at I called you, Mr Speaker, because I thought what had happened was not ordinary.  Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa then got back to me and said that she was in touch with the head of the Military Police, who was trying to see how to communicate with the Unit Commander of the Escort Unit to let them know who I was.  Eventually, we kept driving behind that convoy waiting for any possible directive but we stopped in Bombo.  Something happened that I believe must have related to the people who were behind me. There was another Suzuki vehicle, which we had overtaken just before we reached this convoy. Later I got calls from Gulu and I suspected that this Suzuki vehicle, which was behind me hearing the gun shoots, they thought that we had actually been shot. They sent information to Radio Mega and the whole of yesterday and today they have been calling me to find out if I am alive. 

Mr Speaker, I believe that, first of all, the military escort was right to stop me from overtaking. I accepted that.  However, I think they did a very wrong thing to fire at me because when I fell back it was clearly evident that I was no longer a danger to the convoy. Firing at me was totally uncalled for.

Secondly, having recognised that this was a Government vehicle –(Interjections)- let me just explain. A system that is responsive would not have behaved like the joke we used to have when I was living in Kenya.  The joke was that if you instructed your Masai guard not to allow anybody after 10.00 p.m., if you came after 10.00 p.m. the Masai would refuse to allow you in. Our Military even in executing their job would have responded slightly different. 

But most importantly when the official vehicle of the Leader of the Opposition was purchased by Parliament, Parliament requested the Ministry of Works to put the label of LOP just like the label for the cabinet minister.  The engineers said that the Leader of the Opposition was not on schedule of those who should bear labels.  I believe that with a label, the Military Police would probably have recognised that this is a category of people and an incident like this would not have happen to cause unnecessary anxiety at home and also even amongst the community within Kampala. 

I thought it was important for me to make this form of statement. It should not be said that I actually forced my way. That is not why the guns were fired because they fired after I had fallen back.  I do not also want unnecessarily inflammation. We do hope that proper arrangements can be made because if you were travelling from Gulu and these vehicles are moving at 90 kilometres per hour, you could spend the whole day following them and yet you would have some very urgent business to transact. So, I thought that I would make a personal statement in regard to this.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. There is no provision for discussing personal statements. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

A BRIEF TO PARLIAMENT ON PHOENIX LOGISTICS UGANDA LIMITED

3.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Prof. Semakula Kiwanuka):  Mr Speaker, I beg to lay before this Parliament a brief to Parliament on Phoenix Logistics Uganda Limited for consideration by the Committee on National Economy. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much. Let the Committee takeover and then report back to Parliament expeditiously. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and hon. colleagues, when we ended business yesterday, I went and consulted legal minds on this matter, which has reached court.  The advice I received is that we could be accused of flouting the law of sub-judice. This is provided for in Rule No. 60 of our Rules of Procedure. I thought I should come back to this House and inform you accordingly that it would be prudent that time is allowed to go and distil what matters we can handle here and what matters we should not handle here; so that we do not find ourselves in an embarrassing situation.  

Secondly, since yesterday more information has been coming in and even some of the things that we stated yesterday are being overtaken by events. 

Point number two, more information has been coming in and even some of the things that we stated yesterday are being overtaken buy events. Accordingly, I would humbly request that we stay this matter until I have put together the new facts that have arisen and I have also crosschecked with what is taking place in court so that when we come to debate this matter we have all facts. That is the only way we can take an appropriate decision. Thank you.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister for what he said. He has asked us to make a decision but he has not helped us at all in making that decision. He said these matters are in court and he has not told us what case is court, in which case we do not even know matter in court. Now can we shelf what we want to do when we do not know what the court case is about? 

My expectation is that the Minister would come here and say that his statement is inadequate and he asks to withdraw it so that he can resubmit. We do not even know what the matters in court are. I think the Minister is asking us a little too much. If you do not know what the court case is then we proceed with making our suggestions on the way we think this matter should be handled. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday during your debate there was this issue of an injunction in favour of those who are in Buliisa. That meant that the status quo remains until the disposal of the case. These “Balaalo” will stay where they are. This is what it means. The order is on. In fact, the lawyer for the “balaalo” sent it to my office but I only forgot to bring it. He went to court and obtained that injunction from Justice Kagaba. So, his intention of sending it to me was that Parliament is debating something, which is in court. Therefore, what the Minister is saying in this case is that “Balaalo” stay in Buliisa until the disposal of the – (Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, we expected the Minister to tell us if he wanted us to make a decision. (Laughter) If he has not presented it, we do not have any other choice other than to tell him that we cannot make a decision. But now that you, Mr Speaker, have helped the Minister we can then proceed with considering his request.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, the guidance I am seeking from your chair is that we ended with a way forward and the statement was before Parliament. What becomes of that statement from the Minister? Is it supposed to be withdrawn? How do we treat it? It is now property of Parliament. How do we go about that statement?

THE SPEAKER: What it means is this, a court order protects the people who are in Buliisa, be it “Balaalo” or Basongora to be there but it does not prevent the Minister from making investigations without disturbing the occupation of the “Balaalo” in that area. That is what it means. 

I had adjourned this debate yesterday so that we would have a way forward. The provision was only about debating ministerial statement without saying that you conclude this way. I expected that after yesterday’s debate you would have come out with a motion to provide a way forward but unfortunately none of you moved a motion to that conclusion. What we have is the court order staying the eviction of the “Balaalo” from the area. (Laughter)

MR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As we observed yesterday the Minister came on the floor with questions that he had set for himself and left out a number of issues that were of concern to Parliament. The “Balaalo” are not just limited to Buliisa. Questions were asked about the way forward. There are occupants in Teso, Lango and Acholi. But now the injunction that we are talking about only applies to those in Buliisa. Could the Minister give us a comprehensive and wholistic approach to this menace of people moving up and down all over the country? How do we proceed?

THE SPEAKER: No. How you proceed is that the Minister gave unsatisfactory statement, which did not cover the entire country. Then as Parliament you may decide to take another course, say by constituting a committee to investigate all the issues involved. That is the kind of way forward I expected.

MR KASAIJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You know when the issue was raised I decided to answer two questions that I framed myself. I went to the Hansard this morning and got an extract of what we debated and what I was instructed to do. And I will quote the words of hon. Mukitale who raised the issue: “unlike the other “Balaalo” who have been coming and co-existing with us, these particular land grabbers decide to herd their animals in the people’s gardens without the consent of the people, without movement permits and for all these years, no district or sub county knows who they are, where they come from and who gave them permits. It is only the Mobile Patrol Unit in Kampala which knows them.” 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, it was on the basis of this matter that I decided to restrict myself to the issue of the pastoralists in Buliisa. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the clarification I want to seek from the Minister in charge of Internal Affairs is that we saw pictures showing guns and yet you came here and said those people do not have any illegal guns. Now those guns we saw with those people, were they legal guns? If they were legal, who gave them these guns? 

We have a problem even in Bugisu. They are telling us they are coming for our land despite the fact that we do not have enough land. We know they have money to buy the land but where are they getting this money? (Interruption)

MRS SSENTONGO: Mr Speaker, my colleague is going out of the way. We have just concluded that this debate be suspended because there is a court case and the Minister-(Interjections)- is going to make more investigations. So, if you bring in the issue of guns, it seems you are diverting. So, is he in order, Mr Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: I think our minds are still – let us hear what hon. Nandala is saying so that we can conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. The issue of “Baliisa,” which we are talking about could be in court as they are saying. But the issue is bigger than we think. And since it is a big issue, we would seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker, that the minister either withdraws the statement and brings a fresh statement to cover the whole country, or he allows us to leave where tie injunctions are - we deal with another portion where there is no injunction, like areas in Teso and part of Bugisu. (Interjection) yes, what I am bringing is a serious matter, these people walk with money, and they buy our land. We are too poor now, but some day we shall ask it back.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister concentrated on Buliisa, but in your view, you say that he should have been wider than that. So, what we can do is to ask him to make another statement in respect to other areas of Uganda, and we give him a timeframe within which to bring this statement, say two weeks, and he will bring us that statement. 

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr Speaker, in light of what the honourable minister has stated, is it not prudent for the hon. Minister to reassure us that no step is going to be taken by the government and that the “Balaalo” are going to stay in Buliisa until we are through with the –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But the rule of law - you see, there is a court order and we have said that we are going to respect it. It is the court order to do that.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION TO CONSTITUTE A SELECT COMMITTEE

4.06
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

“AWARE THAT the challenge of nomadic pastoralists has been lingering around for some time; 
AND FURTHER AWARE that the origin and ultimate destination of these nomadic pastoralists have not been fully established; 

FURTHER COGNISANT that nomadic pastoralism has tendered to brood a lot of ethnic conflicts; 

Now therefore, I do move that this Parliament resolves to constitute a select committee of Parliament to further look into the challenge of the nomadic pastoralists throughout this country and report to this House thereafter.” I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, motion seconded.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker and honourable members, this House should interest itself in ensuring that we get a long lasting solution to this problem, which has not just come a few months ago. It has been ongoing for quite some time and Parliament should make an effort to see how to help the Ministry of Internal Affairs on that matter and all other stakeholders in coming up with a sustainable solution to this issue of unexplained nomadic pastoralists. 

The question of land conflicts can be exasperated by unexplained movement of that nature and I think you know that to avert further wrangles, it should be in the interest of everyone of us to put our minds together to design solutions to this problem. 

Thereafter, we would all own the solutions rather than probably dealing with the matter in piecemeal. Today, we are dealing with Teso, and the other day you were dealing with Buliisa. I think let us come up with a more holistic approach to this problem so that we spare our time and handle other business thereafter. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.   

4.10
MR JOHNSON MALLINGA (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Mr Speaker, I stand to second this motion, and I have basically three reasons why I am seconding it. The minister yesterday attempted to answer the questions he had set for himself. He gave us an answer who these people are and where they are coming from. In his answer, he said that these people are basically in two groups. One group is called “Balaalo,” and the other one is called Rwandese. I looked through the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and in the 65 tribes that we have –

THE SPEAKER: A “Munyarwanda” can also be a “Mulaalo”. “Mulaalo,” is a kind of work, and that person may be a “Muyindi,” he can be any tribe – it is an occupation.

MR MALINGA: Mr Speaker, the interpretation of “Balaalo” in this country depends on two groups, the Bantu speaking people and the non-Bantu. Among the Bantu speakers, a “Mulaalo” is a cattle keeper; among the non-Bantu, a “Mulaalo” is anybody who comes from the Western side of Uganda. (Laughter) I wanted to put this right, Mr Speaker. Whether you are a Mukiga, a Munyoro, or a Muhima, you are a “Mulaalo, according to us in Teso; yet I know that there are people in Western Uganda who are not cattle keepers. 

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not in any way a “Mulaalo, but I rise on a point of order. The Third Schedule of the Constitution is very clear about Uganda’s indigenous communities as of the 1 February 1926. And No. 24 is the Banyarwanda. Is it, therefore, in order for the honourable member to mislead this House by saying that that community is not part of the Ugandan communities?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think it is a question of whether he was a ware of the provision. Now that you have referred to it, the problem is solved.

MR KIBANZANGA: Mr Speaker, the minister’s statement yesterday and the honourable member’s speech now all refer to the Rwandese. So, I want clarification from him on whether the Banyarwanda, as enshrined in our Constitution, are the same as the Rwandese.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, this question comes to me because it is related to my statement. First of all, I want to correct the impression that all westerners are Balaalo as said by my colleague over there. I am from Western Uganda and I am now close to being a Mulaalo. 

Now, having said that, I want to inform my friend, hon. Kibanzanga – I wish he was listening to me. We have people called Banyarwanda in Uganda; no body disputes that. But we also have people who are citizens of Rwanda; those are called Rwandese. So in my statement yesterday, I said that some of these – I am now hesitating to use the word Balaalo, because my colleague there may think that everybody from Western Uganda is a Mulaalo; let us use the word nomadic pastoralists. Some of these nomadic pastoralist, according to our initial investigation, which is not yet completed, and I said that yesterday, are Rwandese citizens who crossed over from Tanzania. 

If you looked at my list yesterday, there were a lot of question marks, which indicated that we have not yet finished the investigation. I did beg that at an appropriate time, we come and debate this matter after the investigations have been completed. I think hon. Kibanzanga now understands the difference between those two. Thank you.

 MR MALINGA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the minister for making this clarification. As far as I am concerned, the people who are nomadic are basically the Bahima. So, when he put a general statement that they were Balaalo, I thought it was unfair. 

What worries me most is that we need to find a solution as Parliament for Uganda to live in harmony. But what worries me, first, is the pattern movement of these people. They move in a systematic pattern; you find them in Lango, Acholi, West Nile, Teso, and you do not know what exactly their destination or intention for this pattern of movement.

Mr Speaker, in 2003, when Teso was invaded by the LRA, I took charge of a number of children who ran away from their homes because of the invasion. In one of the occasions when I was travelling to see these children, I happened to pass between Wiawer and Adilang where there are cattle keepers – the Balaalo. I stopped and talked to one of them, and asked him a few question. One of the questions was: All people have run away from here because the LRA are coming. Are you safe to remain here? And the answer he gave me left me wondering what he meant. He said, “Well, they visited us once and they never came back here”. So, I thought, what power could these people have? If the LRA have been disturbing the UPDF for 17 years, and this man is confident enough to say that they will visit us once and they will never attempt to come again. So, I thought there is a power behind that statement. And as I was driving, I found a big pick-up coloured green, with its number plates covered, and there were officers that I presumed were of UPDF. But since it was a beehive, I feared to pass near it and just crossed over.

The other thing that worries me is the method that people use to evict these people. I learnt that in Lango, the Balaalo went to a place called Maruzi, and some people got pangs and cut the animals to destroy the economy of these people. 

In Teso, a Member of Parliament elect, the RDC and a commander of the Arrow Militia, attempted to evict these people by giving them canes of stroke, and he was rewarded for doing this by appointing him a minister. (Laughter)

So, I am worried that if there is a breakdown of law and order, and people have this kind of feeling toward their fellow –(Interruptions)

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, the commander of the Arrow group happened to be me, and the Member of Parliament for that area also happened to be me. I am now a minister. But I want to make it abundantly clear that my being a minister is not a reward for eviction. (Laughter)  My being a minister is because the appointing authority saw it fit to make me a minister after I was elected a Member of Parliament. And I think it is wrong for a colleague to impute very wrong motives, particularly on the appointing authority that the appointing authority rewards people. These ministers are here on merit and I want to make this clear. (Interruption)

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I raise on a point of order because I have a book here entitled, “Pastoralism and Land Conflict in Uganda.” On page 32, I see the honourable minister Ecweru in picture, with a stick caning people. And I think that my colleague was alluding to the fact that before he became a minister, he actually caned people. So, is it in order for the hon. Minister to stand and deny documented evidence? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Are you trying to infer that whoever holds a stick must use it to beat others? Are you suggesting that because he was holding a stick, so he must have used it to cane others?

MR REGAN OKUMU: Mr Speaker, there is a clear picture and on top it, there is a caption reading “A pastoralist being publicly flogged during an eviction” (Laughter) I take this opportunity to lay the whole document on Table.

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying it is a fact? 

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, I want to make it clear that, first of all, as a commander at that time, I was entitled to a swagger stick. All commanders carry sticks in virtue of their status in community. 

I want to support my colleague, the Minister of Internal Affairs that the question of how to deal holistically with the pastoralists is something that this Parliament must critically prescribe. We should, therefore, ask the minister to go back and do critical analysis of the problem and come back to this House to give information. Some of us may have information that could be helpful and I am sure this House will be able to come up with a solution that can bind all of us. 

On the other hand, I again want to insist that I am not a minister because I caned anybody. Ugandans are observing; tomorrow I may move from there to somewhere close to this way. I do not want to be known, or for my colleagues to imagine that I am a minister because I caned somebody.  Very soon some of you may intend to cross; you might need my signature in one of your appointments. (Laughter) So, I want us to be very careful in one or two things. I thank you. 

MR SPEAKER: Honourable members, do you think we should really spend time on this motion? The motion is intended to cover the entire country yet the statement of the minister was in respect of Buliisa. Do we really have to continue with it?

4.26
PROF TARSIS KABWEGYERE (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. We know what a select committee is, and we also know the extent to which it can go. Given the nature of this problem and given what mandate a select committee has, I would like to persuade this House and the mover of the motion that certainly a select committee will not do a good job on it. 

The Herero people in Namibia are these Balaalo that you are talking about. They are called Herero there and here, they are called Balaalo. In many hundreds of years, people have been moving with cattle in all these areas and that is why you hear of the cattle corridor. However, the issue becomes more critical as land becomes an economic value-

THE SPEAKER: These are the issues that will be found out by the committee. The committee will find out whether the cause of this problem is water, grassland etcetera.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, it is true that what you have said can be done, but I am also saying that the work that can be done by a select committee will not, for example, explain why we have Ugandans who had migrated to Congo, coming back to Uganda. Tanzania is chasing Ugandans away from there and so is Rwanda, and so forth. This is a much larger challenge than the select committee would undertake. That is what I mean. 

THE SPEAKER: Should I put the question?

4.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I have understood the question that it should be countrywide and not limited to Buliisa. Can I promise this House that my ministry-

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear him.

MR KASAIJA: There is a motion on the Floor and I want to oppose it by saying that the Ministry of Internal Affairs has got the capacity to provide the information that this House requires. Therefore, there is no need to have a select committee. Thank you.  

4.28
PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (FDC, Agago County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to help the Executive that whatever the Executive does, they do not do it on behalf of Parliament. Parliament can demand that they do something, but it does not mean that what they do is the work of Parliament. Parliament has committees, and in its Rules of Procedure, if it thinks a normal committee cannot handle the matter, it can put a select committee. The select committee is never in conflict with what the ministers can do within their capacities. Therefore, if it is the desire of Parliament, and Parliament works to help the Executive, it should actually be in the interest of the Executive to support Parliament so that the outcome of whatever investigation Parliament does is not seen as a mere white wash or cover by the Executive. 

I beg the Executive to accept the motion to form this committee in good faith and that the outcome of that investigation will help this Government to address the problem. The truth of the matter is that there is a problem and that the Executive has been trying to handle this problem for years and has not solved it, yet Parliament has been very patient. 

The Seventh Parliament gave the Executive an opportunity to clarify on the matter, and so did the Eighth Parliament. I would like to ask the Executive to allow Parliament do its work. If it fails, you will be justified in you argument. Otherwise, do not pre-empt it by anxiety, which is totally unnecessary.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question. The motion is that this Parliament sets up a select committee to probe into these issues of pastoralists in the entire country. That is the motion moved by hon. Epatait and supported by Hon. Malinga. 

(Question put and agreed to)

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE POOR REVENUE PERFORMANCE IN RESPECT OF THE TENDER FOR NAKASERO MARKET

4.33
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Geoffrey Ekanya): Mr Speaker, the report that is about to be presented is important but most of the members did not receive this report until now. It has just come, yet we would like to internalise it and see how we can contribute reasonably. As you can see, the copies are just coming in.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The concern is that this report has been ready. In fact copies were circulated yesterday during plenary. Perhaps a few colleagues were not available then, but that is why this report was referred to today to allow members time to study it overnight and debate it today. So, I think we should really proceed; otherwise, we have postponed it too much. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. The report was given yesterday and we realised that some members were not here. That is why we had to make copies especially for the ministers and other members who were not here. 

Mr Speaker, yesterday you advised that I summarise the report and I want to take this opportunity on behalf of the Committee on Local Government Accounts, to present this report. This is a stand-alone report, the first of the Committee on Local Government Accounts.

I read: “Report of the Local Government Accounts Committee on poor revenue performance in respect to the tender for Nakasero Market”. This is a stand-alone report of the Local Government Accounts Committee, arising from the Auditor-General’s report for the financial year ending June 2005. 

As the committee was handling the Nakasero Market issue as raised in the Auditor-General’s report, the vendors submitted their complaints regarding the dealing between MS Sheila Investments Limited and Kampala City Council.
The committee performed its task in accordance with the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament, as referred thereto.

Background

Nakasero Market was established way back around 1927, under the management of Kampala City Council. It has over 2500 vendors. In 1999, Kampala City Council expressed interest in developing this market. It has plot 4B and plot 7B, and subsequently, Kampala City Council entered into a joint venture with M/S Sheila Investments Limited on 2 September 2005. 

As a result of the irregularities, inconsistencies and illegalities, several stakeholders, notably Kampala District Public Accounts Committee, the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Authority and the Katorogo Commission of Inquiry, have all investigated this matter and have made several recommendations that you will finally find inside there. However, in their general recommendations, they have all queried the contract and the dealing between Kampala City Council and M/S Sheila Investments Limited, regarding the management of this market.

The vendors in Nakasero Market are organised under Nakasero Market Traders Association and sitting tenants. The thrust of the committee investigation was in relation to compliance with the relevant law; management of public resources and ensuring that public interest is promoted in the development of Nakasero Market. 

In the process of executing its task, the committee also took possession of the duplicate certificate of title for the land comprising of plot 4B and plot 7B at Market Street Nakasero, and handed it over to CID for further investigation. 

However, along the way, the minister, the mayor, the town clerk and the commissioner of land registration facilitated the process of illegally registering a sub-lease agreement on this matter. The committee appreciates the support given to it by this Parliament and all staff.

Method of Work

The committee examined the Auditor-General’s report and the relevant documents received from the vendors, the District Public Accounts Committee and PPDA as listed on page 3. 

Scope of work

This report covers a committee meeting with witnesses between 21 December 2006 to 12 June 2007, and they are listed.

Concerns raised by the Auditor-General and the complainants

The Auditor-General in his report of 2004/2005 queried non-remittance of Shs260 million by M/S Sheila Investments Limited. While M/S Sheila Investments Limited was required to remit Shs300 million payable in advance, it had only remitted Shs40 million by the end of the financial year 2004/2005 and this was the foundation of the Auditor-General’ s report. The Auditor-General continues to state that the contract was a period of three years commencing on 15 November 2002 and ending 15 November 2005 and was poorly managed.

The Auditor-General added that non- remittance of revenue was attributed to the purported recoveries being executed by the contractor for the work done in the market. Information availed to the Auditor-General indicated that M/S Sheila Investments Limited erected an administration block in the market area without prior authority from Kampala City Council, and the contractor was recovering the cost of the building directly from the market dues. The Auditor-General highlights the irregularities for such an arrangement, as you will see from page 5 to page 6. 

Summary of concerns of the market vendors

The vendors were basically concerned about the fraudulent transaction between Kampala City Council and M/S Sheila Investments Limited, over a sub-lease offer for land comprising of plot 4B and plot 7B on Market Street, Nakasero. The vendors said that they were denied the opportunity to develop the market according to Kampala City Council standards, not withstanding the fact that they were already having a systematic design of the project and the fact that they could raise a share capital of Shs25 billion, which is well over the Shs20 billion envisaged by Kampala City Council. 

The vendors continue to state that Kampala City Council tormented them and that there lives were in danger.

Chronology of events

Page 7 talks about the chronology of events; what happened from the time M/S Sheila Investments Limited got a management contract for three years starting, 15 November 2002; how Kampala City Council failed to institute a contract supervisor; how M/S Sheila Investments Ltd violated the terms and conditions of the contract and went ahead to erect buildings and carry out improvements without the official authority of Kampala City Council, and without the work plan going through the right procedure. 

This continues up to page 8 and shows how the technical staff of Kampala City Council, including engineers, were acting contrary to the established procedure, violating the law and authorising works.

Page 9 continues to show how M/s Sheila and Kampala City Council later on, after the building had been put up, decided to value a building and give it a value of Shs 1.9 billion, and M/s Sheila was now demanding that it be compensated Shs 1.9 billion for a building which is illegal. According to law, an illegal structure is null and void and cannot attract value. This continues to page 10.

On page 10 you find that the Minister of Local Government, Gen. Kahinda Otafiire, having received a complaint from M/s Sheila, wrote to the acting town clerk to find out why Kampala City Council was not implementing the terms and conditions of the joint venture. Instead of the technical officials from Kampala City Council replying the minister appropriately, they wrote a letter to the Minister of Local Government lying and saying that KCC had now changed from the joint venture and were now offering a sublease. Subsequently, the Deputy Town Clerk, Mr William Tumwine, wrote a letter directing that the debt of the illegal building valued at Shs 1.9 billion be swapped under a sublease arrangement, and directing that a certificate of duplicate title which is for 99 years be handed over to M/s Sheila Investments and yet the alleged sublease offer was only for 49 years. This goes on up to page 11.

From page 11 you realise that on 4th June, the commissioner for land registration, after being prompted by the Minister of Local Government, went ahead and registered a sublease fraudulently. The document with this information is attached.

Page 12 highlights the investigation of the Kampala District Public Account Committee and the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Authority. In their investigation, the Kampala District Public Account Committee established that the process that involved the transaction between KCC on the management had not been fulfilled by the contractor M/s Sheila. It also established that the joint venture had so many loopholes and that the technical officials of Kampala City Council, the Deputy Town Clerk, Mr William Tumwine were acting without authority. 

It also established that the vendors’ interests had not been taken care of and that there is a lot of political interference by the Kampala City Council political leadership as regards procurement, and this has not allowed the technical officials of Kampala City Council to perform their tasks. Therefore, the Kampala District Public Account Committee recommends that the illegal building in the market should not attract value, that the whole contract be cancelled and that Kampala City Council should follow the law in its transactions. 

Similar findings on page 14 established and recommended by the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Authority. The Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Authority states that the former Town Clerk, Mr Ssegane, takes full responsibility for failure to institute a proper contract management mechanism to enable proper supervision of the earlier management contract. This contract was signed in 2002 and the Town Clerk then was Mr Ssegane. It also recommended that the political leadership of Kampala City Council should stop interfering in the procurement and disposal process of the council. It further recommends that in future, the contract committee should be involved in all disposal of land in Kampala City Council. It adds that the Acting Deputy Town Clerk, Mr Tumwine, be cautioned.

Let us move on to page 15 that talks about the construction of an unauthorised complex. The recommendations and the findings are found there. These are part of the Kampala District Public Account Committee report. 

Page 16 talks about the management agreement between M/s Sheila and Kampala City Council. The report highlights several sections of the law that were not conformed to. 

Page 17 is about the redevelopment of Nakasero Market and it continues to page 18.  Page 19 brings in the issue of the sale of Nakasero Market or the offering of a sublease. 

Mr Speaker, although the principal valuer of Kampala City Council was instructed by the deputy town clerk to carry out valuation of Nakasero Market so as to form a basis for the sale, the recommendations of the principal valuer of Kampala City Council were not followed as outlined in the report. Page 20 of the committee report continues on the same matter. 

I now wish to move to the findings of the parliamentary Local Government Account Committee. In the course of the investigation, a number of revelations emerged from which the committee drew the following conclusions:

a)	The management contract of M/s Sheila expired on 15 November 2005 and was not renewed. The current arrangement is, therefore, illegal.
 
b)	The contract was to be reviewed every year but this was not done.

c)	Upon being awarded a contract for the management of Nakasero Market, M/s Sheila requested to make improvements on the market, specifically to improve the state of sanitation in the market. As a result, the then Town Clerk, Mr Gordon Mwesigye, and the then City Engineer, A.J. Byandala responded in the affirmative. The engineer particularly directed M/s Sheila to commence the works after which M/s Sheila would prepare the bills of quantity for submission to KCC.

d)	The initial request by M/s Sheila was specific and only included a chicken house and a driveway but along the way, the company put up an illegal three-storey building without the council’s approval. 

e)	While clause 22 of Nakasero Market Management Agreement expressly prohibited the contractor from altering the infrastructure in the market without written consent of the council, this clause was fraudulently violated when M/s Sheila constructed the building without the council’s approval.

f)	While meeting the officials of Kampala City Council, they confessed that the council’s budget for all the years indicated had no provision for the redevelopment of Nakasero Market and therefore the development of the market was not in the overall plan of Kampala City Council.

g)	 No approved plan exists for the development of Nakasero Market. The proposed development of the market was instead based on an artistic impression of the same. Purported copies of the plan could not be traced anywhere in KCC.

h)	On 3 May 2005, council passed a resolution regarding the development and highlighted what to be done. However, these useful guidelines made by the then council were never followed by the Sebaggala regime, the acting town clerk and her officers. They flagrantly ignored them and went ahead and did what they did.

i)	The joint venture that was recommended by the council was executed but not implemented and no reasons were given for the action. However, it was also wrong for Kampala City Council to enter into a joint venture with M/s Sheila, knowing well that the company had violated the management contract with it by defaulting on the agreed monthly payment.

j)	The reconciliation of accounts by the Deputy Director of Finance Mr Bazil Batalingaya and the subsequent swapping of debt between Kampala City Council and M/s Sheila was illegal. 

k)	By the end of May 2007, the total outstanding amount owed as a result of the management contract stood at Shs 769.19 million.

l)	The committee established that in the strict sense, an illegal structure could not attract any value and therefore no compensation. However, Kampala City Council continued to receive revenue from the illegal structure.

m)	The intended transfer of ownership of the 99 year lease duplicate certificate of title for land comprised in Plot 4B and Plot 7B Nakasero Market in the name of KCC to M/s Sheila, under the directive of the Acting Deputy Town Clerk, Mr William Tumwine, with a 49 year lease, was not only irregular but illegal. It was also strange for the mayor to be in possession of a title when the actual custodian was the town clerk. 

	Mr Speaker, the committee received information that the title had disappeared from the stores of KCC but also got information that the title was in the hands of a wrong person. Subsequently, the committee issued sermons and when the mayor appeared, the committee told the mayor not to leave until he had produced the title, and within two hours the title had arrived and the mayor handed it over -(Laughter) This shows the gravity of the helplessness of some of the staff of KCC when executing their tasks.
 
n)	The failure to review a contract on annual basis and over-commitment of KCC by its officials both past and present, as indicated at the exclusion of the council and its committees, led and continued to lead, the council into financial embarrassment and losses. These actions tantamount to abuse of authority and office.

o)	The Deputy Town Clerk, Mr William Tumwine, unilaterally awarded the sublease to M/s Sheila Ltd for Plot 4B and 7B, in total contravention of the PPDA, the Local Government Act and other laws as indicated.

p)	The reconciliation carried out by the Deputy Director of Finance, Mr Bazil Bataringaya, under the instruction of the Acting Deputy Town Clerk, Mr William Tumwine, which was subsequently objected by the Director of Finance, Mr Bakka Musujja, was illegal.

q)	KCC’s contracts are poorly designed by the city advocate, and are inadequately executed and supervised by the town clerk, all to the disadvantage of KCC. A case in point is the joint venture that omitted a termination clause while another is the sublease, which was registered without adequate documents. All the documents we have analysed from KCC are poorly designed and they are poorly executed, and yet there are officials who are employed and who are qualified to do this work. 

r)	The Acting Town Clerk, Ms Ruth Kijjambu, is not totally in charge and control of her office. For example, when she terminated the service of M/s Sheila Ltd on 2 February 2007, the termination was defied by the central division leadership and no action was taken. She also takes some actions and decisions outside the ambit of the established law, following pressure from her superiors.

s)	The behaviour of the Acting Town Clerk, Ms Ruth Kijjambu, in signing the sublease with M/s Sheila, was in contempt of Parliament because during the investigation, she admitted on oath that the entire process was marred with irregularities and illegalities. These were, the implementation of the management contract, the joint venture and the sublease offer by the acting deputy town clerk. The said Acting Town Clerk, Ruth Kijjambu, agreed on oath to halt the transaction relating to the disposal of Nakasero Market but instead went ahead to execute a sublease with M/s Sheila Investment.
	
	Knowing that the committee was still investigating the matter, the acting town clerk went ahead to execute a sublease as indicated below. This was in contravention and disregard to the constitutional provision and other laws. She also perpetuated the implementation of an illegal resolution in the council, with total disregard to the PPDA Act and regulations and meddled with the procurement process. The law is very clear but what is happening in KCC is that, it is the council that is involved in disposal and procurement of assets in KCC. The technical officials wait for the resolution and directive of the council and this has continued for very many years. KCC is the one that sits and passes the resolution and decides which company should get which market and which one should get which land. This is in contravention of the PDDA Act and the relevant laws. 

t)	The Acting Deputy Clerk, Mr William Tumwine, is defiant and indulges in dubious illegal and fraudulent transactions to the disadvantage of KCC. For instance, the award of a sublease instead of a joint venture in the case of Nakasero Market as sought by the Minister of Local Government in his letter of 13 December 2006 and subsequently by the town clerk. We also established that this officer sometimes misleads Government and a case in point is when the Minister of Local Government asked for some information and instead he was given wrong information that led to wrong action.

u)	The conduct of the Deputy Director Finance, Mr Bazil Bataringaya, was improper as he usurped the power of the Director Finance and carried out fraudulent financial reconciliations with M/S Sheila.

v)	The former Town Clerk, Mr Mwesigye and the technical officers acted outside established procedure and the law, by illegally sanctioning the market without the council’s approval. The contract is very clear but some officials of KCC, by then Engineer Byandala, Engineer Turinawe and the town clerk, just authorised the company to go ahead and put the structure and then submit the bills of quantities. (Laughter)

w)	The city advocate who is the legal advisor to KCC abdicated her responsibility when she drafted an agreement while not taking care of the greater interest of KCC and failing to give proper advice.

x)	 The political leadership in KCC, particularly the mayor, his executive and the council, have usurped the power of the contract committee.

y)	 KCC does not have a streamlined investment and development plan and revenue policy.

z)	The professional advice of the permanent secretary, Ministry of Local Government over termination of legal contracts, was ignored and the letter is there attached.

aa)	The Minister of Local Government, hon. Kahinda Otafiire’s over-involvement in Nakasero Market raises questions as outlined below. Let us move to page 29. In his communication, the minister is bent on favouring M/S Sheila’s taking of Nakasero land yet he should ensure that the relevant laws are followed. Aware that the parliamentary Local Government Account Committee was still investigating revenue management and transactions between KCC and M/S Sheila Ltd, the minister wrote to the Acting Commissioner Registrar of Title, Edward Karibwende, who fraudulently registered a sublease on 4 June 2007 and yet this was still a subject of investigation by both Parliament and CID. The action of Mr Karibwende is tantamount to contempt of Parliament and abuse of office. The letter the minister wrote is attached, you can read it. It is attached as part of the appendix. 

bb)	The sublease was illegally executed and registered on the following grounds:

(i)	The sublease transaction never complied with the procurement laws and regulations. In its resolution, the council offered a resolution offering a sublease to M/S Sheila Investments Limited without following competitive bidding.

(ii) The law that the acting commissioner used to dispense with a requirement of production of a duplicate certificate of title while registering the sublease (Section 69 of Registration of Titles Act) had been repealed by section 41 of the Land Amendment Act 2004. His action was therefore illegal and the registration is null and void.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee invited the Minister of Lands and the Ag. Commissioner, and during cross examination of the Ag. Commissioner of Land Registration and Titles, he conceded on oath that what he did was wrong and added that he did it under pressure from the Minister of Local Government and that in the past he had committed the same error thrice. This action was taken in utter disregard of earlier communication by the committee. I want to indicate that this was the last meeting the committee had. We did not invite the Minister of Local Government, hon. Kahinda Otafiire, to defend himself against these allegations. 

Mr Speaker -(Interjection)- yes, I told hon. Kahinda Otafiire that he will have to defend himself while here and if the House so wishes, this will be expunged because we had to have a timeframe to finish our work. All the above indicates that the whole transaction is suspect, fraudulent and rushed. 

The Minister of Local Government continued to influence KCC to dispose of Nakasero market despite His Excellency, the President’s directive not to do so. As I told you members, we did not invite the minister to find out how they were proceeding in Cabinet because we do not deal in management issues.

cc)	Other organs of Government: IGG, CID and PPDA have not actively prevailed on illegal transactions in KCC otherwise, they would have used their wide-ranging powers to flush out the rot in KCC. 

The committee went ahead and looked at the procurement law of the land. The committee made the following observations as indicated: 

(i) There was no due diligence test done on M/S Sheila Investments before they awarded a sublease for Nakasero market as required under regulation 59 of the Local Government (PPDA) Regulations 2006. Under regulation 59 Section (3)(b) of the same regulation, the nature and extent of the due diligence test to be conducted shall be determined by the risks associated with the non-performance of the bidder. Indeed, knowing that M/S Sheila Investments had already defaulted on the earlier management contract, it would have been prudent for KCC to carry out a due diligence test but they failed to do so hence flouting the said provisions of the law.
 
The report continues and highlights sections of the laws that were violated. 

Recommendations of the committee

In light of the above findings, the committee recommends that: 

1.	Kampala City Council uses all avenues at its disposal, including legal action, to recover the entire outstanding amount owed by M/S Sheila Investments Limited within this financial year.
 
2.	KCC desists from transacting business with M/S Sheila Investments Limited before clearing all contractual obligations. It should also not enter into any dealings with any developer who owes it money.

3.	Since the transactions subsequent to the expiry of the management contract in 2005 between Kampala City Council and M/S Sheila Investment Limited to-date have been riddled with fraud and characterised by illegalities, they must be cancelled before being reviewed in accordance with the law, and in a transparent and competitive manner under the direct supervision of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Asset Authority.

4.	Kampala City Council should appropriately deal with the Nakasero market management contract that expired in 2005. 

5.	Kampala City Council should adhere to existing laws and contracts should be reviewed annually to ensure that council does not incur any losses. 

6.	The town clerk should ensure that contracts are designed, executed and supervised in a professional manner.

7.	The IGG needs to invoke the Leadership Code Act and investigate the conduct of the mayor and his role in the Nakasero market disposal having written purporting to take personal responsibility. The Mayor, Hajji Nasser Sebaggala, wrote a letter to the Public Procurement and Disposal of Asset Authority saying he is ready to take personal responsibility for all these actions. The letter is attached.

8.	The Ministry of Lands takes immediate steps to nullify the registration of the subleases for plots 4B and 7B, Market Street, Nakasero.

9.	A Government caveat should be placed on the land comprised in plots 4B and 7B, Nakasero Market, until all procedures have been complied with.

10.	Kampala City Council should blacklist all companies that have not fulfilled all their contractual obligations and indeed publish the same in the media. Mr Speaker and honourable members, this is a provision in the law but people just ignore it.

11.	KCC should include the re-development of Nakasero market and any other market in its over all development plan and properly budget for it.

12.	Noting that the 30 percent and 70 percent sharing agreement between the vendors and Sheila Investments Limited is vicious and anti-development, it is recommended that this be rescinded by the council and instead secure services of a core single investor to redevelop Nakasero market on behalf of the council, taking into account the interests of the vendors/sitting tenants occupying the ground floor.

13.	The choice of a developer in respect to Nakasero market should be done in a transparent manner, according to its physical development plan in accordance with the laws of Uganda.

14.	Notwithstanding the above, following the set precedent that has been established in previous disposal processes by the state, it is recommended that first priority be given to the vendors as envisaged in regulation 127(1)(b) as sitting tenants and users of Nakasero market in a transparent process to develop Nakasero market (their market). However, should their bid not succeed, the vendors should unconditionally be entitled to the ground floor of the redeveloped market comprised in plots 4B and 7B of Nakasero market. 

Honourable Speaker and honourable members, this recommendation is based on the practice that this Government has been implementing for many years. When Government wants to dispose of vehicles, users are given first priority to acquire them; when Government wants to dispose of pool houses, sitting tenants get first priority; when Government wants to develop Nakawa estate, sitting tenants still get first priority; even with Bugolobi flats, sitting tenants got first priority. We wonder why when it comes to Nakasero vendors are not given first priority. (Applause)

15.	If the vendors fail to qualify or to satisfy KCC requirements, the opportunity to develop Nakasero market should be open and available for any developer through an open bidding under the direct supervision of the PPDA. However, KCC should refrain itself from entering into fresh business with companies that have cases in court.

Hon. Speaker and members, we also established that Kampala City Council continues to engage and enter into fresh agreements with companies that had sued it in court when the case has not yet been disposed of.

16. KCC should only transact with M/s Sheila upon its fulfilment of all its financial obligations under the management contract. M/s Sheila Investments still has an outstanding debt of KCC amounting to over Shs700 million yet KCC still enters into fresh agreements with this company. This beats my understanding! 

17. Government should come up with a policy on development and management of markets in this country. This policy should however stress that in the event of redevelopment of such markets, the certificate of title, which is non-transferable and the ground floor should always remain the property of the local Government upon which a certificate of title will be issued under the condominium property law to cater for the interests of the sitting tenants/vendors. 

18. 	The recommendation of PPDA and Kampala District Public Accounts Committee highlighted here be adopted. 

19. 	The redevelopment of Nakasero market be subjected to what is stated there.
	
20. 	The redevelopment be done according to the Town and Country Planning Act. When we say Town and Country Planning Act, we mean that all buildings within the city are supposed to have underground parking but what has been happening in this city is that, no parking is provided at all. No wonder we all have to suffer these bad jams in the city! 

21. 	The Minister of Local Government should strengthen supervision of KCC to ensure that it complies with all relevant laws of the land. Mr Speaker, it beats our understanding that the Ministry of Local Government is just next door, but what happens at KCC shows that there is no supervision.

22. 	The political leadership of KCC should stop pressuring technical staff to implement illegal resolutions of the council. 

23. 	The Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Local Government takes disciplinary action as follows: 
•		The Ag. Town Clerk be cautioned and advised to take full charge of her office, including setting up transparent and accountable systems capable of protecting public funds.
•		The Ag. Deputy Town Clerk and Deputy Director for Finance be interdicted for professional misconduct and to pave way for wider investigations.

24. The Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should interdict the Ag. Commissioner for Land Registration to pave way for wider investigations.

25.	H.E. the President takes appropriate disciplinary action against the incumbent Minister of Local Government. (Laughter)

26. 	The CID and the IGG investigate – the former town clerks, Mr Gordon Mwesigye and Segane, the former City Engineer and Surveyor, Eng. Byandala, as well as Eng. Turinawe for causing financial loss. (Laughter)

27. KCC regularises all running contracts it has with various contractors so as to avoid future losses of revenue. This should be in accordance with the PPDA and related regulations.

28. 	Any financial loss incurred by Kampala City Council as a result of the above highlighted wanton actions of the Ag. Deputy Town Clerk, Ruth Kijambu, the city advocate, the Ag. Deputy Town Clerk and the Mayor be personally visited on the said parties in the spirit enshrined in Article 164 of the Constitution and regulation 10 of the Local Governments Financial and Accounting Regulations, 1998.

29. 	Lastly, the Rt hon. Prime Minister should compel the responsible ministers, KCC and other Government departments to implement the above recommendations and report on the progress by the end of August 2007.

Conclusion:

Mr Speaker, whereas the committee supports the redevelopment, it is against the fraudulent manner in which the whole process has been and is being handled. The revelations were of grave concern and they affected the operations of KCC in its entirety. The committee, therefore, requested the Auditor-General to carry out a special audit on all revenue sources and fixed assets covering the period of 2000/01 to-date. In the interim, it calls upon KCC to institute a transparent process in disposing of Nakasero market, taking into account its overall development plan, the law and giving utmost priority to the interests of the sitting vendors. Thank you very much, ladies and gentlemen.

THE SPEAKER: I want to thank the Chairman and your committee for this report. (Mr Byandala rose_) Yes, hon. Byandala. (Laughter)

5.21
MR ABRAHAM JAMES BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I thank the chairman of the committee and his members for the report. Obviously, they will have to excuse me because I cannot say that it is a good report. It is disjointed. There is a lot of misinformation; I will elaborate on a few areas.

I did not read the whole report but I randomly looked at a few pages and those that I looked at contained a lot of misinformation. Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, since you are mentioned in this report and you say, “randomly,” do not prejudice yourself; do not look at this randomly. Take your time and study the report.  Because when you say, “randomly” it means you have skipped this and the other. It is better that you take your time and then come out with the comprehensive.  But if you think you are right, go ahead.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, in this report when you look on page 3, I am not among the people the committee invited and cross-examined. This committee wrote letters to me, I appeared three times and on all those occasions they gave excuses saying, “We are very busy, we do not have enough time; we shall call you” and now they just come with a report. I do not see natural justice being done to me.  Consequently, they have missed a lot of information, clarifications and the facts I would have given to this committee.

Allegations made in this report, Mr Speaker, especially against me are wide, wild and very far from the truth. I appeal to hon. Ekanya and his colleagues that if you do not know anything you are writing about, please ask because if you just write, you make false reports, which may bring a bad image of yourself! And when you ask, please ask intelligently. What do I mean, Mr Speaker? (Interruption)

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The honourable member holding the Floor has repeatedly mentioned issues of misinformation in the report and alleging as if the report is of one person. Is he, therefore, in order to allege that a report of a committee of over ten people, including a clerk assigned to this particular committee, is a one-man’s report? Is he therefore in order to allege so?

THE SPEAKER: Is it your position that this one was a one-man’s report?

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, I said the chairman and the committee members.

THE SPEAKER: So you are not saying it is a one-man’s report?

MR BYANDALA: No. It is not a one-man’s report.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I am constrained on how we shall proceed on this matter. The report mentions some parties who are now members in the House, and Eng. Byandala, is now in a bit of difficult position on how to approach the report because really it would now be like a conflict of interest.  He needs to debate the report objectively, but at the same time defend himself. However, the report did not even utterly condemn him but called for further investigations by either the IGG or CID. I do not know whether we would not be procedurally right to spare him the strain to talk about this report, which mentions him. 

THE SPEAKER: How do we help the situation? He is mentioned in the report, he is a Member of Parliament and is saying, “This was not properly handled because I was not given an opportunity to put my case.” In the end he is saying that this report is not credible in as far as recommendation concerning him is concerned. I am not saying he is, but he is the one otherwise who is going to speak for himself. So, he is telling the entire House, “Please, look at this, this was not done. Do you think this report has any value?” This is what he is trying to do.  

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, there is no lacuna because you have the power to rule where the rule is silent. The Rules of Procedure demand that where there is a conflict of interest, one declares.  Apart from the Minister of Local Government who is appointed to execute that task, hon. Byandala in this case has a conflict of interest as provided for in our rules.  He needs to declare his interest on this matter because we are talking of Engineer Byandala who was then the city engineer, and when it comes to this matter, according to our rules which I am familiar with, a Member who finds himself on a matter which is before a committee of the House, and has interest in it, needs to declare the extent of that interest. 

I want to inform Engineer Byandala here that when we are looking at Kampala City Council issues, we are handling issues and that period where he was is so wide and when we invited him it was concerning Owino Market and we decided to suspend Owino Market because of the gravity of the matter. So, it is not this. The real documents and facts are attached to this report, which can be laid on Table. 

THE SPEAKER: You see, the disclosure of interest when a matter is before the committee means this: if I am a Member of Local Government Accounts Committee and we are investigating a matter in which I have an interest, I should disclose it. I have been given this task, but I have this interest, this and this. You may think that in carrying out my work, I am protecting this and the other and that is why I have disclosed it.  But in as far as he is concerned - you see, he was the engineer in the city council.  He is in the House to receive the report. He is now trying to say, “Well this report in respect of me was done without giving me an opportunity to be heard. Had they called me, I would have shown this and the other.”  There is no conflict here. Here he is just trying to show you that procedurally, the investigation according to him was not properly conducted.

MRS OKURUT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The chairman of the committee has stated that he did not have the opportunity of interfacing with the Minister of Local Government and hon. Byandala is saying that he was not called. In light of this, would it not be more prudent to give these people, who are Members of this august House, a chance to at least respond to the allegations that have been raised against them? Looking at this report, the way it is extremely intricate, so that we could halt it and debate it on Tuesday when they have already put in their other side of the coin. Otherwise, we have already violated the principles of natural justice and we risk having exchanges. I need your guidance, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: This is exactly what I did before the debate started. Because I heard him say, “randomly,” and I knew he was the Byandala mentioned in this report. My indication to him was: Why do you not take your time to study the report in detail and then come here and make your case? Then on the basis of evidence of the submission he will have made, you may make a prayer that this requires further investigations but the foundation must be laid and that is easy. But he should have taken more time to study in details page by page and then come and make his submission, instead of being the first one to contribute on the report. (Laughter)

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, I am obliged for your advice. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: You need to study it and put your case before others so that when they start contributing, they take your case into account. That is why the minister of state is saying, “Why do we not give ourselves some bit of time so that you prepare and come here?” Chairman what do you think? 

MR EKANYA: That is the way forward especially as it will enhance the debate and help us to take up the right decision unless the Member has something to say.

THE SPEAKER:  Let us hear from the area Member of Parliament.

MRS NABILAH SEMPALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also want to add my voice to the way this matter of Nakasero Market was handled. As the area Member of Parliament and also owing to the fact that I led some of the vendors to petition on some of these issues, I feel that the situation in Kampala, and not only Nakasero, needs a holistic approach because even the report mentions other markets like Kitintale, Nakawa and Nateete and they all have petitions to the Committee on Local Government. 

However, I also have a query because Kampala goes through a lot of politicking on any matter especially in the process of handling and investigations in the committee. The report was even pre-empted because a Member of the committee went to Nakasero and read it to members of Nakasero Market. So, there is a lot of unnecessary politicking, incitement and I think we need to do something. (Applause) In the issue of Nakasero there has been a lot of –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No. Let us deal with one issue first because you are also making another case to put holes in the report. The suggestion was that, let all of us benefit in studying this report but in particular, we start hearing the case of those mentioned so that when we come to contribute, we take into account the grievances expressed in respect of the report so that we make a just decision on how to handle the report. I think that is the gist of the honourable minister.

MR THEODORE SEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I have also looked in the report and the last conclusion says, “Rt hon. Prime Minister should compel the responsible ministers, KCC and other Government departments to implement the above recommendations and report on the progress by the end of August 2007.” I have a problem there, Sir, because some of the issues contained here and the recommendations are in court.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is a recommendation by the report. The report is submitted to us; we receive it, adopt it and adjust it. So, we are not compelled by the recommendations of the report but we could come to a conclusion that maybe the date is too early. So, you should not fear about that. It depends on the evidence or on the submissions that we shall have got. Maybe according to him, we shall need further investigations of this case. If we do, then the recommendation of end of August may not arise.

So, let us not pre-empt our decision. Here we should be discussing the proper way that we should handle this report; is it that we give ourselves sometime to really scrutinise the report? Do we allow the people mentioned who are here maybe to speak for the people who are not here if they think that they were not given an opportunity to be heard? Does it make sense that we debate this report on Tuesday after giving benefit to those who are mentioned? Maybe those mentioned in the report may approach some Members here and say, “You see, I heard my name mentioned but this did not happen,” because they have no opportunity to come and make their case here.  That is the essence.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sometime back, Parliament handled the case of the Ministry of Health and a situation arose where Prof. Omaswa was mentioned and some members of Parliament petitioned that he needed to be heard or his case needed to be re-examined before the report was debated. And you ruled that he should be given a chance. I think that is really the right approach because the essence of these reports is to establish the truth and to define the best way forward. Therefore, anything that impedes on our attempt and effort to establish the truth should be recognised and put away from the process. 

So, I think the chairman of the committee has already conceded. These other matters that my honourable colleague is raising are matters that, if they read the report as you have advised, can be petitioned in the committee so that they are addressed before we proceed with the debate.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I think there is a consensus but a consensus does not mean 100 percent agreement. What he says is to be fair to all concerned so that we do not say that we hurriedly went through what other people had not studied.

Good enough the Minister of Finance rang me before we came here and said that he is not ready with items 8 and 9 and so he will not be coming to deal with them. So, the main item we have on our Order Paper today is this one. Therefore, we defer it to Tuesday so that each of you religiously studies the report and when we come, we immediately deal with this business. I think that is okay. 

MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did not want the Minister of Local Government to leave this House without knowing my concern in reference to the President’s letter addressed to the honourable minister.

THE SPEAKER: It is part of the report. Therefore, whoever reads this report should take into account the annexure, which are part of it.

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from you. When you look at page 3, on the method of work, we have said that it is natural justice for somebody to be heard. I looked at the list of the people that were interviewed, but I did not see Sheila Investments being interviewed.

THE SPEAKER: Well, let that also be one of the issues that you will raise then we shall see how to address it.

With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to Tuesday to specifically deal with this business.

(The House rose at 5.41 p.m. and was adjourned until Tuesday, 10 July 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)


