Tuesday 6th July, 1999

Parliament met at 2.20 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.
                   
PRAYERS
        
(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FINANCE BILL, 1999

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr. Ssendaula):  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled "The Finance Bill, 1999"  be read a First Time.  I beg to move.

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, item number four is a motion for a resolution of Parliament seeking Government to guarantee capacity payment for electricity by Uganda Electricity Board to AES Nile Power under an independent power production agreement.  

On the 27th of August, the Minister of Energy brought to this House an amendment law to the Electricity Act.  It was a very short amendment.  This House addressed itself to it in detail and at the end of it all, the House resolved that the Minister should go back and prepare a comprehensive Electricity Amendment Act before this Parliament could consider guaranteeing these independent power purchase agreements.  

I have an extract here from the Hansard which I will lay on the Table.  This was a decision of this House. The Minister at that time promised that by December 1998, there would be a law brought to this House for consideration by this House before any further consideration of an independent power purchase agreement.  Parliament agreed.  Of course we know what happened; the Minister left that Ministry and a new Minister came.  

On the 15th of June, the Minister of Finance came back with a resolution of the House to authorise government to guarantee this agreement for independent power purchase.  The objection by this House was vehement and the Minister actually withdrew the resolution and agreed that actually they would now go back and work on the Act. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we are here to consider a project that is going to affect this country for 30 years, maybe more, and in the Committee of Business, the Minister who represented the Prime Minister reported that the Electricity Bill would come to the House before this resolution.  It is now very surprising, Mr. Speaker, that in spite of this scenario, the Minister or government is coming again to request this House to go ahead and authorise the guaranteeing of this independent power purchase. Mr. Speaker, I think we are going to make a big historic mistake. We have examples of these hurried laws that we have passed and  subsequently it has become very difficult to implement them. Now we are being pushed to go ahead and authorise government to enter into a long term commitment which is going to affect not only ourselves but our children and their children and their children -  (Laughter).  

On a point of procedure, I wish to seek your guidance as to whether it is correct for us to go ahead and consider this motion when in fact Parliament has already pronounced itself on the way forward as far as the power sector is concerned.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I also rise on a point of procedure.  Mine is related to the function of Parliament with its Committees.  We have here adopted a standard; once a Committee of Parliament has debated a matter and presented its report, generally we do not open up a general debate.  That being the case, what I saw in the matter we had just handled is that the Committee report opened general debate.  

That being the case, Mr. Speaker, if I were to follow procedure  - and here I seek your guidance - during that debate, some of us stood up to challenge your decision regarding a certain aspect where in the debate harsh punishments were being introduced.  You ruled that those Members who stood at that time did not constitute a quorum and that was based on the fact that certain Members who had stood in their number did not constitute a quorum.  Mr. Speaker, we are now beginning a new session,  Committees are sitting and I am worried about this thing called quorum.  

In our rules of procedure, it is well established as to what to follow when there is or there is no quorum. You have been quoted, Mr. Speaker, to have pronounced yourself on the matter regarding quorum. I would like to seek your guidance, to advise this House, what shall we follow in the matter of quorum in Committees and generally in plenary sittings? 

Mr. Speaker, the rules are very clear;  if the quorum is called, Members must be counted. It is those in the House that constitute the quorum.  If in the Committee there is a quorum question, it is those Members who are sitting who constitute a quorum.  The Committee may not sit if the number of Members as prescribed in the quorum are not present.  Plenary may not continue if the question of quorum has been called and Members have been counted and the numbers are not sufficient.  You have now introduced, Mr. Speaker, a new method that you count those who are in the register.  

I would like, for the record and for the sake of this Parliament, that you give guidance as to what quorum is so that we are specifically aware how we are going to conduct our business because my understanding is that we go by the Rules of Procedure which say Members present must be counted and if they are not constituting a quorum, 15 minutes is given.  If after 15 minutes Members do not constitute a quorum, the House is adjourned.  I seek your guidance on this procedural matter.  I have been in this House since 1989, I am beginning to see things done differently.  I would like your ruling and guidance as to how this Parliament is going to proceed, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let me start with his point. Hon. Member,  I think what you are introducing is to challenge the ruling of the Speaker on that issue of quorum.  I would suggest you apply the very same rules you are citing, namely; if you challenge the Speaker's ruling on a matter of order, then you must come here with a substantive motion with notice. The other one of course is for you to raise the issue of quorum and then we take it from there but I do not know how to proceed on the basis of something which is hypothetical.

MR. PINTO:  I will challenge your procedure in your ruling by a substantive motion.  Thank you for your guidance.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Mwandha, it is quite true that the motion which the Minister is about to move concerns a matter which has been discussed here before and I also recall that at that time, the Minister responsible had made a commitment that by December last year, the Electricity Bill would be before Parliament for debate.  Maybe I will ask the Minister whether that commitment still stands and if so, what happened.

THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bumba): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the commitment to bring the Electricity Bill before Parliament was not met in December 1998 because there was a change in government policy regarding the regulation of the power sector but since then, a new Electricity Bill has been drafted.  It is ready and it will be going before the Committee on Natural Resources within two to three weeks' time.  It is ready for Cabinet cleaning.  The principles were cleared by Cabinet and it is going to be debated by Cabinet and most probably, next week or within two weeks, it will be before the Committee.  

This Electricity Bill is a condition precedent in the power purchase agreement. The developer cannot reach financial closure before the Electricity law is enacted and according to the draft power purchase agreement, the Electricity law has got to be in place latest by September. Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, the enactment of the Electricity law is now a conditionality to the World Bank financing remedial works at the Owen Falls Dam.  the Owen Falls Dam has got cracks and the World Bank has also made it a conditionality that the Electricity Bill must be in place by September for them to be able to give us the ten million dollars we need to have the remedial works done.  

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that should be adequate comfort to the hon. Members that the Electricity Bill is coming in place.  Even if you clear the resolution and we sign the PPA, it will not be operationalised until the Electricity law is in place.  Mr. Speaker, for the developer to be able to raise money, it will not take them less than six months.  In any case, they will not reach financial closure until some time in January next year and by that time, the Electricity Bill will be in place because we  have to meet the two conditionalities in any case.  So, Mr. Speaker, it is a long process.  If we continue waiting for the Bill, we are losing more time and we need the electricity.  So Mr. Speaker, I wish to beg the hon. Members -

MISS NAMUMBYA: I would like to inform the hon. Minister, Mr. Speaker, that this may not be the first time when Ministers or a Minister has ever told this House what is not there.  I recall some time back that the hon. Minister of Health stood here and said that Jinja Hospital had been earmarked for quite a good amount of money and that that money was already in place but there is no money that has ever reached Jinja Hospital.  So I am a bit worried as to whether I can take the Minister's word to be a gospel truth.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, Parliament is the supreme lawmaking body of Uganda.  Noting that whatever we resolve or begin discussing, according to the Environment Statute, 1995 and according to article 245 of the Constitution of Uganda, has got to be subjected to a public hearing,  Would it be proper for us to proceed on a faulty note?  Because, the public which will eventually decide is looking at us.  If we begin on a faulty note, it is going to create a very bad impression.  So I would like to environmentally advise -(Laughter)- that we take our time until the Electricity Bill has come into force so that we can proceed properly and I am sure that the Minister will not ignore my environment advice.  

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Member, why do we not do this - you give the Mover a hearing and then you can discuss the matter and either agree or disagree.  I think let us proceed that way, otherwise, we will not be able to make any headway. Hon. Mwandha, my position on your matter is this that you are raising an objection on a substantial issue and I am suggesting that you hear the Minister's motion and then you react to it so that the matter can be decided.

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, as you can look at this House, all Members of the Executive are here to make sure that this motion goes through.  Mr. Speaker, this is a procedural matter, it is a matter of credibility of this House.  We made a request for a law on the power sector so that we can make other laws and pass other resolutions in the context of the overall law governing the power sector.  

The Minister promised that by December the law would be in place and now the Minister is saying there has been a change, therefore it has to take a bit of time and it is going to take about three weeks before we pass the law.  Now, if we are going to commit this country for 30 years and more, why can we not wait for three weeks, pass the law and then subsequently pass other laws rather than being ambushed and being manipulated and being used as if we are a rubber stamp?  Mr. Speaker, I object to this and I think it is important that we go ahead and have the law before we consider all these various motions.  Thank you.

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much.  Mine is just seeking clarification.  In her opening remarks, the hon. Minister said that the coming into force of the Electricity Bill is a conditionality by many organisations including the World Bank. Secondly, she says that this Bill is soon coming.  I am now wondering, Mr. Speaker, whether it is not more consistent to put the horse before the cart so that we have the Bill preceding the particularities of the purchase agreements so that we know the parameters we are working in. But much more fundamental, Mr. Speaker you will guide me in this matter, Parliament did pronounce itself very specifically to say that this House is not entertaining a power purchase agreement until an Electricity Bill is before this House, how does Parliament go back on that word?  Mr. Speaker, can you advise us so that we know how to proceed with this debate?

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, we have not even started the debate!  No motion has been moved; now, what are we discussing surely?  Why do we not allow the motion to be moved and then you look at it?  That is how we should proceed!  

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT SEEKING GOVERNMENT TO GUARANTEE CAPACITY PAYMENTS FOR ELECTRICITY BY UGANDA ELECTRICITY BOARD TO AES NILE POWER UNDER AN INDEPENDENT POWER PRODUCTION AGREEMENT.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr. G. Opio):  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move the following motion, that:  
"Whereas under article 159 section (2) of the Constitution of Republic of Uganda, it is a requirement that before the Government guarantees or raises a loan for a public institution the Government has to seek the authority of Parliament;  

Whereas under the implementation agreement and power purchase agreement to be executed between the Government of the Republic of Uganda and Uganda Electricity Board - the public institution -respectfully with AES Nile Power Limited, AES proposes to construct a hydraulic power production facility, the investment at Dambo island on the river Nile, approximately eight kilometres north of the existing Owen Falls hydraulic electric facility, and to construct associate transmission facilities;  

Whereas UEB will, under the power purchase agreement, be obliged to make annual capacity payment to AES in respect of the energy contracted and delivered in accordance with 'Annex A' hereby attached;  

Whereas as a condition to its investment, AES requires the Government of Uganda to guarantee the payment obligation of UEB until certain conditions set out in the implementation agreement are made;  

Whereas the Government of Uganda may determine that the overall costs of the investment and, consequently the monthly payment can be reduced by having the World Bank provide a partial risk guarantee to the investors, protect against certain non-commercial risks;  

Whereas in such an event, Government of Uganda will be obligated to provide the World Bank with an indemnification whereby the Government will agree to indemnify the World Bank in the event that the World Bank is obligated to make payment to the investors pursuant to the World Bank partial guarantee;  

Whereas the provision of the guarantee and the indemnification by the Government of Uganda is a contingent liability on the part of Government of Uganda and; 

Whereas the Parliament of Uganda has evaluated the conditions and terms of the implementation agreement and the power purchase agreement and has concluded that the investment would enhance the social and economic development of Uganda;  

Now, therefore, be it resolved by Parliament that the Government of the Republic of Uganda, acting and through its Minister of Finance, is hereby authorised and empowered in accordance with Article 159 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda to execute and deliver to AES Nile Power Limited, the guarantee of the Republic of Uganda. 

Be it further resolved that the Government of the Republic of Uganda, acting and through its Minister of Finance, is hereby authorised and empowered in accordance with Article 159 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda to execute and deliver the required documents of indemnification in connection with any partial risk guarantee issued by the World Bank with respect to the Bujagali project, provided that such partial risk guarantee shall lower the tariff payable from UEB to AES."    Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr.  Musumba):  Mr. Speaker, before I present the full text of the report of the Committee on the National Economy which was made in consultation with the Committee on Natural Resources, I do wish and seek your indulgence, Mr.Speaker, that I make some preliminary remarks on our report. 

Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, on the 20th of January, 1999, our joint Committees of the National Economy and that of Energy were presented by Government with a draft agreement between Government of Uganda and UEB on the one part, and an independent power producer company, AES Nile Independent Power on the other part.  Mr. Speaker, it is well over six months since we received that document and our Committees have worked tirelessly and indeed relentlessly to ensure that the provisions in that agreement are improved for the benefit of this nation.  

In the process, Mr. Speaker, immense pressure was brought to bear, from all kinds of sources, upon the Committees to recommend to this House the agreement for approval.  We were accused, Mr. Speaker, of not appreciating the acute power needs of this country;  we were accused of being insensitive to the need for rapid industrialisation;  we were called forces of darkness;  we were labelled saboteurs who wanted to keep 95 per cent of the population in darkness and so on and so forth.  Mr. Speaker, our Committees were steadfast in their resolve to ensure that the deal that is to be given to our country is improved to the benefit of our people.  Our philosophy was better to delay the project for a few more months while refining the deal than to forever commit our people to bondage and economic slavery under a lopsided agreement.  

It is because of the exceptional hardship that the Committee members were subjected to that it is extremely imperative that the Committees extend appreciation and sincere gratitude to the following:-  
1. His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda who, in spite of his anxiety to get more electricity for his people urgently, was so understanding as to give us peace to do our work.  He offered useful consultative tips to the Committees but he did not interfere nor pressurise us, and we thank him.  

2. We want to thank you, Mr. Speaker, and all the hon. Members of this House who were so supportive in the way you fully identified yourselves with the Committees' efforts and publicly stood by us whenever we were harassed by our tormentors.  This invigorated us and gave us the requisite morale to push ahead with our demands for more favourable terms.  

3. The various ministers of energy who once they realised that our intervention was for the good of us all, interfaced with us with maximum cooperation.  

4. Members of the press and electronic media who gave the issues pronounced coverage which drowned the negative publicity that some self-seekers were mounting upon us.  

5. The technocrats of the ministries of Energy, Justice and that of Finance who diligently shuffled to and out of the Committee rooms when we became too demanding and too difficult to satisfy.  
6. The general public which supported us wherever we went and insisted that we should not settle for less than what was fair and just to this country.  

Hon. Members, as a result of the collective efforts of all of us Ugandans, we were able to improve a rather harsh deal to the levels where we are now proud to be associated with it.  Rest assured that the delay was not in futility.  We have, for example, been able to secure a hundred per cent ownership of the power generation facility by the Ugandan people after only 30 years.  Now, considering that the life of the hydro generation facility is about a hundred years, a gain of seventy years of this facility is a major gain.  

We have also, among other things, been able to secure levelised tariffs of 3.9 cents from the original 4.9 cents, and our consistent argument has been that we would rather have no deal than have a bad deal.  Mr. Speaker, we did not want to have power which was not affordable to Ugandans because then it will be worse than having no power at all!  As a result of these and other interventions made by our Committees, we have been able to secure significant savings for this country.  The details will be given when I start presenting the substance of the report.  

Mr. Speaker, it was so crucial to get this deal right because of its being the pace setter and we owe no apologies to anybody for having taken this long to present this report.  We are firm in our belief that posterity will vindicate this Parliament for a job well done, while it would never have forgiven us for participating, and indeed, endorsing a sell-out transaction.  This now is a deal with which we as a Parliament could be and should be proud to be associated and so, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I wish to present the report of the Committee on the National Economy which was made in consultation with the Sessional Committee on Natural Resources on the Government request for approval of a guarantee for the UEB and the partial risk guarantee.  

This is a fairly long report, the length of which is necessary because of the gravity of the subject matter and, therefore, I seek the indulgence of Members to allow me to give them an account as detailed as possible so as to put them in a position to make a decision based on full information.  Mr. Speaker, I pray that Members bear with me in this presentation.  

In the course of our evaluation, we did meet the following persons to whom we are grateful:  The Committees, myself and hon. Ben Mutyaba did meet His Excellency the President, we also met hon. Kaijuka the then Minister of Energy and Mineral Development; we met hon. Syda Bumba, now Minister of Energy and Mineral Development; we met hon. Ssendawla, Minister of Finance;  we met the country director of AES Nile Power, Mr. Christian Right;  we have interviewed officials of NORPAC/NORPLAN of Norway;  we have interviewed the project director Arabian International, Miss. Monar Abdel Hammid of Cairo;  we have met the UEB Board of Directors;  we met the World Bank group - IFC and IDA; we met the Chairman of AES corporation of America;  we met the US Ambassador to Uganda and her staff;  we met the Norwegian Ambassador to Uganda;  We met AES officials in Argentina;  we met the Under Secretary and regulator of energy in Argentina;  we met ESCOM of South Africa;  we have met Committees and discussed with Committees on the Economy and on Foreign Affairs of the Norwegian Parliament; we have met Harton and Williams, our lawyers in Washington; We have met the Norwegian Water and Energy Administration (NVE);  we have met OPIC.  

We have met many other private people and public people with respect to this particular discussion, the background to which is that it was on the 28th, as I have already mentioned, of January this year, when our Committees met the then Minister of Energy who, on behalf of Government, presented to us the plan to develop hydro power projects by IPPs that it was in response to Government's promotional drive spearheaded by the President of Uganda that AES Nile Power and the Arabian International Construction indicated strong interest in hydro-power development in Uganda and the two companies were granted rights to investigate and develop the sites of Bujagali - that is in early 1995, and Kalagala in early 1997.  Kalagala should actually be called Itanda because that is what it is -  Bujagali and Itanda, although it is commonly known as Kalagala.  Now, towards the end of 1997, Government also attracted NORPAK Limited which is a consortium of Norwegian companies and allocated them a site at Karuma. 

The rationale and the strategy:  
Mr. Speaker, currently there is an acute shortage in this country, and Sir, anybody living in this country can see it every evening and this shortage will continue in the medium to long term even if the Owen Falls extension is completed next year  unless new and large hydro power stations are constructed. However, the development of large hydro power projects require careful and systematic planning because of their nature of being capital intensive and two, because they take a relatively long time to develop. Here we are talking of about five years.  

Considering the existing and anticipated debt commitments under the second, third and fourth power projects by this country which have been responsible for rehabilitating and operating the existing Owen Falls plant and the construction of the Owen Falls extension, and now the rehabilitation or the carrying out of remedial works at the bridge, Government is constrained to invest further in the power production sector, particularly in generation where there are options like the development and encouragement of independent power producer projects.  Therefore, as a strategy, Government would want to encourage developers to come into this area which has a potential for providing fair returns on their investment.  On the other hand, Government should continue to intervene in those areas which are socially desirable like rural electrification and extension of the transmission grid.  

There are several advantages, Mr. Speaker, as we will find out, for involving independent power producers in the power sector.  IPPs, as they are commonly known, in addition to attracting new financial resources into the sector, they also assume the risks of construction, cost overruns and operation;  and for you, Sir, you just enjoy electricity.  They operate their projects more efficiently than those which are publicly owned and one other important objective which the Committee was informed of is that Government is aiming at - after satisfying local demand - being a long term electricity exporter in the region, once a number of hydro power projects are developed in the country. In this regard, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, Uganda has a comparative advantage in this area due to extensive water resources and corresponding waterfalls along the Nile, together with a very stable hydrological regime.  

The development of the projects: 
Mr. Speaker, Government upon receiving interest from the project developers, it was agreed with the developers that they should carry out certain obligations like proving the viability of the projects and the commitment to financing those developments.  Consequently, all the developers undertook, at their own cost, extensive studies in order to establish the technical, economic and financial and legal feasibility studies of the respective projects (Interruption).

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, with due respect to my Chairman, this report was given to us more than 24 hours ago;  we have read it, and in parts, he is beginning to sound like the line minister for energy.  Mr. Speaker, I am only requesting that the hon. Chairman goes directly to recommendations and observations of the Committee because the preamble he is reading to us is more or less the Government position on the matter of energy which we support and we have no problem with. 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, he has also included certain parts in his opening remarks which  are very controversial and we would prefer to forget them.  I can mention for instance, Mr. Speaker, the matter of the two trips to Norway and the Southern parts of the Hemisphere - Latin America and other places. These are controversial, Mr. Speaker, I prefer we do not indulge in examination of the principle, the modernities and how they came about.  So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to request, procedurally that we do two items: Number one, that we actually go on to the summary of the Committee report or observations, or recommendations. 

Also, if I could be advised by the Chairman or the Attorney General on the matter of the legal advice which has been circulated.  Is this part of the report or is this the opinion of the Committee, or is this legal opinion addressed to the government or this august House?  I prefer that this be attached, especially, in reference to the last paragraph of the legal opinion of the Attorney General. It is mundane and it is quite relevant to the matter and, I request the Chairman of the Committee to please go directly to the recommendations of his Committee and spare us the preamble and keep us out of the other issues - (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, I thought you were going to say let him summarise but I surely, in all fairness to the Chairman and his Committee, they spent lots of time, energy and resources, and they must have come to a conclusion as to how their report should be presented to you.  I think that should be left to the Chairman whether he wants to handle the preamble or whether he would like to summarise.  I would go with you if the suggestion is that he should try to summarise some aspects of the Committee's report which may not be very crucial but I think the style of presentation, we could leave it to him.  

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank you for again giving me this opportunity, but I would also like to advise that the Chairman should take note of the mood of the House. If he continues to stay longer than necessary, it may not be in the interest of the motion.

THE SPEAKER:  I think the Chairman has taken note of that.

MR. WACHA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, with all due respect to my Friend, hon. Awori, I think it is important for record purposes that whatever is discussed in this House must be on the Hansard.

MISS. BABIHUGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I am in concurrence with hon. Wacha, and I would like to make an observation that since we have not changed the rules of this House yet, our rules clearly say that the Chairman of the Committee tables the report and reads it to the House.  Unless we are changing the rules abruptly, Mr. Speaker, we would otherwise be advised.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker - (Interjection)
THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Pinto, I have given the Floor to the Chairman.  What is the problem?

MR. PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I would like to rise on a point of order.  Thank you very much, Mr.Speaker, I was very reluctant because I was trying to call for the cooperation of my hon. Colleague  but quite clearly, Mr. Speaker, as my Colleagues have said, there is good advice from the Attorney General in this matter. We have our Rules of Procedure; Rule No.62 clearly sets out how we shall operate and it says that it is out of order to anticipate a Bill by discussion and so on and so forth.  The hon. Attorney General says that this motion that we are debating today has got a bearing on the new Bill which we have been promised is coming,  but it is anticipated.  Is it, therefore, in order for this House to proceed to debate on anticipation in violation of our rules?  

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, we are not debating any Bill in this House. There is a motion which has been moved and this motion has to do with asking this House to authorise government to make certain guarantees to the provision of electricity, that is the motion.

MR. PINTO:  Mr. Speaker, may I kindly read the rule, with your permission?

THE SPEAKER:  Proceed.

MR. PINTO: Rule 62(1) 'anticipation':  "It is out of order to anticipate a Bill by discussion of a motion dealing with the subject matter of the Bill..."

THE SPEAKER:  My understanding still is that we are not debating a Bill in anticipation; we are not debating a motion while anticipating a Bill.  Hon. Lukyamuzi, I think it very, very elementary even for you to understand that when the Speaker is talking, you sit down and listen otherwise, I will take it to mean that you are trying to interrupt or to heckle the Speaker.  Are we together?

MR. MUSUMBA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to thank you again for your wise guidance and also the intervention of hon. Babihuga and hon. Wacha.  I did ask and seek the indulgence of this House at the beginning, Mr. Speaker, that this is an unusually long report, and that it is because of the nature of the transaction.  And I would want to put on the record of this House, everything that the Committee felt was important in developing the kind of conclusion they arrived at. I, therefore, again wish to seek the indulgence of this House to allow me to present this unusually lengthy report.  I thank you.  

I was saying that the original intention of government was to proceed with both Bujagali and Kalagala at the same time.  However, the Committee was informed that the potential lenders like the World Bank group and other development financial institutions refused to support both projects at the same time, citing the initial limited market for power as a major constraint.  On the basis of being the least costly of the two, Bujagali project was then chosen by government as the one to be sequenced first.  Government, the Committee was informed, is now negotiating with Kenya, Tanzania and Rwanda to increase their demand for power from Uganda and once that is achieved, other projects at Karuma or indeed at Kalagala would follow Bujagali and they will be brought to the stream sooner than later. Today, Mr. Speaker, we are required to give our recommendation on the Bujagali project.

The project scope:  
AES as the owner of the project proposes to construct a hydro- electric project at Dambo Island, approximately 8km north of the existing Owen Falls hydro electric facility.  The project, Mr. Speaker, is expected to consist initially of four units capable of generating 200 megawatts of power with an option to add 50 megawatt units at a subsequent date, resulting in a maximum capacity of 250 megawatts.  Also included in the project is the construction of extensive transmission facilities to evacuate the power -  that is the Bujagali-Kampala and Bujagali-Owen Falls power station, thus adding flexibility and strength to the national grid. 

The project cost and timing: 
The project is estimated to cost a total of 515 million Dollars which will include the interest on the borrowed capital during construction.  It also includes 71 million Dollars which is associated with installing a new 220 KV, and 132 KV transmission lines and associated sub-stations. This up-grading will strengthen UEB's transmission system, resulting in increased reliability and lower technical losses.  The construction period is committed to be no more than 44 months after meeting all conditions precedent to financial closing and among these conditions, there are things like acquisition of land, acquisition of necessary consents, finalisation of negotiation with and meeting any condition of the lenders to the project, and most important, power sector restructuring and finalizing of the legal framework and an environmental impact assessment.  We were informed that these activities are expected to be concluded in the course of this year, and that the project, if it gets your blessing, should be fully operational by January, in the year 2004.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member for workers, our rule is this: If you stand up on a point of information or clarification, and the Member on the Floor does not yield, then you do the needful.  

MR.BAKKABULINDI:  Point of order!  With due respect and also not forgetting that hon. Awori has raised the same issue of the mood of the House, and, Mr. Speaker, not also forgetting that some time back before we left for recess, we threw out a motion on the same and we requested that we should first and foremost get a comprehensive Electricity Bill which is very vital, and; also knowing very well that it could happen that after passing this motion, some sections of the comprehensive new Bill which I understand is in final stages could be contrary to what we have passed, Mr. Speaker, is it in order to accept and drive this House in such a state of passing things which are contrary to the mood of the whole House?

THE SPEAKER:  You debate and then he will be able to get the mood of the House which you are saying.  Now, a motion has been moved, he is presenting a report, why do you not listen to the report and then when it comes to debating, you will be able to make your contribution? This is a report by your Committee, surely you should listen to the report!

MR. BAKABULINDI: Mr. Speaker, with due respect -

THE SPEAKER:  Can you sit down please, I have not finished.  Well, it is a report, if you are bored that is bad but this is a report of your Committee you appointed.  I think he is in order to continue with his presentation.

MR. MUSUMBA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

The financing of the project:  Obtaining funding for the project costs is primarily the responsibility of the developer.  Mr. Speaker, if I may be allowed to re-state this, obtaining financing for the project is the responsibility of the developer, in this case AES.  The equity owners of the project will contribute about 25 per cent of the cost with the balance being funded by DAD, loaned by various development finance institutions, bilateral and multilateral agencies and recognized credit agencies.  This will include IFC, CDC, OPIC, which is Overseas Private Investment Cooperation and Export credit agencies.  The debt equity ratio will be 75 to 25 per cent. 

The tariff: 
Mr. speaker, upon commercial operation of the project, UEB will be obligated to pay a monthly charge called capacity payment that will enable the project owners to pay their debt and interest, to repay the equity and return their  loan to meet operating and maintaining expenses and to pay taxes.  The capacity payment is denominated in dollars but it will be payable in shillings because UEB will be collecting from the consumers in shillings.  This payment will vary over the 30-year term of the power purchase agreement.  

The tariff arising out of these capacity payments was originally agreed to at an average of 4.9 cents but as I will be explaining later, the intervention of the Committee caused this tariff to be lowered and as indeed the Committee goes on to comment, this tariff has been a subject of serious debate  as indicated in the issues raised by the Committee as shall be expounded later on.  

Government and UEB have negotiated several technical, physical, commercial and legal terms with AES Nile power, and these are reflected in the implementation agreement and the power purchase agreement.  Both agreements were presented to the joint Committees for review with the request from government that Parliament authorises government to guarantee UEB's obligation under the PPA.  We as a Committee raised the following issues, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, and the method adopted in presenting this report is the question/answer method.  The questions that the Committee put before the Minister and the answers that the Minister gave us have all been recorded for you, Mr. Speaker, to be put on record:-
1.  Sequencing:
The Committee asked why Bujagali project should be developed first and not Kalagala or Karuma and the Minister did explain as follows that the hydro power development master plan study which was conducted in 1996 produced a sequencing scheme of the hydro power sites on the River Nile on a least cost basis and technically and economically, Murchison Falls came first as the least costly but this could not be developed because of environmental considerations.  However, any of the two sites - Bujagali or Kalagala could be developed first, followed by Karuma.  

2.  Developers: 
EAS and Arabian International Construction Limited had been granted rights to develop Bujagali and Kalagala respectively. Both developers completed their detailed feasibility studies in 1998 and the sites were ready for development.  A load forecast study which was carried out in September, 1998,  however revealed that the two projects could not progress at the same time.  As a result, the two developers formed a partnership to develop Bujagali which was already advanced in terms of documentation, financing arrangements and environmental impact assessment.  Since Bujagali is well advanced, so we are told, it would get financial closure earliest.  

According to the power demand projection, the development of a major project like Bujagali should then be followed by a medium sized project like Karuma.  Consequently, we were informed, Government is committed to the development of Karuma Power Project but at that time - that is in January 1999, the developer of Karuma - that is NORPAK - had not yet completed the necessary geo-technical investigations - that is rock drilling, the vulnerability tests, petro-physical analysis and rock mechanics.  The hydrological studies were not in place, the topographical studies, the engineering design, the fiscal and economic modelling and environmental impact assessment had not been done.  In addition, infrastructure to evacuate the power from Karuma, like the construction of the Karuma-Lira transmission line and the up-grading of the Lira-Tororo transmission had to be taken into account. 

UEB Capabilities:
The Committee wondered about the wisdom of UEB being obligated to purchase all the power generated by AES since; one, UEB's losses were very high and, therefore, a lot of energy would be lost in the system and; two,  UEB's record of revenue collection of the billed energy was very poor. There was a fear that UEB may fail to fulfil its obligations under the Power Purchase Agreement due to its inefficiency.  Further, the Parliamentarians were not sure that there was adequate market to absorb the contracted capacity - the capacity that UEB was being obligated to contract and then the other question was, does UEB have the capacity to expand its system to distribute all its energy; the energy at Owen Falls Dam and the energy at Bujagali and the energy at Karuma?  

The Minister did clarify as follows: The Minister first concurred with the Committee that it is true that UEB is quite inefficient now with a lot of power losses, that this is one of the reasons why Government had to give a guarantee to backstop UEB's obligations.  On the other hand, positive steps were being taken by Government to make UEB an efficient organisation and this should result in a drastic reduction in the current losses.  We were further informed that as a fast measure, Government had secured a credit from African Development Bank for UEB to improve its transmission and distribution systems and this would cover the areas of Kampala, Jinja and Tororo, in addition to extending the transmission line from Apac to Masindi.  This should go a long way in the reduction of energy losses.  Additionally, we were informed that Government had embarked on a Sector Reform Programme which would involve privatisation of UEB through long term concessions.  The impact of the sector reform will then have the effect of increasing the efficiency of UEB and injection of capital in the existing network of the UEB. 

On the issue of the market to absorb the contracted capacity, the Committees were informed that Government carried a detailed load forecast to project the power demand in Uganda and in the region for the next 25 years and the study shows that there is need to bring a power project not later than the year 2004.  The Minister further stated that Government had reached a preliminary understanding with Kenya and Tanzania to increase export sales of electricity to those countries in order to address our balance of payments position.  Finally on the issue of UEB's capacity to extend its distribution system, the Minister informed us that the Ministry had already worked out a strategy to handle that important element through the following measures:-

1.  The introduction of a rural electrification fund which has already been agreed to by Cabinet, we were also informed, which should see a systematic increase of electricity coverage.

2.  The divestiture of UEB through a concession arrangement with an expansion programme and;

3.  The acquisition of soft loans for systems improvement from bilateral donors.

Then the Committee asked; what was Government's privatisation agenda for UEB?  The concern was; when UEB is privatised, how much of it will be sold to individual entrepreneurs and what is the fate of the guarantee that we are being requested to give since we will not be in a position to ensure the efficiency of the new owners, and that they will be able to service their capacity obligations?  We were informed that the following milestones have been developed by Government:-

1.  That Government's approval for reform strategy would be mid June 1999 and 
2.  That there will be enactment of the Electricity Act and the law establishing the regulatory framework by September 1999 and; 

3.  That there will be establishment of the regulatory body by February the year 2000 - the millennium year.

4.  That there will be an award of distribution concessions by October 2000 and; 

5.  That there will be an award for generation concessions for Owen Falls and Owen Falls Extension Power Plan by December 2000. 

On the mode of UEB's privatisation, the Minister informed the Committee as follows:-
1. Ownership of the existing core assets of UEB - that is generation, transmission and distribution - is to remain in the public sector in the short and medium term.  The control of assets will be let out to the private sector through concessions.  
2. The concessions will have a defined time frame and targets to achieve.

3. Assets will be transferred to the private sector in the long term, especially when the assets have appreciated in value. 

4. UEB will be unbundled into generation, transmission and distribution entities. 

5. The private sector will be encouraged to the extent possible to own new incremental assets in respect of generation, transmission and distribution of power.  

6. Power purchase agreements will be developed for Owen Falls Dam and Owen Falls extension.  

In addition to those two, the power purchase agreements for Bujagali and Karuma will be assigned to the transmission company in the short and medium term.  In the short to medium term, responsibility for transmission will remain with the successor company of UEB and it will be operated as an independent and profit making business unit.  The transmission company will be responsible for export sales of power.  In the long term, transmission will be let under a concession contract to the private sector. We were also informed that the maximum number of financially viable distribution concessions will be created out of the existing URB distribution businesses, UEB actually.  In the long term, all power purchase agreements will be transferred from the UEB transmission company and, together with any new ones, they will be assigned to the distribution concessionaries.  
On the issue of guaranteeing the efficiency of new owners of UEB, the Minister did explain that since the assets of UEB will remain in public domain, what Government was going to do is to include performance obligations in the concession agreements.  In that case, risks are not that great compared to full scale privatisation process involving the transfer of asset ownership.  

Now, thereafter, the Committee did raise issues relating to the following:

1.  The ownership of AES Nile Power; who owns this company AES? The Committee also raised fundamental questions on the tariff level and structure - how much are we paying and in what manner?  We also raised questions of the mode of ownership the project - is it build and operate or is it build and operate and transfer?  And then, we did also ask about financing of the transmission lines associated with the project.  We also sought clarification on the allocation of risk on the water flows - those hydrological guarantees.  We also raised questions of absence of a regulatory law.  We raised questions about the adequacy of the financing bond; we raised questions about the security package of the project; we raised questions about the requirement that Government waives its immunity; we raised questions about the nature and place of arbitration in case of disagreement; we raised questions about environmental assessment.  Mr. Speaker, we raised questions about everything and these are the answers we got.

On the ownership of AES, first of all we were of the view as a Committee that ownership of AES Nile Power and AES Electric Limited was not satisfactory.  There was no legal nexus as to the ownership of both these companies and how they are linked with the AES Corporation of America which was supposed to be the ultimate parent company and which we were supposed to be contracting with and, Mr. Speaker, we did carry out a lot of research in this area to determine who owns which  company.  We also did find out as a Committee that the financial base of AES Electrical of U.K was too weak to sustain the kind of project we were talking about.  

We also did raise the issue of AES Nile Power to which we were informed that Bujagali project was being developed on project financing basis.  The project is required to provide sufficient funds to pay itself, it is not financed on the balance sheet of the sponsor.  However, what is required is that the project company and its ultimate parent should have sufficient financial means to contribute to the requisite equity to complete the project and in this case, AES Nile Power Limited would be required to execute an equity subscription, an agreement or guarantees by the AES Corporation of America which is to provide these funds and on the part of Government, it was a concern that the company is able to raise equity and loans for the project and that the project will be constructed in a viable manner.  

Now, in order to mitigate against the above risks, the Committee was informed that the financing bond of US $7 million and an engineering procurement and construction bond called ECP Bond of 15 per cent of the cost of construction had been demanded by Government and agreed to by AES.  It has been incorporated in the agreement. However, Mr. Speaker, we were not satisfied with those measures and we did request the Minister to develop a better strategy to solve the ownership problems and in that regard, the Minister did inform us that she intended to propose to AES Nile Power that in order for Government to feel more comfortable with the entire transaction, AES Corporation of America should be a party to the agreement and at the same time, the company should post a performance bond of 10 per cent to the total project cost for the entire life of the project which would however reduce in a pro rata manner in accordance with the discharged obligations. I am happy to inform you, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, that in the final draft, we have been able to get AES of America to underwrite all the liabilities that will arise by the AES Nile Power in the course of the transactions.  

The Tariff Level and Tariff Structure:
The tariff which had been negotiated was a concern to the Committee.  Mr. Speaker, the Committee was of the view that a levelled tariff of 4.9 cents which had been given to us as of January 1999 to bring to this House was too high.  The Committee requested for a re-valuation of the actual cost of generation to avoid a very expensive and unaffordable tariff. 

Finally, the Committee did question whether Bujagali was, in fact, the least costly.  So, on the issue of least cost sequencing, the Committee was informed that according to the hydro power development master plan study carried out in 1996, Bujagali was the least costly after Murchison Falls, followed by Kalagala and then Karuma.  So, of the four; Murchison Falls first, Bujagali next, Kalagala next, Karuma next in their order of being least cost, Murchison Falls of course had a very high environmental impact and had been dropped as a site to be developed in the foreseeable future. 

Bujagali and Kalagala sites which are quite comparable were chosen for developed and detailed feasibility studies were thus carried out on both sites. The would-be developers of Kalagala, as I have already told you, went into partnership with the AES people so that one site can be developed at a time.  This economy could not sustain both sites at the same time.  

On the cost of generation, the Committee was informed that project costs were initially determined through a detailed feasibility study and in order for Government to cross-check on the costs as presented from these feasibility studies, it was agreed that an independent cost estimator, Revay and Associates of Canada be contracted to carry out a third party evaluation and the results of Revay and Associates helped to guide the negotiations.    

The Minister made an elaborate presentation on the tariff.  In the first instance, the Minister did agree with Members of the Committee that the negotiated generation tariff was quite high compared to other hydro power producing countries like Norway or other major electricity producers like South Africa. The Minister did point out that what makes a tariff high for hydro power projects is the cost of civil works; for example building of a dam and the power houses and so on. Once these costs are paid back, then the tariff reduces dramatically because, as you all know, the water is free.  

The Minister further argued that another important input into the tariff is the cost of capital.  Unlike projects developed on concessionaire financing, this project is structured to access financing from the capital market whose interest rates can be as high as 10.5 percent per annum and has a short pay back period of 12 years.  Besides the debt, equity returns can make a project very expensive depending on the country risk.  The Committee was informed that through protracted negotiations, the return on equity has been reduced from the 30 percent which the developer had initially wanted to 19.75 percent.  

The above explanation notwithstanding, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, the Committee was of the view that Government should negotiate for further reduction in the tariff.  The Minister then agreed that further discussions will be held with AES and we agreed on the scenarios which were that;
(i) AES Nile Power should reduce further their return on equity from the 19.75 percent and; 

(ii) that Government, and indeed Parliament, should support the access to partial risk guarantee of the World Bank which would have an impact of reducing the tariff further and; 

(iii) that the Power Purchase Agreement be extended for a term of more than 30 years - say 35 to 40 - in order to allow for a longer spread of a return on the equity.  

I can inform the hon. Members that the last proposal having been studied, we found that actually we do not benefit much as a country by extending the years that these people would have ownership of the project. So the year of 30 was retained.  

Now, the manner in which the tariff had been structured had also been of concern to the Committee.  The Committee did observe that the tariff was initially low and it raises in the fifth year.  This was explained as follows; one, that AES Nile Power like other investors will enjoy a tax incentive available under the Investment Code which is accelerated depreciation allowances.  In practice, this will have an impact equivalent to an Income and Withholding Tax holiday for the first four years.  Therefore, Income Tax becomes payable in year five, resulting in quite a sharp increase in capacity payments. The second aspect on the general increase in the tariff in  current dollar terms is a function of the time value of money.  

We had a lengthy debate on the mode of project ownership - BOOT. The Committee was of the firm view - and on this we really insisted, Mr. Speaker - that the project should be on the basis of Build, Own, Operate and Transfer. The original agreement as brought to us in January 1999 was structured such that AES would Build, Own and Operate forever with minimal premium to Government. For us we insisted that there must be a premium on the people who own the falls, that is the people of Uganda.  We cannot have a falls owned for someone to come and invest, and all we are is that we are a net consumer of his product and will never partake in the ownership of the project. 

Mr. Speaker, let me inform this House that on this point, we made very, very big gains because the owners of the project did agree that for a project that has a lifespan of up to 100 years which they were going to own for 100 years, after 30 years the project will be owned by Uganda 100 percent.  Hon. Members, I thought you would clap for this achievement.  We should have applauded for this achievement.  Not yet?  More is to come.  

It was agreed that now we can have the plant after 30 years although if we ever intend to sell the plant as a Government, we would offer to AES first or we would offer to the whole world but allow AES the right to fail to pay for it before we sell it to somebody else.  We did not think that was unreasonable in the circumstances.  It actually would give additional incentive for AES to keep the facility in good state of repair knowing that they will have the first opportunity to buy it when we sell it at market prices obtaining at the time.

Transmission Line:
The Committee was of the strong view that transmission lines which AES Nile Power is supposed to construct to link the power plant to Kampala and Jinja should be financed separately, preferably through donor financing.  The argument that the Committee was making was that the amortization period for transmission and that for the power plant are different, and they should therefore not be subject to similar financing terms. To this, the Minister explained that it was at the insistence of the Government team that the AES Nile Power agreed to finance the transmission lines, and thereafter hand them over to Uganda Electricity Board.  It was envisaged that if Government had to raise 70 million dollars to do those transmission lines and on top of the requirements raise another 350 million dollars to expand the country's transmission and distribution system at the same time, the burden would be significant.  

Mr. Speaker let me remind the Members that quite often, we have borrowed 70 million to do a job worth 70 million and we have ended up expending, as a Government, 140 million to do a job of 70 million.  The evidence is glaring.  So, we were persuaded that in the circumstances, let the obligation to build the line lie with the contractor.  In this we would avoid delays in construction as a result of Government inefficiencies, it would also obliterate the issue of mismatching the two projects which was a concern, both for the developer and the Government.  

The Minister also informed the Committee that technically, the lifetime or amortization period of a transmission line and the dam are not significantly different.  For example, the Uganda - Kenya transmission line which was constructed 40 years ago alongside the Owen Falls Dam is as sound as the dam, although now it is the dam that requires remedial works, the transmission line is still clear in the sky. 

As a way forward, therefore, the Minister proposed that the two projects could be properly ring fenced, that is the transmission and the generation project, so that they are regulated separately with different cash flows.  The Government of Uganda would also examine other options of cheaper financing for the transmission lines and we found this as a Committee attractive.

Now the hydrological risk:  Mr. Speaker, the draft agreement as brought to our Committees of Parliament in January 1999 had a provision which said that whenever there was a drop in the level of the river, Government of Uganda would pay for the shortfall in the electricity produced.  In other words, we were being asked to guarantee vagaries of nature.  There were a lot of jokes made in the newspapers and everywhere about whether Ugandans have their own factory for water to ensure that they can fill up the River Nile whenever its level goes down.  We strongly objected to this and it was refined.  It was removed.  Government no longer has to guarantee hydrological risk other than the risk that is in a position to best manage things which are beyond the Ugandans and the Government of Uganda as risks associated with the droughts and so on. Those are now to be considered force majeure events.  Sir, as a result of the intervention of the Committees of Parliament, the Ugandans are no longer required to guarantee the level of water that they have no control of.  

The Committees expressed concern that the Electricity Act is not yet here in this House. We were very emphatic and we told the Minister that the Electricity Act to regulate the power sector must be brought to Parliament. The Committee was of the firm view that the conclusion of the Power Purchase Agreement should await the Law, especially in view of the serious weaknesses of the Uganda Electricity Board. It is my humble duty and privilege to report to this House the transactions that took place in our Committees and I believe the hon. Members will bear with me.  

The Minister did accept that it is true that the new Electricity Act, an Amendment to the existing Electricity Act has been delayed in coming to the House.  She did explain that this is largely due to Government change in policy that instead of setting up Sectoral Regulatory Regimes, the Government view was that we should put one Multi Sectoral Regulator, and that the original Electricity Bill which was due to be presented in December last year had stipulated the creation of an Electricity Regulatory Commission, then Government later sat and changed the Policy - Cabinet sat and changed the Policy and said that it had found it necessary to harmonise the Electricity Bill with the Public Utilities Commissions Bill.  The Electricity Bill which had been presented to Cabinet for its onward transmission to Parliament fell by the way side.  So it was late.  And that the role of the regulator would be to enforce Power Purchase Agreement.  

Now, waiting until the Electricity Bill is passed, therefore, was not an issue in the critical past of this project.  It would only serve to deter the furtherance of the development of this project.  On the other hand, the Minister explained to the Committee that by the nature of the industry today, the electricity sector will continue to be regulated by contracts until a time, say 30 years from now, when vigorous and real competition will be able to exist.  But this will only happen when electricity generation is adequate and when we have access to electricity in the country as a majority of the Ugandans but in a situation where you have 90 percent going without electricity, this is not an issue yet.  

The Committee further raised elements of the future of the Uganda Electricity Board. The Committee argued that the future of Uganda Electricity Board is not yet decided at a policy level and that Government is already tying its hands that any privatisation will have to be done in a manner that is satisfactory to AES Nile Power.  In other words, why should Government guarantee an enterprise that is about to be privatised? Why should the privatisation restructuring outcome be satisfactory to the AES Nile Power?  And why should the tariff be fixed and yet in the future, it is likely that we could have a power pool that will have significant impact on the tariff on a very competitive pool market?  

Mr. Speaker, we asked all these questions - there is no new question that is being raised.  We asked all these questions.  These are the answers we got.  The Minister explained that privatisation of Uganda Electricity Board is not required to be done in a manner that is satisfactory to AES Nile Power.  That the provision in the agreement merely requires that the privatisation:

(i) should not have a material adverse effect on the ability of the successor to perform Uganda Electricity Board's obligations.  The two are different actually and;

(ii) that this does not result in a less credit worthy successor of Uganda Electricity Board.  

The Minister further stipulated that those elements are legitimate concerns for Government and any company entering into a contract with Uganda Electricity Board will certainly also be of concern to potential lenders.  If Government has to attract any investors in this capital incentive sector, it is very important to stabilise the commercial transactions and give appropriate incentives.  In that regard, the Minister clarified that a Government guarantee of Uganda Electricity Board's obligations is required because currently, Uganda Electricity Board does not have sufficient credit on its own - credit and credit worthiness.  It has neither really.  The project is not financeable without Government support.  

Now, if the successor entity to Uganda Electricity Board can build a stronger balance sheet and achieve positive investment  - grade rating and so on, then the Government guarantee will be extinguished, it will retire earlier than the years you are being required to guarantee.  

The tariff is fixed for the term of the PPA because of the need to get both parties the benefit of the bargain and to stabilise the commercial transaction.  The main advantage to government is that when loans are paid, it will not be possible for the developer to levy a high tariff like those of new developers who will be entering the market with financial encumbrances at that time.  

Mr. Speaker, we talked about the Financing Bond.  The Committee also queried the proposed financing bond of seven million which Government has to receive from AES Nile Power. The Committee wanted to know whether it is likely that by financial closure, the costs expended by AES Nile Power would have exceeded the bond amounts and thus, no recourse by Government! To us it was explained that the Financing Bond permits Government to receive seven million dollars if AES Nile Power does not achieve financial closing for reasons other than Government or Uganda Electricity Board's default. For example, if we pass this guarantee today, these people would have six months plus two months of grace in which to bring money and start work.  If they do not, because maybe World Bank has refused to give them money and whatever, for us, Mr. Speaker, straight away we get seven million dollars.  

The Financing Bond continues after financial closing until such a time when AES Nile Power has invested 12 million dollars for actual project cost after financial closing.  So, we must see enough cement and graders and iron-bars worth at least 12 million before we are satisfied, not just to tell us, we carried on studies.  Which studies?  So we want to see actual investment of 12 million before we are satisfied that the 7 million bond is extinguished.  It is envisaged that should financial closing take time and AES Nile Power starts construction work, if on financial closure the company shall have invested 12 million, then their obligation will have been discharged.  Consequently, any money spent by AES Nile Power to date is irrelevant.

The security package. 
The proposed security package which involves a liquidity account, a pledge of export sales and a government guarantee was seen by the Committee as an over-protection of the company against any risk exposure.  We said that for us to give you a liquidity account, then we pledge all our export sales, then we give a government guarantee, really that is too much guarantee!  So we did ask the Minister to go back and re-negotiate this point.  We were even concerned whether UEB can raise money under the liquidity account and how AES Nile Power would access it.  

It was explained that the liquidity account is designed to serve two purposes: First, it will be available to cover monthly capacity payments that are due and are not made before recourse to the government guarantee.  Secondly, it serves as a foreign exchange bureau if there are no dollars in the market.  In essence, it is an escrow  account which will be maintained by a first class bank appointed by both parties. Funding this liquidity account will be through the following avenues: 
(i)  the revenues received from the sale of electricity prior to the time the entire project comes on line. 
(ii) the savings from the current export sales 
(iii) if acceptable to government, by reserving some of the taxes payable by the project during construction.  
(iv) improved revenue collection through privatisation.  

Now access to the liquidity account prior to the commercial operation's date is only as a forex bureau.  The arrangement was that the account would initially be funded with shillings and the bank which is holding that account would over time convert these shillings into dollars.  If during the construction AES Nile Power had dollars and needed them in shillings, the liquidity account would be the logical place to exchange them as the shilling on deposit would need to be converted into dollars in any case.

The Minister did clarify that the issue of assigning export sales for debt serving is a requirement of the lenders who would like a mechanism to ensure that their debtor, AES Nile Power, has access to foreign exchange since debt serving has to be paid for in dollars.  The export sales pledge is intended to take the place of the liquidity account since the later will go away once a bankable export sales contract has been secured.  But, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, in spite of this explanation, the Committee  was of the emphatic view  that since government is giving a guarantee, then a third security of an export pledge should not be given to AES.  And I am happy to report that, Sir, we  achieved this point.

Waiver of the immunity. 
Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, the Committee expressed concern on the provision of the waver of immunity. Why is there no right of appeal after arbitration? The original agreement as brought to us in January 1999 was that if there is a dispute, government will go for arbitration in Singapore and that the arbitration would be final; no one can go to court after it.  We said, how?  We were uncomfortable with this clause - a clause that requires government to declare the execution of the implementation agreement, a private and commercial act.  There is an analogous provision, both in the power purchase agreement and the guarantee.  The clauses also create a category of exempted assets from the waver of immunity that is created.   

Now, the Minister in consultation with the Attorney General, on this matter advised the Committee that this kind of provision is not rare in project financing and where international financial institutions are involved.  The Minister further clarified that government needs to wave its sovereign immunity in a commercial transaction, otherwise the investors would have no recourse if the government did not abide by its obligations.  Of course the explanation was; if government does not want to behave in a commercial manner, it should not go into commercial transactions. 

We did query, as Committees, the provision on arbitration which provides that the law of arbitration shall be the English law but the venue will be Singapore and there will be no arbitration thereafter.  Mr. Speaker, for us we were emphatically against arbitrating in Singapore.  What is special about Singapore?  We were informed that there is as much bribery and corruption in those parts of the world as indeed they are in these other parts of the world.  So we did persuade the Minister to revisit this in their negotiations and as we speak now, Sir, I am happy to report that London has been agreed to as a place for arbitration.

Environmental impact assessment.
The Committee was of the view that an environmental impact assessment approval must be obtained before signing the agreement.  That was our very strong position as a Committee. The Minister did explain that the need to carry out an environmental impact assessment of the project was clearly recognized during the negotiations as this is a requirement under the NEMA Statute.  The developers equally know this very well.  The World Bank and IFC will not give the necessary financial support to the project unless an environmental impact assessment has been duly executed. 

The Minister on the hand stated that carrying out an environmental impact assessment takes a long time and as it is being developed, as it is being finalised, we could also go ahead and evaluate the application of government for this guarantee and make our own findings on it, knowing very well that NEMA as a statutory body will have its own role to pass sentence on the environmental suitability of the project.  We were also informed of how much work AES has done on the environmental assessment. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I just want to summarise the gains that have been made as a result of the Committee's intervention in this agreement.  The summary is as follows: We have been able to achieve ownership. After the initial 30 years, we have 100 per cent ownership of the project which was not there.  We have been able to achieve a reduced tariff.  Mr. Speaker, I have caused the circulation to all honourable Members of a document that has three sheets of paper.  The first one is the letter of the Attorney General which I will speak to later but I want to draw your attention to the two graphs.  

Hon. Members I know that you like having these matters reduced into graphs and figures, it is easy for everybody to see and to follow.  I have caused this to be reduced into figure so that you can see for yourselves the gains that we have made as a country as a result of the intervention this Parliament has made. If you read "Bujugali hydro-electric project tariff in US cents per kilo watt", you will see that in June 1999 - we had a tariff in  January 1999 when this thing was first presented to us as high as the sky. Are we together hon Members? You can see the faded one.  The one that is "US cents per kilo watt hour". Surely, Engineer, it is obvious - (Interruption). 

MR. DICK NYAI: Mr. Speaker, whereas the Chairman is very detailed in his submission of the report, I am wondering whether it is possible for it to be reflected in our Hansard when he is showing the Members the various graphs.  Can't he just draw the Members' attention to the graphs in question and lay it on the table? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You proceed.

MR. MUSUMBA :  Mr. Speaker, that is a valid observation.  All I am saying is that, let us study this graph very carefully and we will go step by step.  You will see that in the year 2004 - I am talking about the graph that shows the tariff in cents per kilo watt hour, anybody who can read will see it.  The source is a comparison of the tariff in the document that was given to us in January 1999 and the current one which has been attached on some of the copies of your report, relating to the tariff - (Interjections) - No, this is not AES.  So for those who have had access to this document, you will be able to realise that a reduction in the tariff has given us a much lower obligation in US cents per kilo watt hour than had been originally envisaged, coming to as low as less than one in the year 20 and 32 when in the original January 1999 document, we would have to pay well over 3 cents in the same year.  

Similarly, hon. Members, I want to draw your attention to the only other graph which indicates capacity payments in quantum as indicated on the graph, the sharp drop between the years 2014 and 2017 which leaves a large difference of no less than 40 billion annually, a saving to government of 40 billion annually from the year 2017 to the 2033.  This is again a major saving. Mr. Speaker, the other gains that have been made as a result of our intervention -(Interruption) I have no problem with clarification.

THE SPEAKER: You see, the position is this, if a Member rises on a point of clarification or information and you would like to give way, you do so but if you think you do not want to be interrupted, then you do not sit, in which event the Member raising the point will not insist.  So, it is up to you, Mr. chairperson. Sometimes he may be having a very useful information to give you.  So the discretion is yours.

DR. OKULO EPAK: I want to thank my hon. chairperson and Friend, Mr. Musumba. If I got him correctly, he said that the Committee through its diligence and perception negotiated or caused, well whatever it is -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: You address through the Speaker, nobody else.

DR.OKULO EPAK: I was seeking clarification from the hon. Chairperson because this graph really contains a lot of projection and I would have wished to agree that their bargaining limit was at the 3.9 cents per kilo watt hour but the rest of the projections, I am wondering whether the Committee was able to even obtain that level of understanding and negotiation for 33 years and beyond because it looks a bit difficult.  Can I be clarified whether they negotiated this far?  Then I would commend them highly. Thank you very much.

MR. MUSUMBA :  Mr. Speaker, I wish to assure the hon. Member that the joint Committee of these Members of Parliament, of both the Committee on the Economy and the Sessional Committee on Energy do have the capacity to study and comprehend a reduced tariff when they are exposed to one. And indeed, Sir, we went through these figures on an annual basis and we are satisfied that this was a worthy material for presentation to the full House and Sir, we stand by it.

If I may now conclude, Sir, the various gains on account of our intervention have been laid before you hon. Members.  There is one last one for the social amenities in which we said that in order to provide tangible benefits to the citizens in the vicinity of the Bujagali project area, AES will provide a minimum of 1 million dollars, prior to the commercial operation date for the provision of social amenities like schools and health centres and so on and thereafter, they will provide any social amenities as agreed with local authorities, including the Kyabazinga Isebantu.  In addition, the company will pay an annual ground rent to the local administration and other land and water user charges.

Mr. Speaker, we now wish to put to this House that there is another area in which government guarantee is required, and that is the World Bank partial risk guarantee.  Mr. Speaker, I want to explain these guarantees because before I came in, some Members were not clear, so they were pulling me to decide and asking me to clarify.  Are you guaranteeing these people's borrowing?  The answer is no! AES has the obligation to raise its own money.  We, as government, are not going to guarantee their loans at all.  

Mr. Speaker, the obligation as being required here and now is simply that when AES has looked for its money, wherever it gets  - and that is why we have put a penalty, if they do not bring the money when they say they should bring it, we penalise them by 7 million dollars.  They will bring here money, they will build their own facility. We shall put our man there to ensure that the correct mixture of cement is being made so that the thing does not collapse after 30 years.  They will set up the facility,  they will generate the electricity.

What we are guaranteeing and what I am asking hon. Members to agree with me on is that when they make the electricity, they will sell the electricity to UEB which UEB will then be able to sell it to you and me through their normal system.  It is at that point that we are guaranteeing that whatever electricity they generate, UEB will pay for it.  If UEB fails, that is where Government guarantee is being required, hence, the purpose of this motion.

The other thing is the partial risk guarantee.  Mr. Speaker, this country is a country where there are risks like foreign exchange risks.  This year or this month, the dollar is shs. 1,400; tomorrow it will be shs. 1,500; the day after, it will be shs. 1,700.  So, for someone to bring in half a million dollars to invest, he needs comfort that in case there is a wide difference or fluctuation - even the availability of the dollar itself because you can want like ten million dollars and you will not be able to find it - (Interjection) -  

MR. WACHA:  Mr. Speaker, could the Chairman tell me on which page we are now?  

MR. MUSUMBA: I am on page 26 of the Report, on Item 89, which deals with Government guarantee in respect of the World Bank Partial Risk Guarantee.  All I am doing, Sir, is presenting the Report and explaining this rather intricate issue of World Bank Partial Risk Guarantee.  

I am concluding by saying the Committee wishes to recommend to this House that authority be granted to Government to guarantee UEB in the terms set out in the motion so as to enable the Agreement to be signed.  I beg to recommend.  

MR. CHEBET MAIKUT (Kween County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I think the importance of energy development in any country cannot be over emphasized at this point, knowing very well that less than ten per cent of our population has no access  to power, I therefore support all initiatives geared towards the development of the energy sub-sector in this country.  However, Mr. Speaker, I have a number of disturbing questions:

One, realising the importance of an overall legal framework under which the power sub-sector development is to be undertaken and, further aware that AES Nile Power Limited has been around in Uganda for the last two years or so, why has the Ministry of Energy not seen it fit to present to this House the Electricity Bill as promised mid-last year?

Two, how can the Committee of this House denigrate itself to a level where they present a report on a matter that they know very well should be preceded by the presentation of the Bill in this House?

Three, Mr. Speaker, is it always wise to keep starting new projects and abandoning them half way done?  I shall give an example:  Under Power Two and Owen Falls Power Three Extension Project, I understand there is a provision to have five turbines and I am reliably informed that currently, Government has only been able to secure three turbines, meaning that the other two worth about four million dollars are not yet secured.  I am told that once these are installed, at least a capacity of about 120 mega Watts of power will be generated.  Now, why has Government not seen it fit to accomplish this project first and foremost before looking at other projects of energy development?

Four, Mr. Speaker, I also have something which bothers my mind.  Is it always environmentally viable, whether at national level or globally, to go in for the construction of very huge power dams, or it is better to go for small to medium power dams?  For example, the people of West Nile for quite a long time have been crying for the Nyagak Project - Nyagak and Siipi Falls and so many others.  Why has Government not come out very clearly to address the development of these mini hydro-power stations?  

Five, last but not least, Mr. Speaker, what is the financial burden implication to the ordinary Ugandan tax payer now and in many generations to come on this Government's Partial Guarantee to the AEC power?  Because I think the Ugandan tax payer needs to be fully aware before we go into contractual obligations which have far reaching financial implications to this nation.  

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, so far two motions have been thrown out of this House.  The first being last year when the then Minister of Energy did present to this House -(Interruption)-

MR. EKANYA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker and the hon. Member for giving way.  I would like to give you information on the credibility of Nile Independent Power, quoting from the Weekly Review of August, 23rd 1991.  These same people - Nile Independent Power - AES - and the Managing Director of g Madhvani got a contract in Kenya to process molasses and other energy components for the Kenyan Government but that project became what they call, "A white elephant".  According to the Commission of Inquiry which is reported here, it may be the cause of the death of the late Robert Ouko of Kenya.  So, that information is very important.  Thank you.

MR. CHEBET MAIKUT: I thank the hon. Member for giving that vital information to this House.  Mr. Speaker, there is a wise saying that -(Interruptions)

DR. NYEKO: Mr. Speaker, hon. Ekanya has referred to a very important document.  Could it be proposed if he could lay it on Table for us, to become a Parliamentary document?

MR. MUTYABA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, for the purposes of correctness, I would like to give related information to what hon. Ekanya has just given that actually, in 1991, there was no company called "Nile Power" because Nile Power was formed purposely for this dam at Bujagali.  However, I think what he wanted to say is that one of the share-holders in Nile Power was involved in that project.  So, I want this to be on record that Nile Power as a company was not in existence in 1991, however, it is true that one of the share-holders in Nile Power was involved in the project in Kenya.

MR. TAIRE: Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the Members, hon. Ekanya and hon. Mutyaba, for  giving way. This matter of the molasses project in Kenya, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I would like to inform you that this was a political matter in Kenya like it has been.  Only recently, there were massacres in Kenya and this one led to the death of Ouko, as he has said.  It had nothing to do with Nile Power.  This is a project which is in my constituency and has no connection with the death of Ouko.  Thank you very much.

MR. NYAI: , Mr. Speaker, I think what we have on the Floor before this House is the Power Purchase Agreement Guarantee between the Government of Uganda, Nile Power and so on.  Is the hon. Member in order to talk to us about a molasses project which is in his constituency?  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nyai, I think you know what the hon. Member meant.  That is not a very serious point of order.  The Member is talking about the project we are talking about in this House and he was only making a reference to the molasses project.  I think that was obvious.  

MR. ONYANGO KAKOBA: Mr. Speaker, I just want to put things on record and the information I am going to give is in that respect. It is not because I am an agent of any one but as far as the molasses case is concerned, we have had a number of consultations in the process of bringing up this motion.  We have had a number of consultations to the people concerned and the explanation we got from the AES people was that it was the Kenyan Government which failed to guarantee their part of the contract, that is why the whole scheme collapsed, but it was not the other way round.  I just thought I should give that information for the guidance of this House.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr. Speaker, I thought there was a document on the Table and that is the document on which I am rising on point of procedure.  Mr. Speaker, the procedural point I am rising on is, in Company Law, I do not think that shareholders take responsibility whatsoever for the deeds or misdeeds of the company.  It is the directors and managers. Therefore, I am seeking your guidance.  Here is a document totally unrelated to the subject we are discussing, is it procedurally correct for this to be a part of the record of this House, Mr. Speaker?  Is it procedurally okay?

THE SPEAKER: Well, the hon. Member who was giving information made reference to a document and I think for hon. Members to respond one way or the other, they really want to know what the document is referring to, and that is why we have it laid on the Table.  But that is not to say the mere laying of the document on the Table really vouches for its veracity.  That is for Members to decide when they eventually peruse it and then they will make their contributions accordingly.  They can even say it is irrelevant, it should go to the dustbin but as long as it is being referred to here and it is laid on the Table, I think you are entitled to have a look at it.

MR. CHEBET MAIKUT: In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I would like to note that there are quite a number of uncertainties and issues which are not clear to this House.  I am also aware that we have got a very committed and respected team of leadership in the Ministry of Energy. I, therefore, wish to submit that this motion for a Resolution guaranteeing AES-Nile Power Limited be withdrawn in good faith and be taken to the kitchen for more cooking before its presentation to this House for consideration.

MR. KAKOBA ONYANGO (Buikwe North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me way.  I would like to thank the Chairman of the Committee for the Report well done and I would like to thank the Minister for having presented the Resolution.  

Mr. Speaker, some time last year when I stood up in this House on the issue of electricity, my position was very clear.  I supported development.  Mr. Speaker, my position has not yet changed and I still support development.  Mr. Speaker, I look at this resolution as a resolution that will help us solve the power problem that we have in Uganda.  Mr. Speaker, we are all aware that the power we have is not enough and, therefore, we need power.  

In the modern world, there is no way we can talk about modernisation without having power in place.  Mr. Speaker, power is a key aspect of this development and that is why we need it.  We need this power to sustain the industries that we have in place, we need this power to attract more investors, we need this power to modernise agriculture, we need this power for domestic use and save our environment, contrary to what has been put across.  Mr. Speaker, much as we need this power, we do not have enough power and the situation is quite pathetic.  This is why at times we get cases, more often than not, of load-shedding.  Mr. Speaker, when this issue of power came up, I took up the initiative - (Interruption) -

MAJ. OTOA:  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the hon. Member who is on the Floor.  The hon. Member on the Floor organised a dinner for YPA to meet AES.  I want him to clarify whether he has some interest in this thing - (Interjections).

MR KAKOBA ONYANGO: Mr. Speaker, I am not surprised hon. Maj. Otoa has raised this issue.  It is because he is not a Member of YPA.  That is why he does not know and he never knew what happened.  What happened was that this dinner was not secret, it was a meeting which was inviting all Members of YPA and every Member got an invitation.  Those who were able to attend attended.  It was a consultative meeting and it came about as a result of the fact that at the time when we organised that meeting, our room up was being renovated.  There was no space. 

MR. MWANDHA: Point of clarification, Mr. Speaker.

MR. KAKOBA ONYANGO:  I am not taking it - (Laughter) - I will give him a chance later. As I was still explaining, it was because there was no room here up and that is why we decided to have that meeting there and every Member of YPA was aware.  Everyone got a letter.  I can now take the clarification.

MR. MWANDHA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Could hon. Kakoba Onyango who is also the Chairman of YPA tell the House who paid for that dinner?  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

HON. MEMBERS:  Yes, yes!

MR. KAKOBA ONYANGO: I am not surprised because the Members who are raising these questions are not Members of YPA.  They do not know how we operate but the truth of the matter is that YPA paid.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you give him the opportunity to contribute and then you can respond.  Let us have an orderly debate please. Hon. Mwandha, you are becoming rowdy. I do not want to apply certain rules to you.  You made your point and I am going to give you an opportunity even to speak for one hour and we listen to you.

CAPT. GUMA:  Mr. Speaker, I wanted hon. Kakoba to clarify.  Did he say that every Member of YPA attended?  Did I hear that?  I would want that clarification.

THE SPEAKER: I think what I heard was received invitation.

MR. KAKOBA ONYANGO: Mr. Speaker, as I said, we gave invitation to every Member of YPA and it was up to the Members to attend. It was not compulsory.  It is as simple as that.

MR. BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and I would like to thank hon. Kakoba for giving way. The information I want to give my Colleague is that indeed it is true that a good percentage of Ugandans need electricity. I do agree with you but I think the Members' concern - the issue at point now is the procedure.  The PPA - is it how it is drafted, that we should adopt? And what should come first?  Is it comprehensive Electricity Bill to come first or the production of electricity?

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Mr. Speaker, I beg to raise a point of order in respect to hon. Onyango Kakoba and hon. Mwandha.  Are these two hon. Members in order to doubt each other's integrity, particularly on an issue which is bordering on the ethics and integrity of YPA Members and especially when the Minister is right here? (Laughter).  I think, Mr. Speaker, this is a very serious thing.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see anything wrong in one person questioning the integrity of the other.  It is normal in conduct of relations.

MR. KAKOBA ONYANGO: Mr. Speaker, thank you for that ruling. Hon. Bakkabulindi wanted clarification but I must point out that he has jumped the gun.  I was just going to come to that later on. I hope he will hold on for some time.  

MR. PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I have in my hands a letter by the hon. Attorney General and he is right here to advise us further.  His last statement says: "It is, therefore, my opinion that the agreement may be executed but unless a regulatory law is enacted which is a condition precedent, the project might not be implemented."  Could he advise us?  Are we just wasting our time?  Could I, as a matter of procedure, receive the advice of the learned Attorney General on how we are going to proceed?  We have broken our other rule of anticipation but we are still continuing.  Could we be advised?

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Katureebe): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  First of all, I want to thank the Committee for the very good job they have done and for the diligence they have really put in to help many of us along the way.  At least I am glad the Chairman did acknowledge that one of my officers did work very closely with the Committee.  

First of all, Mr. Speaker, it is important to clarify why this motion is here.  It is here, as the Minister pointed out, under article 159 of the constitution which requires that there can be no borrowing by government or guaranteeing of any loans or any monies unless Parliament has approved.  

Now, what is required to be brought here by the Minister who has negotiated the loan or guarantee is contained in article 159(3)(a) that the terms and conditions of that loan, in this case the guarantee, shall be laid before Parliament and shall not come into operation unless they have been approved by a resolution of Parliament.  So the Minister normally comes here with the terms and conditions which he has negotiated.  

What normally happens -(Interjection)- I am developing the point - indeed as we know, the Minister of Finance goes to various agencies, signs agreements but the borrowing does not become effective until Parliament has approved and he brings those terms here as contained in an agreement that he has signed.  Indeed one of the conditions that is usually attached is that the Attorney General must give a legal opinion which says among other things that Parliament pass the resolution and attach a certified copy to the resolution of Parliament. So the important thing here is not the signing.  It is the approval of Parliament which operationalises the borrowing or the guaranteeing.  It is for that reason -

MR. RUZINDANA:   Mr. Speaker, can I get clarification from the learned Attorney General on what Parliament would be asked to approve;  is it the agreement, is it the principle of borrowing?  If it is the terms, do we have them yet?  Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I am constrained to ask this but a loan must be an amount of money.  I have looked for this amount -(Laughter)- and really, the amount is not there and even the guarantee of the World Bank, the partial risk has no amount, no probable what!  I am glad the Attorney General is here and can actually explain.

MR. KATUREEBE: Thank you.  I did say Mr. Speaker that  -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Pinto, you asked a question and the Attorney General is really going to pains to clarify.  Why do you not give him that opportunity?  When he has finished, then we can ask you to ask your supplementary question. You are the author of what the Attorney General is belabouring on.

MR. KATUREEBE: I did say, Mr. Speaker, that I was going to develop the point, then hon. Ruzindana came in. It starts by saying government shall not borrow or guarantee. Any guarantee where government is guaranteeing payment of public funds out of the consolidated fund, whether it is one shilling or a hundred shillings or whatever it is, you must get the permission of Parliament.  

Now the terms, what are we guaranteeing?  What the Minister is required to bring are the terms and the terms and conditions are the very terms in the PPA agreements and IPA agreements that the Committees of Parliament have been scrutinizing.  On the basis of those conditions, on the basis of those terms can they recommend to this Parliament that government should give a guarantee which is one of the conditions stipulated in the PPA agreement that should U.E.B fail to pay any of its obligations under these agreements, then the Government of Uganda will have to come in and pay - (Interruptions).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let him develop his point.

MR. KATUREEBE: The important thing, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the agreements, there are obligations to be performed by Uganda Electricity Board now and in the future and if U.E.B fails to perform those obligations, then the recourse will be hired to the Government of Uganda.  That is the guarantee that we are talking about.  Some of the terms may not be ascertainable now because some of the obligations will arrive in the future.  If, for example, there is a payment for damages and things like that, what is important is the principle that any guarantee must receive the support and approval of Parliament.  This is why these things are here and that is why the Committees of Parliament went out of their way to spend all the time they have spent scrutinizing these terms and conditions as they are given. 

MR. MWANDHA: I just want to seek clarification from the Attorney General, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I am getting more and more worried because hon. Ruzindana has put a very clear, simple question.  What are we committing ourselves to?  I mean how much? Now he is saying some of these obligations may arise in future. Is he now really advising this Parliament that we should guarantee obligations in future which we do not know about, for which we have no control? (Laughter). Is he really saying that we should give government a blank cheque?  Honestly,  Mr. Speaker, the Attorney General should advise on what concrete guarantees we are giving.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. KATUREEBE: Mr. Speaker, I believe this point is as clear as it can be.  We are guaranteeing obligations as contained in the agreements that have been scrutinized by Committees of this Parliament. The exact amounts, I cannot say because that is not the most important thing.  The most important thing is that under the constitution, no guarantee whatsoever - (Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Gentlemen, the learned Attorney General is giving advice, he is giving an opinion surely, you should give him an opportunity to make it and then you can use it the way you want.

MR. KATUREEBE: The point I want to finalise with, Mr. Speaker, is that the constitution says no guarantee, no loan can be given unless with the approval of Parliament.  So to me, the exact amount does not matter but as long as we know that under the agreements we have scrutinized, there are certain obligations of Uganda Electricity Board and we are saying, if Uganda Electricity Board fails on its obligations as of principle, the government guarantees and it is that principle that is here for approval. 

Secondly, on this question of which comes first, whether the law should come first and so on, as I said, you can sign an agreement and that agreement contains conditions, it contains certain terms which say that unless such and such a condition is fulfilled, then what we signed for may not take place. In the law of contract, this is what we call conditions precedent. You put a condition precedent like, indeed if the Minister of Finance was to sign any agreement to borrow, one of the conditions precedent is to get the approval of Parliament. If the condition that is contained there is not fulfilled by the party supposed to do it, then there is no agreement.  

Now that is why, in my opinion which I gave to the Committee I said, even if you sign, indeed we can sign but as long as the condition of the terms which the Committee has scrutinized says there must be a regulatory law and until that law is there, the other party will not reach financial closure. If there is no financial closure, they cannot borrow money.  If there is no borrowing of money, there is no project, there is no agreement. That is precisely what I am saying.

MR. MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Hon. Members, I think a very important point has been raised here which I want to clarify and supplement and that is, Members are asking, what are we guaranteeing?  In the whole presentation, maybe I did not clearly inform the Members that actually, the schedule of what we are guaranteeing or seeking to guarantee is laid out in the independent power purchase agreement which is the subject of the resolution.  Mr. Speaker, maybe by way of procedure, I think I should lay it on the Table with its proposed amendments which are attached on the sheet that I have circulated to the Members. These are the new rates which, if you approve, will then be incorporated in here. This is what we are seeking to have approved and the whole agreement is hereby laid on the table. 

THE SPEAKER:  Now, you will realise that hon. Onyango Kakoba is still on the Floor;  you are raising a point of information, clarification or what?

MR. WACHA:  I wanted to raise a point of clarification but now I think I raise a point of procedure.  Mr. Speaker, hon. Ruzindana raised an issue which I think can now be termed as follows that; we are discussing a matter, the terms of which we have not seen.  Hon. Musumba has now laid on the table the terms of the agreement.  Procedurally, can we proceed on this matter without the House being given a chance to look at the terms?  I appreciate, Sir, that the Committee has dealt with this matter for a long time but as a matter of procedure and for the principled functioning of this House, are we to say that once a Committee of this House has seen and dealt with matters, then the House is irrelevant in participating in the matter?

THE SPEAKER:  Are you seeking that clarification from the Attorney General?

MR. WACHA:  No, I  have now put a matter of procedure.

THE SPEAKER:  Alright, can we deal with his matter of procedure first?

MR. KARUHANGA:  Actually it could also be procedural but I am enquiring from the Attorney General whether this is the case so that I get a proper picture.  I have noted the points raised by hon. Pinto and read the Attorney General's letter to the secretary to the Committee on the Economy and I have taken note of paragraph 2 and the last paragraph of that letter on the first page where he is advising on the AES agreement but just for clarity for those who do not have it, let me read, it with your permission, Mr. Speaker.  "I have studied the draft agreement and below are my comments in respect of the issue raised in your letter - and I jump (1) and go to (2) - The draft contracts have a provision to the effect of enactment of an appropriate regulatory law as a condition precedent to financial closing.  It is, therefore, my opinion that the agreement may be executed, but unless a regulatory law is enacted which is a condition precedent, the project might not be implemented as the company is unlikely to obtain financing."   

I am a bit concerned at the way this whole matter has now turned into a saga and has come here and has gone back and has been with the Committee for so long and the Committee had to travel to places and this and that -(Laughter)- and now we land here with a situation where Parliament for the second time -the whole House is now getting involved and the matter I was expecting has gone through the normal procedure - has gone through Cabinet, has got the blessing of the Leader of Government Business, has gone through the Business Committee, the Minister is bringing it up having taken concerns of the whole House which we had here when we threw this thing out. The whole thing is not only embarrassing the House, the country, the government but even it is embarrassing the people who want to do the business, the AES.  

Now, the Attorney General is advising the Committee and I want to find out, has the Attorney General also advised the government about this matter?  Because, if this is a condition precedent and because the Attorney General is the advisor to Government and he is just giving a copy to the Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources.  Now, I do not know whether he got the copy; whether the Minister requested for that copy, or whether he knew about this matter.  So really in the end, Mr. Speaker, we are confronted and we as Parliamentarians will finally be blamed.  As I heard in a rally addressed by the President in Mbarara that "you see, some MPs have taken chloroform and they cannot awake.  They do not know that we need power." So we are sleeping.  So, everything is going to come here and we are going to be the ones to blame for all the darkness in this country.  

What I want to know is, if this was the case and the Minister was advised, did the Minister ignore the Attorney General's advice and he is proceeding with complete awareness but having disregarded the Attorney General's advice, or is it a case where the Attorney General is saying, you do it and then put conditions and then when in future the law is passed, then we shall hear about AES, which means that actually it is a lie if we pass this and AES' hands are tied by us and AES says, you see Parliament was so difficult?  Is that the intention to make this House a scapegoat?  What is the real truth? Why is there so much confusion about this contract; why are we being put into this ridiculous situation?  Not only ourselves, but even the AES; what is the problem?

THE SPEAKER: Let me give the Attorney General opportunity to respond to his question and also hon. Ben Wacha.

MR. NYAI:  Mr. Speaker, I would like us to find a way forward and I want to move this motion with a very clear spirit and I would like -(Interjections)-  at times I do not;  particularly when things become emotional.  

Mr. Speaker, before I move the motion, I would like the Attorney General to confirm my understanding of his paragraph to the secretary to the Committee that: "It is, therefore, my opinion that the agreement may be executed, but unless a regulatory law is enacted which is a condition precedent, the project might not be implemented as the company is unlikely to obtain financing."  Does that mean that it does not matter even if we give the guarantee and we sign these agreements and we then pass a regulatory law which goes contrary to the agreement we signed, it will be null and void or that if we reject the regulatory law, the agreement will also fall by the way side? In other words, Mr. Speaker, I want the Attorney General to rest my mind on this because if that is my interpretation and it is correct, then we are just wasting time.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Dick Nyai, I thought you stood up - you interrupted debate on a motion, and the motion is not forthcoming  surely, we cannot go on like that!

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I am moving that: "This House having considered the request for a Parliamentary resolution on the 6th day of July, 1999 as contained in the Minister's motion under Article 159(2), and this House being satisfied that the necessary regulatory law is not yet in place resolves that the Leader of Government Business withdraws this motion until the regulatory law is before this House."  I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Now, I want you to tell me under what rule you are proceeding so that we know exactly.

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I was proceeding on the rule that when a motion or a Bill is before the House and is for debate, it can attract Amendments from Members on the Floor.

THE SPEAKER: That is a very substantive motion, and under normal rules of procedure it will require notice, unless you resort to rule (8) of our Rules of Procedure.  I think, let us do this hon. Members - (Interjections) -  why do you not listen a little bit more before you can take a position?  Listen more so that you are in a position to bring up your motion properly  or you can amend it!  

Hon. Ben Wacha raised a point of procedure, I think, arising out of the Attorney General's submission, namely that when a matter is referred by this Parliament - hon. Okumu and hon. Minister for General Duties in the Office of the Prime Minister  -  the matter of procedure he was raising was that when a matter is referred by this Parliament to its Committee and the Committee has considered it, studied it, investigated the issue and prepared a report which they submit to this House for the plenary, is the plenary locked out and is it not supposed to discuss it?  And the other procedural point attached to that is, where are the terms of the agreement or specifically he said, where is the agreement?  I think that is your point of procedure, if I understood you correctly.  Is that correct?  Now, if that is the case  -(Interruption).

MR. WACHA: Broadly that is the principle behind my procedural motion  but in respect to terms, I said the Chairman has now laid the terms on the table, and the majority of the Members of this House have not had an opportunity to look at those terms.  Are we to consider ourselves now irrelevant, now that the Committee has studied the terms?

THE SPEAKER:  Now ordinarily, hon. Members, the motion which has been presented or any motion which is talking about terms of an agreement should have the terms of the agreement, if you like, attached to it.  Now, in this particular case, the Minister in the resolution made a reference to certain terms of the agreement as considered by the Committee.  

Now, I would like to remind you that the Minister of Finance has come here  many times before, seeking for authority of this House to allow him to borrow money from the World Bank or from wherever and he has not, I think, on all those occasions which I can recall, attached the whole agreement which he has negotiated with the World Bank or with any of the lending institutions.  

Now, this Parliament has considered the terms as contained in the motion and the Resolution, I would like to remind you that  although it is quite correct to say that the motion ordinarily should either contain all the terms in the agreement or a portion of it which requires approval of Parliament or the entire agreement, this is not the first time you have looked at a motion which contains the terms, or some critical terms of the agreement requiring approval of Parliament before the Minister of Finance has gone ahead to conclude and sign a loan agreement.  I think, you remember that one.  

MR. ONYANGO KAKOBA: Mr. Speaker, after a long time, let me go back to the fight, and that is part of the game anyway.  Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, we need power and when this issue of power came up, I took up the trouble to do research and to find out if really we need power in this country.  

In my research findings, I discovered from recent UEB figures that the current domestic demand for power in this country is 260 megawatts.  Mr. Speaker, currently the power we generate at Owen Falls Dam is only 180 megawatts. This gives a deficit of 60 megawatts that we need.  Mr. Speaker, on top of that, we have suppressed demands which is as a result of provision through candles, through kerosene lamps, through small generators and through car batteries.  This also amounts to 80 megawatts that is suppressed.  Mr. Speaker, in essence in total we need 340 megawatts -(Interruption).

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr. Speaker, I believe there has been a motion on the Floor from hon. Dick Nyai of Ayivu Constituency.  I am at a loss -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  There is no motion on the Floor except the motion of the Minister.  Can you proceed?

MR. ONYANGO KAKOBA:  Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, we have a deficit in essence of 160 megawatts that we need to produce so that our people can have power.  Mr. Speaker, this is a study which was carried out by a French company Electric de France in 1998 September last year.  Mr. Speaker, the same report goes ahead to give the figures that for us here, in essence we need 300 megawatts of power and the projection for 2001 is 400 megawatts of power.  If we go ahead and project to 2006, we will need 600 megawatts of power.  

Mr. Speaker, it is quite glaring that we do not have power  because in the first place, when I talk about domestic demand, what we are producing now is 180 megawatts, even if you added on what we are going to produce after the completion of the Owen Falls Dam extension which is 80 megawatts, that one will give 260 megawatts yet we need over 300 megawatts.  That is the way I looked at it, Mr. Speaker. If we add on the projections, it is not easy to get these figures.

MRS. MPANGA:  Mr. Speaker, I want to give information to hon. Onyango Kakoba that the issue we are talking about is not whether we need power, because we need it.  The issue we are talking about is whether we should guarantee before we know the details.  He is making us irrelevant by going to the issue of whether we need it or not; we need it but should we have it at the cost of everything?

MR. ONYANGO:  Mr. Speaker, the hon. Member, is a teacher, and she knows very well, I think, that when you want to put a point across, you have to build your case. I was just building up my point.  Mr. Speaker, as I was saying there is great demand for power but UEB as it is now can not provide all the power that we need.  Government is constrained because of inadequate financial resources, it can not provide all the power that we need.  That is why we need these private companies that can give us power.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mwandha, I think you know the rules  -(Interjections). Hon. Mwandha, I am still addressing, you sit down yourself.  Let us not turn this debate into something else other than a debate with sobriety.  The rule is that, if the Member does not give way, you sit down. If he gives way I can recognise you, if he does not give way, I do not see you.

MR. ONYANGO:  Mr. Speaker, it should be the clarification I think.

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank my hon. Friend for giving way  because the issues he is raising are issues which are dear to all of us but I think we have a problem, and our rules provide that where there is no clear rule to guide the House, the Speaker guides the House. 

The matter I want to put for guidance, Mr. Speaker, is the matter which hon. Karuhanga raised with regard to the letter of the Attorney General. The Attorney General is very clear in paragraph 2.2 and also paragraph 3.  It seems to me that continuing to debate this when the Attorney General is very clear in black and white - we do not seem to be making any progress.  The important thing is really to decide whether we should ignore the Attorney General's advice at our own peril or we should accept his advice.  But really, whatever we do today, it has no consequence until the regulatory system is in place. So really, I think it is important to us in accordance with our rules.

MAJ. GEN. MUGISHA MUNTU:  Mr. Speaker, the mood in the House seems quite ugly but I do appreciate why the mood is that way, and also hope that the Leader of Government Business is watching and we need to take lessons from what is going on here so that in future we really do things in a manner that does not create such a mood like there is in the House - (Applause). But at the same time, I would like to point out to the House with all due respect that literally, all the questions that are being raised here, and I believe that whatever other questions will be raised or observations made, you will most likely find that we raised all those questions in the last six months but we have been handling this issue between ourselves, the government side and the AES and I would like to point out the reason why that letter from the Attorney General has been attached to the report of the Committee on the Economy.  

Ever since we started discussing this issue as far back as January of this year 1999, the year of our Lord, that question has come up again and again up to the last minute - up to last week in actual fact, and I very well know that a number of members of the Committee on the Economy insisted that there is no way they could append their signatures on this report unless the Attorney General committed government in writing and, therefore, this letter. But I would like to contribute to the motion of the Minister, and I would like to be advised whether it is possible for me now to do so, or whether I should  -(Interjections)- sorry, Mr. Speaker, I rose on a point of information, I have given you this information but I would also like, Mr. Speaker, to give me an opportunity at later point to speak to the motion of the Minister for Finance.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Mwandha, are you giving information?

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Speaker, now that you have this letter in your hands, the real issue is on paragraph 2(ii) and paragraph 3, and since we do not seem to have rules to cover this, I was going to appeal to you, Mr. Speaker, that you guide this House because we are bound by those very clear statements by the Attorney General.  So, we need your guidance because really we must make progress.

THE SPEAKER:  Let me guide you this way.

DR. KINYATTA:I want to bring a motion under rule 44 (c)-

THE SPEAKER:  Read the rule.

DR. KINYATTA:  Mr. Speaker, Rule 44 reads: "The following motions may be moved without notice - (c)  any motion for the adjournment of a debate."  So, Mr. Speaker, if you allow me I can move this motion under this rule 44(c).

THE SPEAKER:  But what provision are you referring to for adjournment of a debate.  There is a provision you should cite.

DR. KINYATTA: Under 44(c), I wanted to move a motion that this debate on this particular motion be adjourned.  Then I will have to justify  my motion.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Alright, proceed.

DR. KINYATTA:  Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  I have listened for nearly two hours since we begun here, the House is paralysed, and everybody is paralysed and also demoralized.  Mr. Speaker, it is very clear that the condition precedent which we need to we make a law for Electricity in Uganda should precede any other projects in this country and for this reason, you could see Members of Parliament, everybody here trying to say 'no, we should do this first' and so on.  We have now had two hours of debate on this and we have not moved any inch. I would, therefore, like to propose that we adjourn this debate  indefinitely until the Electricity law is in place while we are doing other things.  I beg to move, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, is the motion seconded?

MEMBERS: Yes!

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, you can justify your motion.

DR. KINYATTA: I have already finished.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity.  I am standing up to support the motion moved by hon. Kinyatta and I am pained to do so and I feel very disappointed in doing what I am doing because of the fact that this country needed  electricity yesterday, and now we are adjourning the debate just because the players have failed to meet the expectations of the legislators.  

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out something in my other capacity as a Lawyer about why I am pained in supporting this motion.  If we should pass this motion as it is, the following are the dire consequences of what would most likely happen:  We now approve, we then bring the Electricity Bill and we pass it into an Act and AES does not accept any of the regulations that we put in the law  and they claim that the contract was frustrated and then they go for arbitration and who pays the arbitration bill?  Mr. Speaker, it is not that, that will happen - (Interruption) -

THE SPEAKER: Are you prepared to take the information?

MR. KARUHANGA:  If I can finish, I will give the hon. Minister an opportunity.  I am not saying that is going to happen but I am saying that in the unlikely event that such a thing takes place, who then will be found in the latch?  Is it the tax payer of this country or somebody else?  What is our role then as Parliamentarians?  

The Attorney General has already safeguarded himself; I think he is very clever. If I was him, I would have done the same.  He has told the government, he has told the legislators, he has told the country in black and white that by the way, stand warned, there is a condition precedent and that is that the law is more important than the approval; ignore the fact raised by hon. Ruzindana that the figures are not available to the legislators, ignore that fact because we can commit our country for ever ad infinitum because Parliament has the power to do anything it wants to do except to turn a man into a woman but it can be done scientifically.  It is impossible the other way round.

MRS. BBUMBA:  Mr. Speaker, according to the draft PPA, there is a clause, I think Clause 2(iv) which subjects that PPA which has been laid on the table to the laws of Uganda present and future.  It is a very clear clause -(Interjections)- yes! it is provided for in the contract and, Mr. Speaker, whereas it is true that the Electricity law is a condition precedent in the PPA, but for this company to organise the money to reach financial closure is going to take six months and during those six months, a date has been set for having the Electricity law in place.  The Electricity law is going to be in place, according to the provision in the PPA, before the company reaches financial closure.  The company needs this PPA to be able to -(Interjections)- Mr. Speaker, the company needs the guarantee in order to go and start the process-(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Mudoola, resume your seat, she is giving information.

MRS. BBUMBA:  The company needs the resolution to be able to go and start on the long process of raising the money which process is not going to take less than six months. The Executive has promised Parliament that the Bill will be with the Committee  within the next three weeks.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  Mr. Speaker, the hon. Member was holding the Floor and the hon. Minister gave an information but it is the procedure of this House that the Minister has an opportunity to wind up and give all the information that she has to satisfy us before we vote.  Now, is the hon. Minister in order to take up the time of the hon. Member which is limited because all of us want to contribute, to interrupt the hon. Member with her debate which is endless yet we also want to contribute?  

THE SPEAKER: You raised a point of order.  Did you not?  Now, as I understand it, the Minister was giving information to the hon. Karuhanga arising from hon. Karuhanga's debate of the motion moved by the hon. Kinyatta. She was not contributing to her own motion. She was giving information to hon. Karuhanga who was debating a motion moved by hon. Kinyatta.  So, the Minister is in order to give the information. 

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I am very grateful for the Minister's information that there is a clause in the - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Has the Minister finished giving information?

MR. KARUHANGA:  Yes, I am satisfied with her information.  I have understood the information.

THE SPEAKER:  Proceed, hon. Karuhanga.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Most grateful, Mr. Speaker.  I am grateful for the information from the Minister in fact because she says that the provision has been put in the Power Purchase Agreement to say that AES accepts and will bind itself to the future laws that will be made by this country after this contract.  Now, I am not a lawyer for AES but I know that AES hired the best lawyers available on the American continent.  Would you expect AES to sign an agreement saying that if this Parliament were to pass adverse laws affecting their contracts, affecting their fundamental interests; would you expect that they would put that down and say we bind ourselves in the future, that they would anticipate a law and anticipate what is going to come in the law without safeguarding themselves, having hired the best lawyers in the country in America?  

If they were to do that, why then did they refuse arbitration in Uganda, having known that the Ugandan laws are going to affect them? Did they accept? They did not! They said we go to Singapore we said no, they said we go to London, we said we have an arbitration centre here in Uganda financed by America.  It was not acceptable. They want to go away and handle their arbitration yet in the law they say they accept!  We have not even seen the laws and in an arbitration centre in Uganda, they would provide their own arbitrators, they would have to propose their own lawyers.  It would be an equal playing field but they were not capable of accepting that. 

The Minister is trying to convince us that they anticipated a law they have not seen, a Parliament which they have not seen, to pass laws and bind them? Supposing they do not like the law we pass?  There is an arbitration court in London and I have attended, by the way, arbitration centres in France. You do not know how intimidating those things can be.  I am the president of the Arbitration Centre in Uganda, there are very complicated things there and let me tell you, if I were the AES lawyer, I would not like to bind this agreement and transform it into the next law that is going to be passed.  

Having noted that the Attorney General has protected himself, absolved and  washed his hands, he has left the matter to you to consider, he has left us and he has left the Minister and the Government and ourselves and he has told us and put us on notice, Hon. Kinyatta's motion is getting us out of that latch.  Hon. Kinyatta's motion is saying, we discuss no other Bill, we move no more steps because of the need that hon. Kakoba was describing for power.  Let us have this law in place so that both parties, the Government and AES, know exactly where they are going.  

You know, Mr. Speaker, sooner or later, UEB will be privatised and privatised it will be because it has already moved towards hon. Manzi's ambit in the Privatisation Unit and it has moved those schedules and work is going on to divide it in three or chop it in three sections or into one section and sell it away.  That is the company that is signing the agreement for guaranteeing the -  so, why do we not pass this law, know the fate of UEB first?  In any case, let me remind this House. I was sitting in the same spot I am sitting in now and there was a Minister for power in the name of hon. Sir Richard Kaijuka. You were sitting there, you brought the Electricity Bill to the House. The Bill is already thrown, it is out.  We asked for one or two provisions, you said in November of last year, "I will bring the Bill."

MR. KAIJUKA: Mr. Speaker, I thank hon. Karuhanga for giving way.  I think it is important we go back to where we came from and really, being a back bencher, I also get pained because I want moods to be in consonance so that we can move forward.  Let us go back to where we started.  It is true that last year, I as a Minister then of Energy and Mineral Development, did bring a draft Bill, the Electricity Bill, circulated it to members of the Committee, if you remember.  It was an Amendment first, but then I circulated a draft Bill after we had had a stake holder's meeting and so on.  I want to really be open and frank; if it is true that it is partly as a result of our own confusion in Government - (Applause) - do not misunderstand me.  Please do not misunderstand me.

THE SPEAKER: Order, please and let the hon. Member make his point.

MR. KAIJUKA:  I am informing the House that at that stage, instead of proceeding to have one regulatory framework for Uganda electricity or power sector, just like Telecommunications has done, Government changed policy that we should move to a combined utilities commission, combining all the utilities. That is the confusion we are talking about.  I am saying so because since I left Cabinet, I have learnt that the policy has now again changed that we are coming back with a single regulator for electricity.  So if that is the case, I am entitled to say there is confusion and it is made in good faith - (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are giving information to hon. Karuhanga. You are not contributing.

MR. KAIJUKA:  Mr. Speaker, I wanted to give hon. Karuhanga additional information and the House that in my view, I am sorry that the mood has really turned around because I would have stood to oppose for example, Dr. Kinyatta's submission on one simple ground that there is no contradiction in the House approving, for example, the on-going project and then making it mandatory to have the Electricity Bill because of one important point - (Interruption) -

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Kaijuka, give your point to hon. Karuhanga, he is the one debating.

MR. KAIJUKA:  Okay, go ahead. I hope you will give me the opportunity to debate.

MR. KARUHANGA:  I am very grateful to hon. Kaijuka.  I think that hon. Kaijuka's point is very important in as far - by the way, I am grateful to you and I am happy with the deliberation because it is very important to know where to place the blame and I want to wind up. 

After receiving hon. Dombo's motion addressing AES, it is very clear to me that they have been pumped with information that this House is against them.  It cannot be the case, we want power.  This House is, in fact, grateful AES was the only company in the whole world which came to invest US $500 million in Uganda and this country and this Parliament is grateful to them and they have spent a lot of time trying to move a very difficult block from Government in order to get here.  But to get here, what problems do they get?  They get these procedural problems.  So, it is not this House which brings problems to AES.  AES had better get that message very clearly.  I think this House wants power, wants a company which can give us power.  

This is the biggest amount of money which this House is being asked to approve - US $500 million or more.  It is therefore an honour to Uganda to attract an investor of that magnitude to come to our country and we appreciate it but we want to draw it as hon. Mpanga said, when our hands are also as clean as those of the Attorney General and not only is it in the interest of the AES that this is done because they want a good, valid contract which can live up to thirty years when they will use their option to hand over their business to the Government.  They want to have a good contract and they want to enjoy that contract, they do not want to get into a contract which is going to be full of legal loopholes; too many road blocks, too many legal fellows hanging around their neck like an albatross; taking them to court, suing them left, right and centre. Hon. Dombo is harassing me, can I take his message?

MR. DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and hon. Karuhanga for giving way.  Mr. Speaker, I wish to inform hon. Karuhanga and this House that right now, Government is in the process of privatising Uganda Airlines and right now, the whole process is stranded and Government's hands are tied and the value of Uganda Airlines has been reduced to one shilling just because Government committed itself in an earlier agreement. So, we can only proceed if Government withdraws and all the other bidders who are interested in purchasing Uganda Airlines have withdrawn unless Government clarifies on the earlier commitment.  Would this not be the same case when we come to AES and the Power Purchase Agreement?

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Dombo.  I just want to conclude by talking about the pre-emptive right clause in that agreement and I am talking from a point of view of ignorance but I will use this time to look at it because what hon. Dombo is saying  which  has reminded me is, when you look at all the contracts this country has made where pre-emptive clauses have been used time and again, they are a disadvantage to our country.  I have looked at the BAT contract, the Barclays Bank contract, the Nile Hotel contract, the Hima Cement contract, ENHAS and Uganda Airlines shares contracts and it is very important to know that at the end, you will find - Mr. Speaker, as you know, I am in legal practice,  any client who comes to me, I put in a pre-emptive clause if it is relevant and I make sure that I tie it in such that when he is handing over this business to me, he is the only buyer.  Others have done it and I would like to know whether that is also the situation in this case and if I do not see it, whether the Attorney General has seen it.  

It is very important, therefore, that we as Parliamentarians also give AES a good contract because definitely, out of this type of thing, AES is not getting a good contract.  In spite of the fact, I must thank the Committee on the Economy because for six months they have been shouting their voices hoarse and they have questioned and questioned and improved and improved this contract, but when it comes to day's session, what do we see?  A serious, simple lacuna raised by the Attorney General.  Obviously, he must have raised it to the Ministers before and now, we have to stop it again and that is why I painfully support hon. Kinyatta's motion and I thank you.  

MR. WACHA (Oyam North, Apac):  Mr. Speaker, I gladly support this motion.  I want, Sir, to address the Minister through you.  If I were the Minister in charge of this resolution, this would have been a motion that I would have supported because, what are the alternatives?  

Reading the mood of this House, the alternative would have been for me to push ahead with the motion and to loose it and what would have been the repercussions?   The repercussions would have meant that the report of the Committee which has worked so painfully for six months to do a great job for this nation would have been rejected.  It would have meant, too, that this House would have had to go through the whole process all over again, asking the Committee to sit again look at this contract all over. But what is hon. Kinyatta asking for?   

Hon. Kinyatta is telling the House, "look, let us put a semi colon to the debate on this resolution and wait for something to happen first before we start where we have stopped."  Hon. Kinyatta is not saying, let us reject the motion on the resolution.  No! He is saying let us put a comma until such a time that the Executive is ready and we know it is ready and not going to embarrass this country and then we start from where we have put a comma.  This, Sir, is not asking for too much and I would have expected the Minister, or the Leader of Government Business to jump and say, "I accept that motion, I am embarrassed." But up to now, that has not happened.  I hope she is about to stand up.  

Nobody should lecture us, Sir, on the country's need for electricity, nobody!  Everybody knows about that but is it not about time that this House insisted that we do things correctly?  Is it not about time?  How many times have we been told about things about to happen which never happen?  Only last week - Jesus Christ! - only last week we had to go for a fiasco.  Should we do that again this week?  Is it not now becoming a norm?  So, Mr. Speaker, I support this motion and really, I support it with a clear conscience because I think for once we are going to do something correct.  Thank you, Sir.

THE RT. HON. PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  There is room for an Amendment to the motion so that we can meet each other at an appropriate equilibrium.  The point has been made that Uganda collapsed for all practical purposes but now it is on the mend and so, an attempt has been made to go out of our way to request people to come and invest in a difficult terrain.  

In fact, we have been cajoling and the investor in question was also cajoled along with others but others would not come to Uganda when the social political terrain was so difficult and the investor came and he incurred some costs, for example, affecting environment impact assessment. And now when he is on the brink of being assisted to see us through the vital issue, when Uganda is brightening, we are blocking the system at the last minute and, therefore, I want to suggest to honourable Members that the compromise should be, until we bring the Bill, but we do not necessarily have to wait until it is a law because when we bring the Bill here, you will be able to fathom the framework and the content.  

This has the advantage that we do not cause unnecessary delay because, as you know, it takes a lot of time to procure money, it takes a lot of time to procure a loan. The reason why we are trying to hurry was, under Article 159, to ask you to endorse the time so that we might be able to procure the money while the Bill is being prepared because everything in Uganda is a priority.  When you are dealing with such a situation, there are times when you must sequence things in a manner we are doing it because everything is a priority.  This morning I was dealing with disaster and I realised that many corners of Uganda are afflicted with disaster.  Therefore, I want to appeal to you that you accept the Amendment that "until we bring the Bill".  That is the only Amendment I am making.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, are you proceeding to Amend his motion?  Well, let him say it first.  Hon. Fiona Egunyu, let us go step by step.  He has requested to make an Amendment to the hon. Kinyatta's motion.  Now, if it is seconded, then we take a decision.  If it is not seconded, then it falls by the way side.

MAJ.GEN. MUGISHA MUNTU: It is seconded.  I second the proposal from the Prime Minister that the Bill be presented to the House.

THE SPEAKER:  No, let me read out the hon. Kinyatta's motion so that you can appreciate the hon. Prime Minister's Amendment.  "That the debate on the matter on the Floor be adjourned until an Electricity Law is in place."  Alright?  So, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister seems to say that "until the Electricity Bill is Tabled."  Okay he has written it this way:  "According to Rule Number 44(c) - okay he has justified under what Rule he is proceeding, of our Rules of Procedure - I wish to move that the debate on this motion for a Resolution of Parliament seeking Government to guarantee capacity payment for electricity by Uganda Electricity Board to AES Nile Power -  No, No.  I think the other one captured by the Clerk seems to be to the point.  So the Hon. Kinyatta's motion is that: "The debate on the matter on the Floor be adjourned until the Electricity Law is in place."  That is his motion and The Rt. Hon. Prime Ministers is that: "until the Electricity Bill is Tabled."  Right, is it seconded?  Hon. Members, is this motion seconded.

MAJ.GEN. MUGISHA MUNTU:  Mr. Speaker, I second the motion of the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister and if I am advised to speak to it, I will also go ahead and indicate the reasons why.  The proposal of the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister is not new, we asked exactly for that in the Committee of the Economy because some of us anticipated the problems that we would meet on the Floor of the House.  We asked that the Draft Bill -(Interruption)-   Mr. Speaker, may I be allowed to finish?

THE SPEAKER:  He is just making a justification.

MRS. EGUNYU: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker before the seconder goes ahead to defend the motion, I am raising on a point of procedure to ask from the Speaker if he is procedurally right that they could proceed to Amend the motion of hon. Kinyatta without him accepting the Amendment.

MR. KINYATTA:  First of all, I was not contacted, Mr. Speaker, but I reject it -(laughter).  I also reject the Amendment on my motion.

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Speaker, we have seen many Bills in this House.

THE SPEAKER:  Order please.  Yes hon. Mwandha, are you contributing to hon. Kinyatta's motion?

MR. MWANDHA:  Yes, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I support the motion by hon. Kinyatta and I would like, in view of the fact that it is so late, under Rule 63 to move that the question be put, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Is it seconded?  Now hon. Members, there is a motion on the Floor by hon. Mwandha - (Interjections) - Let us go step by step, I know what I am doing.  There is a motion on the Floor by the hon. Mwandha that the question be now put and it has been seconded.  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER:  I now put the question that the debate on the matter on the Floor be adjourned until an Electricity Law is in place.  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, it is now fairly late, I  therefore adjourn the House to 2.00 O'clock tomorrow, Wednesday.  Thank you.

(The House rose and adjourned until Wednesday 7th July, 1999 at 2.00 O'clock)
