





Wednesday, 01 July 2020

Parliament met at 4.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting and I would like to apologise profusely for the late start. 

This morning, I commissioned the commencement of the seven cities of Arua, Gulu, Mbarara, Masaka, Mbale, Fort Portal and Jinja, which took place in Jinja this morning. Thereafter, I also had to attend a meeting of the Central Executive Committee of the NRM, where we are still grappling with how to deliver democracy in the present circumstances. 

That is why I am late but let us do some work for the remaining one hour. There are just two matters of urgent national concern.

4.32
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have read information in the press today to the effect that Cabinet is drafting regulations to be followed by political parties, among others, including the extension of executive members of political parties.

I rise to seek clarification from Government. Under what circumstances would Cabinet debate regulations regarding the internal management, running and functions of political parties?

Secondly, what are they trying to insinuate, that political parties are now an appendage of Cabinet? Are they saying that now that the parties’ executive committees are expiring, therefore, Cabinet has the mandate to extend the term of political parties; well aware that even the term of parties, like the Central Executive Committee itself and others of parties, have in-built mechanisms within the party.

Is it, therefore – (Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, is hon. Ssekikubo in order? Since when did we regard information in the newspapers as gospel truth? Since when did Parliament legislate in anticipation or on the basis of rumours? Is the honourable member in order to bring us rumours here from newspapers and wanting the Executive to respond to this? Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, our rules have a rule against speculation and anticipation. Therefore, until the matter is properly brought here, I think it is not ready for debate. Thank you.

4.35
MS DOREEN AMULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, concerning the issue of floods in Amolatar District. In Amolatar, there are sub counties, which are completely cut off and all the roads are flooded. That is Akwon, Acii, Namasale, Arwotcek, among others.

These floods have caused a lot of damage in Amolatar District. The reason for which I rise is not that the flood issue is new. I want to go straight to my prayers because the whole country knows what is happening concerning the floods.

First of all, I bring it as a concern to the ministry responsible to carry out some study on the nature of the floods the country is experiencing. You may see as though this water is just some water springing out of the soil but before you know it, it is very deep. 

Once somebody steps in, they drown. When they drown, you may take some days to get them out of the soil.

Currently, in Amolatar District, we have lost seven people in the pretext that they thought the water was shallow and they could still walk on the surface of the water, yet the ground is already eroded. I do not see any Government agency doing a study on how these floods are affecting our people.

There is a man who just buried just yesterday. He thought he was going to rescue some of his property that had been carried away by the water. When he stepped on the ground, it was already very deep and he died. Many people have lost their lives in such a manner.

Madam Speaker, it is also my prayer that Uganda National Roads Authority and the Ministry of Works and Transport improvise some boats for Amolatar District and also part of Kwania and Dokolo. It is now a burden on the members of Parliament. I have already donated two boats in Amolatar to help the wanainchi to cross to the next village, parishes or sub county because they do not have any alternative routes to cross over.

It is also my prayer that relief food be offered to the people of Amolatar. Since these floods started, Amolatar has not benefitted from any relief, not even tarpaulins and yet, people’s homes have been submerged in water. At least, let them be given something for temporary structures. Quick maturing planting materials should also be provided.  (Interruption)

MS AVUR: Thank you, honourable colleague. Madam Speaker, our people along the Albert Nile or different water bodies in this country are suffering due to rising water levels.

I was in Pakwach last week. There is a strange skin disease that has erupted due to the rising water levels. There is a lot of itching and it comes on the skin similar to somebody suffering from cancer. This is in about five villages of Ombara, Cik-Iti and Kego. Over 40 households had to leave their homes. It is even affecting intimacy between couples; the itching is too much. Water-borne diseases are a problem. 

We need the intervention of the Ministry of Health and Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to find out what this worm is that is causing problems to the people. Is it coming because of the floods? It is even eating their crops, especially their cassava. 

Madam Speaker, we really need urgent attention as people who are living along the water bodies. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Ministry of Health should address the problem of the skin disease, happening along the Albert Nile and give us an update. However, the Minister of Works and Transport is here. He gave a report on the floods and what he intends to do. I do not know whether there is something to add for the areas of Amolatar. 

The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is here on the issue of production. I do not know whether they have anything to add. People’s homes are flooded and they want seeds for the next planting season. 

4.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Madam Speaker, the ministry is considering remedies for those people who are affected by floods. Our honourable colleague, hon. Hellen Adoa is there trying to assess the situation. We shall come back to this House in less than two weeks to report on the action to be taken. 

4.41
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Madam Speaker, we presented a report here on the effects of floods in the whole country and we requested for some emergency funds. I understand there is a move together with the Office of the Prime Minister to get some emergency funds, which will help us to respond to some of these. However, the amount of money that we were told seems to be very little compared to the extent of the damage across the country, where there are floods. 

As I speak now, River Nyamwamba in Kasese, is back to its dangerous nature. It has already flooded many of the roads. We have troops who are cut off in Karambi because of the washed away bridge. Therefore, we will wait to see what we get and then we will see what kind of response we will make with whatever money we get. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, when the request comes, let us please, support the Ministry of Works and Transport so that Ugandans can be free to move to do their business.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON FAILURE BY GOVERNMENT TO PAY UGANDAN TRADERS IN SOUTH SUDAN AS RESOLVED BY PARLIAMENT AND MONEY APPROPRIATED ACCORDINGLY IN THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

4.43
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, this is a statement on the delayed compensation of Ugandan traders who made losses in South Sudan. 

First of all, I should have been here a few days back but because of other responsibilities, I was unable to do so. I had to do a lot of consultations on the matter. 

As you may recall, on l9 March 2020, I submitted to Parliament a comprehensive statement on this matter. In the statement, I indicated two categories of claimants. The first category is the 10 trading companies belonging to the Ugandan South Sudan Grain Traders and Suppliers Association (UGTA), who are a subject of Schedule One of the bilateral agreement, and were owed $56 million. Of this amount, $15 million was paid by Government of South Sudan leaving a balance of $41 million, which became a subject of the above bilateral agreement. 

Out of this amount, part payment of Shs 40 billion was made in the second quarter of the Financial Year 2018/2019. Whereas Parliament appropriated Shs 76 billion for payment, the ministry was not able to effect the payment for the reasons I will state later on. 

The second category is of traders that are a subject of Article 10 of the bilateral agreement, who had neither been verified nor paid, of which Shs l.535 trillion was claimed but only Shs 25.738 billion was found to be valid after the verification. 

Madam Speaker, the actions so far undertaken by the ministry to settle the outstanding obligations to Uganda South Sudan Traders were guided by the decision of Cabinet and the resolution of Parliament on 03 April 2018. 

Under Cabinet Minute 154 (CT 2016), the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, and the Attorney-General were authorised to negotiate and execute binding agreements with the Government of South Sudan. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was also authorised to effect payment upon agreement with the Government of South Sudan on the terms and conditions of reimbursement of $41 million. 

A bilateral agreement was, therefore, signed in 2016. Cabinet made a decision that the Government of Uganda should compensate only those traders who supplied the Government of the Republic of South Sudan. 

On 03 April 2018, Parliament approved the bilateral agreement and recommended that an addendum is made to the bilateral agreement to cater for the additional claimants. Therefore, my ministry has undertaken the following actions on the categories stated above;

Category 01
As indicated above, after the resolution of Parliament and going by the provisions of the bilateral agreement, funds amounting to Shs 40 billion were paid to the Ugandan South Sudan Grain Traders and Suppliers Association on 22 February 20l9 as part payment out of the outstanding claim of $41 million. This, therefore, leaves a balance of $31 million.

Madam Speaker, after the above part payment, concerns on the likely irregularities in the payments were raised by several stakeholders as follows: 
    1. His Excellency the President, in his letter dated l5 April 2019, directed the Attorney-General and I to verify the genuineness of all traders' documents before payment is made.

    2. The Commissioner General of Uganda Revenue Authority, in a letter dated 07 August 2017, conducted verification on Ugandan South Sudan Traders and found that some of the claimants were found to be duplicated while others had no evidence of exports.

Madam Speaker, after the above concerns, the Secretary to the Treasury raised a concern that in accordance with the Presidential Directive above, he could not pay without verification of the claims. Therefore, in line with Section 164 (2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Section 11 (2) (c) of the Public Finance and Management Act, 2015 (as amended), he instituted an independent verification of all the claims of Ugandan South Sudan traders.

However, the Category 1 traders filed an application in the Civil Division of the High Court against verification. The traders under Category 2, through the same court, opted for verification. Court issued a permanent injunction against verification of Category l but cleared Category 2 to be verified.

Consequently, an Order of Mandamus was issued compelling the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury to immediately pay the balance of US$ 31 million to Category 1 traders. The Category 1 traders have filed a fresh application in the Civil Division of the High Court under Miscellaneous Application No. 276/2020, the Ugandan South Sudan Traders and Suppliers Association Ltd v. the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury and the Attorney-General. 

The application is seeking that the respondents be cited for contempt of court and be ordered to pay interest on the balance of the claim amount.

Arising from the court application, Government and the claimants agreed for an amicable out of court settlement to negotiate and report back to court on Friday, 3 July 2020.

Madam Speaker, it is therefore prejudicial to undertake deep discussion of this matter until the court application is disposed of.

Category 2
Madam Speaker, going by the Parliamentary Resolution on the addendum to the Bilateral Agreement, the Court Order and Article 10 of the Bilateral Agreement, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development continued to receive additional submissions of claims by the Ugandan South Sudan Traders who had neither been verified nor paid. These were subjected to the independent verification process.

Madam Speaker, you will note that of the 160 Category 2 traders that submitted their documentation for verification amounting to Shs l.535 trillion, only three claims amounting to Shs 25.738 billion were found valid. The rest of the claims were questionable.

Madam Speaker, a Cabinet Paper on the independent verification report was therefore prepared and submitted to Cabinet for consideration. Further action on Category 2 traders therefore awaits the decision of Cabinet in order to amend the Bilateral Agreement to include Category 2 claimants.

Conclusion
Madam Speaker, Government currently has a stock of approximately Shs 1 trillion in unpaid court awards, including the award to the South Sudan traders as indicated in paragraph (10) above. Some claims date as far back as 20 years. Due to resource constraints, these awards cannot be settled at once as was directed by court.

To settle these court awards, the ministry has developed criteria that involve signing of consent agreements with willing claimants for a payment plan that can fit within the Government cash flows. The criterion is as follows: 
The principle amount is paid in full, accumulated interest on the award, if applicable, is discounted by 50 per cent. Interest stops accruing after signing of the consent agreement, payment of the award is made within a maximum period of five years. To date, this process has saved Government of Uganda Shs 300 billion.

Whereas funds were appropriated in the Budget for Financial Year 2019/2020 to settle these outstanding payments, the delay was majorly as a result of the court processes, the need to holistically authenticate the claims and the financial constraints faced in the Financial Year 2019/2020.

During the Financial Year 2019/2020, the ministry was faced with heavy expenditure demands that included, among others, the need to operationalise the newly created administrative units numbering 700 that required Shs 112 billion, requirement for road construction under UNRA of Shs 700 billion, among others. These, however, have not been funded up to date due to cash constraints.

I would also like to inform the House that while we are desirous of compensating Ugandan traders in South Sudan, we should also be mindful that the Government of Uganda owes Ugandan businesses approximately Shs 3 trillion in unpaid domestic arrears.

Madam Speaker, I therefore implore this House to appreciate the financial constraints that we are operating in to the extent that we have been forced to defer many other payments, including those central to our economic development strategy. Therefore, it is not possible to pay the South Sudan traders in one tranche.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I would like the House to note the following:
    1. Category 1 claimants are still a subject of court.
    2. Category 2 claimants are still awaiting a Cabinet decision.
    3. While we agreed to pay the South Sudan traders as a courtesy in order to support our business men and women, this must be done prudently to ensure that we avoid paying fake and unauthentic traders as exemplified by the verification report of Category 2 of the claimants.

In conclusion, I would like to lay on the Table a list of documents:
    1.  List of trading companies in Category 1.
    2.  The independent verification report on the claims of Ugandan South Sudan Traders under Category 2.
    3.  The two court rulings on the claims of Ugandan South Sudan Traders.
    4. The letter by H.E the President.
    5. The letter from Uganda Revenue Authority.
    6. The newspaper adverts on the verification of claims by South Sudan traders.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay. Thank you.

4.59
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I would like to start by thanking the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for finally coming out and giving us some very vital information, which previously we did not have officially from the ministry.

Madam Speaker, when Parliament debated this matter and took a decision by a resolution of Parliament, there were two categories of Sudan traders. There were the 10 companies the minister is talking about. I did come out very clearly to tell Parliament that after analysing the 10 companies, we reduced them to four. We were able to discover that they would find that in one company, which is among the 10; it was owned by directors or members who are also in the other company. Of the 10, you could actually globalise them into four. It has also been confirmed that the 10 have been paid through the same account; not individual accounts. All these are in our debates, Madam Speaker. 

In addition, we were able to discover that there were 23 other companies that had been verified by the Sudanese Government. Some of them were partially paid and were subject to further verification by Uganda Revenue Authority in Uganda. They were found to be authentic by operation because going through Uganda Revenue Authority means that all the documents were available to confirm that exportation took place legally. 

In the letter from Uganda Revenue Authority, there were some exceptions and reservations, as the ministers stated. There was an issue on a company called Aponye. After that, Uganda Revenue Authority advised that, that issue be looked through more deeply before they are paid. I do not have the details but I think the ministry has them. Hence, that reservation that the minister expressed about the 10 companies could be true. They appeared to be 10 but, actually, those who owned the 10 companies were discovered to be four. That is a fact. 

If you care to analyse it, that is the exact situation. We discussed this. We exposed it but all the same, Parliament decided that we do not mind how much the 10 companies have already received because we did confirm that they were already paid 10 million dollars, as the minister confirmed now earlier on in cash. 

After we passed the resolution, unfortunately, the same 10 companies, in defiance of the resolution that Parliament passed, got another 40 billion. Instead of paying the 10 companies, as we had agreed, together with the 23, who were small indigenous traders, the 23 indigenous traders were not catered for. However, the 10 giant companies still got an additional 40 billion, after we passed the resolution and even passed the budget of 76 billion. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to respond to the minister in this way; first, why would the 10 companies not want to be verified? They went to court, asked for an injunction to restrain any authority to verify them. Why did they do that, and yet the same Government is very willing to pay them the 15 million dollars and then Shs 40 billion? Why is that so? The indigenous small companies that were asking for 10,000, 50,000 and 100,000 dollars had been verified in both South Sudan and Uganda Revenue Authority have not been paid any money. Why is that so? I want that. There must be justice. 

When you talk about court, the Order of Mandamus has been on record as having warned this Parliament that there is a special account where the order of mandamus is paid from; that is the Treasury Operations Account. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is very conversant with that. Some of the people that we work with rush to that particular account in order to make payment of certain things that we cannot, as Parliament, easily verify. 

Madam Speaker, these 10 companies rushing to court, getting an order of mandamus and get the money from the Treasury Operation Account show that they have paid without any further verification by Parliament. That is my own view and I think nobody can challenge me on that because I have been following you on that for quite a long time now. 

Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: Can you propose some solution? 

MS OGWAL: Yes, I would like to conclude by saying, the indigenous companies have been verified and partially paid by South Sudan; Uganda Revenue Authority also verified them. We have the records that were tabled in this Parliament. 

I would like to implore Parliament that, since the 10 companies were paid, whether erroneously or not, with that one, the Government can follow up and recover some money, if they have the opportunity to do that. 

However, the 23 that have been verified, Madam Speaker, for us to really register justice - these are very ordinary indigenous traders. One of them, a lady who had been gun raped in South Sudan, collapsed in hon. Bahati’s office; she is really in a desperate condition. You cannot tell me she is pretending. She is a woman who has been very active in the great trade. 

Therefore, I request that while we wait for all these formalities about ministers, Cabinet and so on, we should authorise the payment of the 23 already verified companies, which were also approved by Parliament on the day we passed the resolution. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to request. 

THE SPEAKER: We have talked about this matter very many times. 

5.07
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we debated the issue of South Sudan traders, we were not making any headway. With due respect to my mother, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, Madam Speaker, we debated this thing in that line. At least, with South Sudan traders, Madam Speaker, I speak with authority because I went to South Sudan. 

Madam Speaker, when we demanded for the payment of the 23 members in that Category 2, the Permanent Secretary, the Minister of Defence and Minister of Finance asked us if you have failed to pay the 10 that we verified. At the time when they had finished supplying, how do you expect to pay the 23 that you want us to verify now? They signed a sovereign guarantee for Government of Uganda to pay on behalf of South Sudan. That is why they asked if you have failed to pay the 10 and now you want to verify the 23; when will you pay them? 

We had the third category, Madam Speaker. We agreed with the authorities concerned that we shall seek an appointment with the President and discuss that because it is a different category that needs to supply the Government of South Sudan directly. The issue here is that the Government of South Sudan, using its authority, verified the 10 companies. They sat with the Government of Uganda and agreed to pay. Why has the minister failed to pay them? 

They have also said, “You verify the 23.” Madam Speaker, we were in South Sudan and talked to the Minister of Trade, the Permanent Secretary and the Minister of Finance here said these people want to form a body to begin the verification exercise. There were some delays. 

I have heard the minister of finance very well; that we have domestic arrears that we have to handle. The moment the minister of finance begins mixing this and the other – for example, we shall bring those ones demanding from Kamuli also on the list so that we demand from Buhweju - and we shall not move forward. 

Madam Speaker, here, we appropriated money for those ones that suffered and lost in South Sudan, not those ones that lost during the COVID-19. What we are saying is; can you pay those that we appropriated money for so that we know that that is over and we begin on another category?

Lastly, we are realising that people are not paying and are dillydallying because they are not beneficiaries. We have seen several payments made from different angles and in one day or two or a weak. This one is taking us ages to clear money that was appropriated.

Madam Speaker, desperate situations call for desperate moves. The people that went to court did not go because they wished to go, it is because some people have stubbornly refused to pay them. Can we use this House - with these several stories of domestic issues; tomorrow they will bring another story; can we have these ones paid, then another category comes and we look at it other than mixing A and B? We need to have this done so that we forget it.

5.11
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for giving us a statement. Whereas we appreciate the financial constraints that the Government has, the honourable minister needs to be considerate in this. Well aware that these people who supplied South Sudan have suffered a lot, some people came on wheelchairs and stretchers when we were investigating this matter, Madam Speaker.

However, when the honourable minister comes here and starts saying that we have so much unpaid groups of people, we are mixing these issues. I would pray that we do not mix up these issues.

We allocated Shs 76 billion- the good thing is that you consented to it; but you are saying that there are reasons as to why you are not paying out this Shs 76 billion. Honourable minister, remember a lot has been debated about the same issue in this Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, I am part of the group, which went to South Sudan, and we investigated this matter. We are taking things in an easy way but we are going to lose out as a country if we do not take this matter seriously. 

I pray that we handle issues one by one. Let us not mix up the issues of COVID-19 with the issue of South Sudan, which were there before COVID. I beg to submit.

5.13
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for speaking for the oppressed. I would like to register my disappointment first, to my elder Omunyoro, Kasaija because I know he is a fighter. However, I would like to call upon his heart to truly turn Ugandan.

Madam Speaker, you sent us to South Sudan after the traders had complained. In our meeting, we interfaced with the ministry of finance because they were part of the witnesses the committee called.

At the time, they informed us that they were failing to pay traders because they had not been verified because the Government of South Sudan had refused to send a team to verify. That is why we thought it was important to go to South Sudan.

We went to South Sudan and we were received. We had realized that there are different categories of traders: the category of the 10 who supplied grain reserves of the country. Their demand was $56 million. They had been paid under a memorandum of understanding $15 million. They remained with a balance of $41 million. Now when South Sudan fell into problems and could not pay, they ran to Government of Uganda and explained to the President.

The President led them with the Prime Minister, the Attorney-General, and the Minister of Finance. They had a meeting and we have those minutes which we laid on Table.

In that meeting, the Government of South Sudan admitted that they acknowledge the debt but were not financially well. The President, as the father of East Africa said, “Okay, on behalf of my traders “- because the traders wanted to go to court. The President restrained them and said, “Cool down, South Sudan is our young country, we shall handle the matter”.

That is what led to a bilateral agreement. In section 5 of the agreement, Uganda agreed to pay on behalf of South Sudan and South Sudan would pay later. In that agreement, it was agreed that South Sudan would verify the traders; it was agreed that they would make a joint team. That is what the Minister of Finance was telling Parliament that South Sudan had not given them a team. 

We reported to you when we came from South Sudan. I even wrote to the Minister of Finance, while we were still in South Sudan that they had agreed to give us a team to start immediately, and I requested him to send our team. 

I sent the documentation to the Minister of Finance. I did not move with the copies, because I knew we had laid them when we were reading the report. I refer you to the report of the Select Committee to South Sudan, which I know you have. I call upon you to read it. All those documents were attached.

Madam Speaker, we carried copies to you. I personally carried a letter addressed to the Minister of Finance when I came back written by his counterpart of South Sudan, including the instrument of appointment of the people who were supposed to attend to the joint team. 

South Sudan informed us that they did not want to be conned. These traders did not supply Uganda; but South Sudan. They said they acknowledge, Uganda agreed to clear so that they could pay later, but Uganda should only pay the people they cleared.

They said they had cleared a team of traders but wondered why a year later Uganda had not been able to clear $41 million and yet Uganda wanted to be given more sovereign guarantees. We had to explain that that was a different category but there were other categories which we explained well. Some of them -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all you are saying is already on the Hansard; it has been said many times.

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: I beg for one minute to conclude. I wanted to put facts right so that this House gets it right - we have always talked about it.

The second category was for those who desired to be verified, of which the Minister of Finance was saying there was no team; but it was formed. 

Madam Speaker, I want to go on record that the traders have never supplied to Uganda but the Government of South Sudan. Uganda undertook the obligation to clear upon verification and agreement by South Sudan, which has already sent a sovereign guarantee of verified people in people’s names. Where do we get the moral authority to say we also want to re-evaluate them? Honourable minister, be fair. You are blocking the payment of others who need to be verified.

Finally, it is a team of ex-gratia. Madam Speaker, we came to you because South Sudan said they were many traders especially from northern Uganda. That is why I disagree with the issue of Uganda Revenue Authority because their records at the border cannot show - Some traders were buying maize from stores of the big traders in South Sudan, as they had established very big markets there, and they would supply. There is this category, including those who lost property and houses, and that is why we brought in the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs. They came in because some Ugandans were doing consultancy services; where does Uganda Revenue Authority come in to verify somebody giving consultancy services?

There are those traders whose machinery was destroyed. These ones were giving services; one was cleaning the city of Juba and then there were some who lost road equipment. How are you going to verify that? However, we agreed. Parliament sent us, we did your work and we agreed with the Government of South Sudan. We sat with three ministers, the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Defence, who was Gen. Manyang at that time, and the Minister of Commerce and Industry, Gen. Mayom. We reached an amicable agreement. Why then should my government fail the people?

In our select committee report, we made proposals. Even when we asked for the Shs 76 billion, we knew that we desired over Shs 1 trillion. We gave a recommendation that was approved by the House that in a situation where our Government cannot absorb – (Interruption) - we can do domestic borrowing. Madam Speaker, we want to be – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude. 

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: How are you going to give economic stimuli when the space for our traders who went to South Sudan has been taken over by other countries? They are bankrupt, they are losing houses and you are now telling them to agree to be paid in five years when bank interests are accruing!

Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development I would like you to remember the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives - on several occasions, you have stood and even written to the banks to hold on, but banks cannot wait anymore. Let us resurrect the plight of the traders. Let my government stand up today and speak for the ex gratia group. That is the one the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is supposed to verify. This is the group whose documents are lacking but they genuinely traded and lost; the ones catered for by South Sudan, who the Government of Uganda is obliged to clear. Kindly, let us resurrect their plight. I thank you.

5.22
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think hon. Ann Maria Nankabirwa has almost said it all. 

Madam Speaker, you sent a team from Parliament. This Parliament’s term is ending and we are going to lose the institutional memory, unless we are saying that the next group of MPs, even those who will not come back, shall come and interrogate the same problem. Time is money. Procrastination - postponing the issue – has now seen the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development bring in another problem of COVID-19. If they had settled the matter earlier, then we would not be suffering with the same problem.

The Committee on Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is being pushed to re-enter the same negotiations. There are small traders who are appealing to the committee but we are saying this matter has already been dealt with. There are big traders but there are also small ones who lost almost everything and now, COVID-19 is compounding the problem. 

We even have more debts of tobacco traders - the ones the President promised. They lost money during the tobacco issue, and they are in Bunyoro and everywhere. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, let the minister not compound the problems on his desk. We are appealing that Parliament makes the final resolution on this matter. This matter has been on the Order Paper for four months. Now that it is being discussed, we are again going away with nothing.

THE SPEAKER: What are you proposing? Can you propose so that we can take a decision?

MR KASULE: Let the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development re-call the committee that considered the matter, sit on a round table together with the traders and solve the matter because they have the records. Otherwise, they should pay using the supplementaries that we pass here every day.

THE SPEAKER: This House took a decision, we appropriated money and there is nothing to discuss but to just pay.

MR KASULE: Honourable minister, you have the money, please pay the traders and we conclude the matter. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.25
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to, first of all, thank you and the honourable members in the House for this spirit. 

The reason why this august House intervened in this matter was because of justice and equity. It was a matter of saving all Ugandans who had participated in trade in South Sudan. 

Now, there are three principles: One, the independence of this House. There is no reason why this House performs its duty of appropriation and undertakes resolutions when the Executive is part of this House and the Executive goes back to negate the resolutions of this august House. 

Hon. Bahati stood before this House and he committed. He asked us to accept that they pay, on grounds that when a thorough investigation is carried out by a select committee of Parliament and a resolution is undertaken, observed and accepted by all Members of this august House, they shall abide as is. What happened later? Today we are coming back and running around in cycles. This was the undertaking that was made by Government on the Floor of Parliament. Therefore, did Government dupe Members of Parliament?

Two, the issue of verification does not arise now. None of these traders supplied your Government. All these traders supplied the Government of South Sudan. Our own committee went to the Government of South Sudan and the Government of South Sudan wrote back saying, “all the traders whose companies and names have been mentioned, indeed supplied our Government”. So, who are you to say no? In any case, this money is for taxpayers of Uganda. The reason they are coming in is to shoulder the burden of the people of South Sudan who could not pay our traders in time. As a result, our traders are in dire economic distress. The issue on which this Parliament intervened was the issue of equity. 

Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, are you here to defy the motion that was passed by this august House? Are you here to defy the resolution that we took during the time of appropriation? Madam Speaker, there is only one solution for our honourable brother. If you want to defy the position of Parliament, you state it but if you still stand by the position of Parliament, you ought to effect the payment. 

You cannot postpone the payment of monies that were appropriated in a House sitting in which you took part. If you had objected at that time, then you should have stated it in this august House that you will not be able to pay. People come to this august House to seek justice and this august House has powers to pay. 

Madam Speaker, we should stand by our resolution that what we adopted from the report of this Parliament. It should be upheld and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development either pays, resigns or we force him to resign.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, since we passed that resolution, no one has come with a motion to rescind our decision. Therefore, the decision of this House stands. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development you have to pay the South Sudan traders. If you do not, we know what to do with you. (Applause)

Please, minister, forget the Cabinet issues, go and pay. Let us go item 3 (ii).

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker and colleagues, I am not defying the decision of this House. It is financial circumstances that are making me move slowly. I have not said, at any given time, that we shall not pay. Please, quote me and show where I said that. All I am saying is two things - (Interjections) - I will come back to that. One, the Government has priorities – (Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With due respect, the minister should also respect the House where he belongs. Madam Speaker, you have made a decision that the minister has no option but to pay. However, the minister is insisting that the Government has priorities. These priorities have come up on the money that we specifically appropriated for South Sudan traders.

The minister said he met the team that he had been asked to amicably settle, and he suggested that he gives them 20 per cent and pays the balance in the next five years. Now the minister is here insisting that it is not lack of willingness to pay but he has no money. So, is the minister in order to say that he has no money when we appropriated that money to specifically pay that particular category? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the money was appropriated for that purpose. So, we want to see you pay that money for that purpose, minister.

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, we always appropriate. The question I raise is: Is all the money that is appropriated released? Releasing money depends on cash because we operate a cash budget. You can appropriate but if the Treasury does not have cash, that cash will not be made available. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not know why the Government has not taken up the option of following up the South Sudan Government to raise money. Why haven’t you done that? Minister, we want a report about this payment in 10 days. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON ALLEGED USE OF GOVERNMENT PROPERTY ON THE DISPUTED LAND IN KIULA CENTRAL FOREST.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, there was a query for both the ministers of works and agriculture about the tractors and equipment in Kiula Central Reserve Forest in Kayunga. Where they yours?

5.33
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On a date I do not recall, I got a call from hon. Nantaba that there was a Ministry of Works and Transport low loader, which was loaded with a bulldozer in Kayunga, Galilaya-Bbaale area.

I carried out a check, and yes it was true; the low loader belonged to the Ministry of Works and Transport. I informed the engineer in chief. He followed up the matter and found out that the low loader was coming from Jinja, where it had delivered culverts to the Jinja Show Ground, which we are tarmacking. On its way back, through Kayunga, at a place called Bukoloto, a Mr Lwanga, formerly a commissioner in the Ministry of Works and Transport, stopped the low loader and requested the driver to go to Bbaale and help him load his bulldozer. 

This was done without any permission from any of the authorities at the ministry. As I speak, the driver of that low loader has been suspended and the low loader is back to the ministry. There were no bulldozers or Ministry of Works and Transport equipment other than the low loader, which was in that area. 

MS NANTABA: Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. There are two ministers who were supposed to respond to this matter. The Ministry of State for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is here and he has not told us why graders or tractors belonging to the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) are also involved in degrading the forest. 

I would like to thank the Minister of Works and Transport. When I found the low loader loading those bulldozers in the middle of the forest, I took photographs and I sent them to the minister and I can attest that he responded immediately. He told me he was going to suspend that driver. However, as I speak, tractors belonging to NAADS are still in the forest, degrading and destroying the forest even when the mother ministry is aware of this misuse. 

Madam Speaker, I beg that the minister presents his statement because the impunity is still going on. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Order Paper reflected two ministers. I do not see the other minister - Oh, he is here. 

5.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to respond to the issue of tractors that hon. Nantaba has put before this august House. 

Government started an effort of giving out tractors to farmers across the country. The tractors are majorly given to organised groups. The organised groups have the mandate to use tractors to open land that they own communally or land that is owned by individual members. However, if the group also allows, they can hire out the tractor for commercial purposes to get some little money to help in the maintenance. 

These tractors are given to farmers. When I spoke to hon. Nantaba, I told her that I wish we could get the number plates to find out which tractor had been given to which group. We would then find out under what circumstances this tractor ended up being used in the destruction of a forest.

Madam Speaker, on the guidelines that are given to farmer groups, some of the issues raised include that they are not supposed to carry bricks for commercial buildings and they are not supposed to carry charcoal. That is getting involved in environmental degradation.

We are taking up the matter, Madam Speaker, because when I spoke to hon. Nantaba, she told me that it is not her responsibility to get us the number plates. Therefore, we are moving on the ground to find out – (Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, a matter that appears on the Order Paper, to the best of my knowledge, requires a response to this House in writing. The minister is just responding to us haphazardly, having a discussion with you and the House without anything written that can remain on the record of the House. Is he proceeding rightly? 

By the time he is even beginning to allege that we need to confirm numbers - I thought that he had done his independent verification and interrogation exercise as the in-charge of the docket, to find out, which tractors those are so that the House is fed on right information. Madam Speaker, is he proceeding rightly by rumour mongering here? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Maybe he has an oral answer, which will be reflected on the Hansard. However, Minister, this matter has been in the public domain for about three weeks; why haven’t you gone there? Why haven’t you sent someone there? It is not very far - Let him answer, please. You know, we have other work. 

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that this matter came up last week but personally, I was not in town. All of us, the ministers in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, have been scattered. Actually, two of us came back to Kampala on Monday and one came in today. I got to know about this matter on the Order Paper this afternoon and I said I would be here to answer because at least I have the issues off cuff. 

THE SPEAKER: Find out the particulars but also, you are expected to send your technical officers here when Parliament is sitting. They are supposed to be here to record what is happening so that they can –

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Speaker, let me ask for some time, until Tuesday next week.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. 

MS NANTABA: Madam Speaker, you recall that I alluded to the same minister as having contacted me to liaise with the people who are destroying this forest. The tractors being talked about here are under his docket - the ones destroying the same forest. I want you to recall that, Madam Speaker.

The degradation is on-going and yesterday, you instructed the Minister of Water and Environment to take action immediately. Today, we were holding meetings in her office, getting ready to move on the ground to remove the tractors. I talked to the minister personally and he told me these tractors were donated to groups in Kayunga. I asked him, “Can you name those groups that you donated these tractors to? Can you give me the number plates of the tractors you donated to them and for what purpose because they are in the forest, degrading a forest reserve that belongs to the country?” Now, he is asking for more days as degradation is on-going, yet the minister is planning to go there and remove the same tractors. 

Madam Speaker, this matter has been on for a long time. I do not think the minister is proceeding well to reluctantly respond to this matter that needs urgent attention. Madam Speaker, kindly intervene. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister is directed to expeditiously establish the equipment which is in the forest, identify the owners, and come back to us immediately. Unfortunately, the honourable member said when she approached you some time ago, you did not appear willing to assist her. That is what she said here in your absence.

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Speaker, I have not scared anyone and I would like to assure this august House that we are going to go on the ground. By the end of tomorrow, we shall have a position. However, tomorrow is Thursday and I doubt whether Parliament will sit on Friday so that we come back here. That is why I had asked for Tuesday to come and report back. Tomorrow, we shall be on the ground, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Please, work with the Minister of Water and Environment because her ministry is also involved, so that you can put your muscles together to eject the intruders. Thank you.

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE INQUIRY INTO MANDATORY INSPECTION OF MOTOR VEHICLES IN UGANDA

5.46
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. For purposes of refreshing Members’ memories on this subject matter, allow me to give a very brief chronology of events.

Madam Speaker, a statement by the Minister of Works and Transport was referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on 29 June 2017. The committee presented a majority report with a minority report on 13 February 2018. Later on, hon. Denis Sabiiti gave a statement of personal explanation clarifying why his name had been mentioned in the report, and that happened on 2 May 2018.

Madam Speaker, on 2 May 2018, the Attorney-General also presented a legal opinion on the matter, as you had earlier on requested him to give an opinion. The House raised points of clarification and the honourable Speaker deferred debate to 3 May 2018. However, after that period, the committee has only received a letter from the Minister of Works and Transport dated 4 June 2020. The letter indicates that so many things have happened and the ministry and even Cabinet took some action, basing on the recommendations of the two reports.

Madam Speaker, I pray that you allow the minister to inform the House on what actions have been taken and we can take a decision thereafter.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Minister of Works and Transport.
 
5.49
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Madam Speaker, as partially stated by the Chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, on 5 May 2018, the Attorney-General presented an opinion to Parliament in support of the recommendations of the majority report, recommending renegotiating the contract and confirming its binding nature to the parties. 

On 12 October 2018, Cabinet authorised the Attorney-General to renegotiate the contract. The Attorney-General referred the matter to my ministry. 

THE ACTIONS TAKEN BY THE MINISTRY OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT SINCE THE MATTER WAS REFERRED TO ME BY THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL

Renegotiation of the Contract with SGS
My ministry initiated contract renegotiations with SGS to review the vehicle inspection fees among other issues, which were raised by the parliamentary committee during the inquiry into the project. A multi-sectoral negotiation team was put in place comprising representatives from my ministry, NEMA, UNBS, Uganda Police Force, and Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. The addendum No.1 was subsequently signed on 8 April 2020 by both the ministry and the SGS, and the addendum is attached to this report. 

ACTIONS TAKEN BY THE MINISTRY OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT SO FAR TO IMPLEMENT THE CONTRACT FOR PROVISION OF MANDATORY MOTOR VEHICLE INSPECTION SERVICES AND ADDENDUM NO.1 TO THE CONTRACT

Since the signing of Addendum on 8 April 2020, my ministry has taken the following actions: 
    1. Formation of the Project Implementation Team. In order to effectively implement the project and also, putting into consideration recommendations of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, my ministry opted to put in place a two-layer multi-institutional project management team comprising the Project Steering Committee and the Technical Contract Management Team. The Steering Committee, to be chaired by the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Works and Transport, will comprise key senior officers from my Ministry (at the level of Commissioner and Director) and Heads of Institutions of NEMA, UNBS and Uganda Police. The committee will be responsible for giving strategic policy guidance on implementation of the Project. 

    2. The Multi-sectoral Technical Contract Management Team (CMT) was also put in place, and it will comprise technical staff from my ministry and National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA), Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) and Uganda Police Force. The CMT will be responsible for managing the day-to-today technical aspects of project implementation. My ministry has already written to NEMA, UNBS and Uganda Police Force through their respective ministries to that effect. 

    3. My ministry is also contemplating on the possibility of handing over the Master Test Centre to the Uganda Police Force after constructing it. This centre will ensure that the ministry is not accused of conflict of interest in case there is a challenge on the results given at the testing centre. This will, in effect, become the Inspector of Vehicles, as it was previously known. This time, it will be an automated system as opposed to the physical system.

In conclusion, the Periodic and Mandatory Motor Vehicle Inspection for road worthiness is a vital component in improving road safety. Every year, the country continues to lose many lives in road accidents that are avoidable. According to the Uganda Police Annual Crime Report, in 2019, we lost 3,880 people in road accidents. This is a huge number of people to be lost in road accidents alone. 

You are also aware of the number of accidents that have been occurring within Kampala where heavy trucks failed to brake leading to loss of innocent lives and damage to public property. Such incidents are very traumatising not only for the victims and their families but also for the entire country. 

For a long time, vehicle inspection in the country was being carried out manually by humans, thereby influencing the outcomes due to subjectivity of the inspector. This manual method of inspecting vehicles not only fuels corruption but also does not guarantee accuracy of results. The introduction of automated vehicle inspection services by the Ministry of Works and Transport through SGS will not only improve road safety and reduction of emissions from vehicles but will also wipe out corruption tendencies associated with manual vehicle inspection schemes where there is a lot of subjectivity by inspectors.

Madam Speaker, these are the highlights of what was renegotiated;
The fees, which was one of the issues, have since been readjusted, for example: 
    • Motorcycles have been readjusted from Shs 54,752 to Shs 22,000;
    • Motorcars and dual carriage purpose vehicles have been renegotiated from Shs 110,212 to Shs 96,000;
    • Light omnibus passenger vehicles have been readjusted from Shs 120,000 to Shs 90,000;
    • Medium omnibus vehicles have been readjusted from Shs 59,000. We have raised this one because originally, the amount of money for testing these vehicles was lower than that of motorcycles. So, this has been raised to Shs 100,000;
    • Heavy omnibuses, which were like buses; their fee was previously only Shs 944 Shs. This has been raised to Shs 120,000; 
    • Light good vehicles have been readjusted from Shs 110,000 to Shs 96,000;
    • Medium goods vehicles have been lowered from Shs 147,500 to Shs 90,000;
    • Heavy goods vehicles have been readjusted from Shs 59,000 to Shs 120,000;
    • Trailers and semi-trailers have been readjusted from Shs 19,760 to Shs 50,000;
    • Agricultural tractors have been readjusted from Shs 54,752 to only Shs 1,000.

The other highlight about the renegotiated contract is that previously this contract was supposed to be a Build, Operate and Own, but in the new contract, it is going to be a Build, Operate, and Transfer. At the end of the term of the contractor recouping his investment, the investment will be a Ugandan property. Those are some of the highlights of the new negotiated terms. 

In conclusion, I request the full support of Parliament to enable the ministry to fully implement the mandatory motor vehicle inspection services so that we improve safety on our roads. Unlike before, there is not going to be time limits for testing the vehicles. Every individual will be encouraged to do the testing. It is not like we will put a time limit for everybody to be there. That will cause a stampede. Instead, people will be encouraged to do the testing. 

We are going to have a session where SGS and the ministry will be able to inform and educate the public about what is expected of them in this exercise. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much. (Mr Okupa rose_) Aren’t you a member of the committee? 

5.58
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, I am a member of the committee but when the chairperson came up – You know, the chairperson posted on our platform the letter written by the minister and the Members said, “To simplify this work, can you call a meeting such that we go through the letter to harmonise and get to know the issues that were raised by the minority report?” 

We are the authors of the minority report. Madam Speaker, I am just shocked that the meeting did not take place and now we are being told here that this is what has happened. If the meeting had taken place and the minister came to present, it would have simplified our work because we would have looked at the nitty-gritties.

I know the chairperson was a member of the majority report, which was rejected. However, I was part of those who wrote the minority report- the minister has now raised issues and I will not ask him, because there were issues regarding the facilities that were built in the wetland; what has to be done? What have you resolved in the agreement regarding those issues where the contractor built in the wetland along Bombo Road; and the ones, which were built in the road reserve in Mbale? What has happened or what have you decided on them? Those are the things we should have internally finished before we brought this matter here.

The second was the issue of the disciplinary action recommended on one member, a commissioner, Mr Ronald Amanyire, who had connived with the company and even went without the knowledge of the ministry to South Africa, to meet with this company and continued working on this issue. What action has been taken against that commissioner? It was recommended that disciplinary action be taken against the gentleman. 
These are some of the issues, which should have been sorted and by the time we came here, we would not have to pull ropes between the minority and the majority reports. The Minister for Works and Transport is here and –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, hon. Okupa, for giving way. Madam Speaker, we also raised a pertinent issue on the quality of the equipment that was going to be installed. The equipment that they brought into the country does not meet the standards for which the checking of the mandatory inspection of vehicles is supposed to observe.

Secondly, we asked why Government cannot take it on right away because we saw that the Ministry of Works and Transport has more competence in taking up that mandatory inspection of vehicles than a private agent. 

Why, for example, would Government guarantee the investor and yet, it has the personnel and it is the very Government that had to guarantee the investor to acquire the money? Why would Government guarantee someone who is incompetent?

Madam Speaker, SGS had been refused in other circles where they wanted to invest. In Uganda, Government did not accept SGS in the previous contracts that they had taken. They were disqualified. Therefore, honourable minister, why are you not putting the record right on why Government had rejected SGS and on the mandatory inspection of vehicles other than bringing them on board, yet, they were blacklisted?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the best way to handle this is to have this matter taken back to the committee and we resolve those issues because we cannot resolve them here. We would then bring a report and show the harmonisation and do a checklist on the issues that were raised by this House; because it approved the minority report, with the issues that needed corrections.

Let this matter be taken to the committee; and we sit with the ministry team, then we shall come back when those issues are harmonised. Otherwise, if we proceed with this as it is, it may be very difficult.

6.03
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. By the time we presented the report, I was a member of that committee. The House debated and adopted the minority report, which I was part of. (Interjections) The chairman is disputing but we shall go on record.

Madam Speaker, we faulted SGS right from the beginning. There were issues that we pointed out, regarding how SGS got the contract. We recommended that if a private company was to be given the contract, then they would have to advertise instead of Government negotiating with SGS. SGS was wrong right from the beginning.

A colleague has talked about Mr Amanyire, whom we faulted for going to South Africa to negotiate and bring information here yet, the other side, the company that he was advocating for was supposed to supervise SGS.

We even said that right from the beginning, SGS was supposed to submit some money to Government according to the contract. SGS did not submit this money. When they realised the issue was coming to the Floor of Parliament, SGS went and put some money. That is on record.

Madam Speaker, when you look at the causes of accidents in Uganda - what SGS was looking at was contributing less than 20 per cent of the causes of accidents in Uganda. Therefore, we said that we have inspectors of Vehicles (IOV) in our Government, why are we investing money in a private company that we did not know how it came on broad.

In our report, we said, when they were applying for the contract, the company that applied was different from SGS, which got the contract. Secondly, the SGS that was here; we brought information of where it failed in its dealings in Russia and other countries.

Therefore, we said in our position that SGS could not qualify to run the mandatory inspection. We requested Government to take over the role and if it could not, it would have to re-advertise so that fair bidding would be put in place and companies compete so that we can get value-for-money. 

That was our position; not having Government to sit with SGS, where Mr Amanyire is still a staff in the Ministry of Works and Transport. 

As said by a colleague, we recommended that Mr Amanyire should be subjected to disciplinary action. The minister did not act on that.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have been looking through records. This matter last came on 14 February 2018 but it was not concluded. The presiding officer during that time said that he would return to the matter. Therefore, we did not vote on either the minority or majority reports.

Therefore, I would like to propose that the minister submits his highlights because he said that he borrowed from both the minority and majority reports. Therefore, we submit them back to the committee and crosscheck how much of the same were adopted, so that we know if there is a balance or not and move on. (Members rose_) I have made a ruling.

GEN KATUMBA:  Madam Speaker, I will oblige.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much for attending and for your patience. Unfortunately, it is already 6.00 O’clock and we are still under curfew. Therefore, I would like to adjourn the House to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.07 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 2 July 2020 at 2.00 o’clock.)

