Thursday, 9 July 2009

(Parliament met at 3.13 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this meeting. I have three items on this Order Paper.

Please, join me in welcoming teachers and pupils of St Clares’ Namengo Primary School, Budaka. They are here to observe our proceedings. (Applause)

The second item is a statement which the Minister for Security wanted to bring last week and I refused because we had deal with the State of the Nation Address. 

The third one is by hon. Hussein Kyanjo concerning the girls who are in Iraq. One of then came to see me today consequent upon our debate she was facilitated to return. So, she came and she has come to me today and she is in the country. She is also prepared to tell her story with her friends. So, if the Minister for Gender is prepared I have the contact of the young lady. 

Then the other one concerns the issue which we have been discussing in the country; famine which we were discussing yesterday. Yesterday, I agreed with the Teso Parliamentary Group that they go to Teso but the Committee on Agriculture would go with them to evaluate the situation and report. I have received a similar request from the Leader of the Opposition but we have agreed that since we took a decision yesterday that the Committee on Agriculture goes round and makes a report on our behalf as Parliament, I have urged him to stay here and the committee should go and make a report. So, I am directing the Clerk to facilitate urgently the Committee on Agriculture to go out and evaluate the situation and report because I am told that it is bigger than the areas we have been talking about. Thank you very much. 

3.33
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to raise issues of importance to the nation. 

One, I would want to thank the Office of the Speaker, the Office of the Clerk, the Office of the commissioners and the office of ICT for installing  a voice system in the lifts in the South Wing. Today the lift has a voice system and I am able to move up and down without a problem. Congratulations! (Applause) And it is not only me, I know that some Members of Parliament have got low vision; some are wearing glasses and in case the glasses got lost, they can use the voice. Thank you very much.

Secondly, we people with disabilities worked very hard to ensure that we have ramps in this Parliament. We have two ramps in the North Wing and one ramp in the South Wing. But to my disappointment, there are some people who are continuously parking on the ramp. And when we go there we struggle to jump over those steps. Please, I am asking you Members of Parliament, staff here and whoever comes to Parliament, through the Speaker, don’t park there. It is written: “No parking.” I thought you have eyes to read but you are not reading -(Laughter)- and I really get disgusted when I have to jump over and I touch a vehicle on our road. Please, inform the Sergeant-at-Arms to arrest any vehicle which is parked there. We feel hurt.

Then lastly, we people with disabilities need gazetted parking places. The parking is there but I don’t have any. I move around and by the time my driver gets parking I have already lost my bearings. So, please can we people with disabilities have gazetted areas for parking and nobody should park there? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Baba Diri. I direct the Sergeant-at-Arms to clear the areas around ramps of cars as they do in other countries. I would also urge the sergeant of the security at Bauman House - I have also heard of    some cases of loss of property in the building. So please take extra care on Bauman premises. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, we people who cross from Bauman House have been facing a problem. We did even communicate to the Sergeant-at-Arms and the Inspector-General of Police to help us clear the boda bodas that are parking at our gates. They managed to remove the MTN booth that was there but boda bodas are there. I don’t know whether they have failed or there is a problem. We want to ask the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Sergeant-at-Arms to see to it that this place is cleared and if need be we would even have a zebra crossing in that place. Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, sergeant, you know that Bauman House is also the precincts of Parliament; so what happens this side should also happen the other side. Please, ensure that there are no boda bodas outside Parliament.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, the issue of a zebra crossing has been under mentioned; but let us have a zebra crossing in that place because you cross that place as if you are a prisoner. You actually have to cross as you are driving because you fear that a boda boda will knock you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Local Government here? Because we need someone to instruct Kampala City Council; Government Chief Whip, please take it up otherwise Members are going to die from stress and accidents. 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I will take it up with the Minister of Local Government. I thank you.

MR AMURIAT: In relation to what is on the Floor, I have also experienced a lot of difficulty finding parking within the precincts of Parliament. Especially some Members who don’t have drivers to search for space, occasionally you could even be blocked where someone comes and parks in front of your vehicle and you have to take time to establish the owner of that vehicle to remove his or her vehicle. I would like to seek the indulgence of your leadership to intervene and save Members of Parliament losing valuable time in search of parking space in an area where they actually perform their duties because this is where we work and I think it would be good for the administration of Parliament to ensure that we are as comfortable as possible. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We shall take it up. We apologise for the inconvenience.  

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.26
THE MINISTER OF SECURITY (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There have been reports in the media about the emergence of new rebel groups threatening the peace in the North and other regions of Uganda -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do appreciate the attempts by the Minister in charge of Security in this country to give us a statement on the state of affairs as far as security is concerned; and this is a statement to which we attach great importance. As has been the tradition of this Parliament, we wish to have copies of this statement so that we can be able to follow. It is not just a matter of passing it across the Table to me; it is about giving it to Members of Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have 300 copies, Mr Minister?

MR MBABAZI: I like the idea of the Opposition Chief Whip giving me names. Madam Speaker, I apologise that these copies were not distributed before I started speaking but I am sure by now they are at the gate. When I came in, I left my staff making copies and they were behind me. So I have absolutely no doubt that even before I finish the first page, they will be here. (Laughter) I just appeal for patience and reason. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, let us stand over it and take one question while the copies arrive. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY BILL, 2009

3.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled The Industrial Property Bill, 2009 be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it seconded? 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, the Certificate of Financial Implications is accordingly laid on the Table in accordance with the Rules of Procedure. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Bill is committed to the relevant committee for perusal and report back. 

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 65/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is anybody standing in for hon. Nampijja? 

3.30
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am standing in for hon. Susan Nampijja, to ask the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development the following question: “Could the minister inform the House whether we as a country got value for money by hosting the Afro-Asian Youth Assembly in March 2008? Were the objectives of hosting the Afro-Asian Youth Assembly achieved in light of the reported poor organisation of the event?”

3.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE, YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS (Ms Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Nampijja for asking this pertinent question but I want to state that in the first place, the ministry has never organised an Afro-Asian youth assembly in Uganda. What we organised was the Afro-Arab youth festival -(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, please. Allow the minister to respond. Proceed. 

MS ALUPO: Madam Speaker, I would therefore like to seek your guidance and indulgence on whether I should answer a question on the Afro-Arab youth festival which we held. Otherwise, in regard to the question that the Member asked, we did not hold that kind of conference in Uganda. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, the hon. Member has asked a very pertinent question. In my simplicity, many of the Arab countries are found on the continent of Asia -(Interjections)- yes, we can go back to geography lessons. Whether it was a typing error or not, all I am saying is that there are many Arab countries in Asia. We would be trivialising this question and the answer that we are expecting if we just decide to limit ourselves to say there is no such a forum. I seek your indulgence. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When we had the first meeting of this session, I informed you that we have many questions which are pending and we also said that we want precise answers and that the Speaker will be rigorous in the process of these questions. If there was no meeting of this nature, there is nothing to discuss.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 66/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF HEALTH

3.35
MR SIMON EUKU (UPC, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Madam Speaker, question number 66/1/08.

 “Could the minister inform the House what plans government has to establish a health centre IV in Kalaki?
b)	Would the minister consider upgrading Kalaki Health Centre III to a health centre IV?”

3.36
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): The overall strategic objective of the Ministry of Health infrastructure development is to consolidate the existing health facilities to enhance the functionality and increase accessibility to health services and equality of health care delivery within the available resource envelope. 

Many health centres have been constructed throughout the country but some of them are not functioning currently. The national accessibility of a health facility within five kilometres is anywhere between 75 to 85 percent. In other words, about 85 percent of the population of this country is within five kilometres of a health facility. 

Kalaki Health Centre III is a functional government health facility located in Kalaki sub-county, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido District. Kalaki County has Lwala Hospital which is a private not for profit hospital or health facility as referral centre for the health sub-district of Kalaki. It is the policy of the Ministry of Health that where a government or a private not for profit general hospital exists, it should be the headquarters of the referral system of the health sub-district. Upgrading Kalaki Health Centre III to IV would mean that the health sub-district will have two referral centres. This will result in splitting the primary health care funds allocated to the health sub-district to these two facilities leading to gross under-funding. Because of this reason, there is no need of upgrading Kalaki Heath Centre III to health centre IV. Instead the services at the health facilities should be improved to meet the health needs of the population of that sub-district.

In the Financial Year 2009/10, the focus of the ministry will be to functionalise all the health centres which have been constructed, completing and rehabilitation of the works started in Tororo, Bududa, Kambuga, Itoojo, Nebbi, Apac, and Rushere general hospitals. In addition to this, eight health centre IVs, 36 health centre IIIs, 75 health centre IIs will be connected to power as energy resource, ultra sound equipment and generators will be supplied and installed in three general hospitals. Theatre equipment will also be supplied to 11 health centre IVs. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.39
MR SIMON EUKU (UPC, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Is the minister aware that because of this gap in policy implementation, Kalaki constituency has been denied government responsibility in health service delivery that has resulted in a number of deaths that should have been avoided? 

The statistics show that in 2006/07, we had a child mortality rate of 15 percent; maternal mortality rate was six, giving a total of 21. In 2007/08, we lost 19 children, 10 mothers giving a total of 29; and in 2008/09, we lost 29 children, 11 mothers giving a total of 39.

Two, is the minister aware that Kalaki constituency will not accept Lwala Hospital as an alternative to Kalaki health centre IV because to consolidate that we –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are creating new questions. Just ask supplementary questions arising out of his answer, please.

MR EUKU: I oblige.

3.41
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have some clarifications to ask from the minister. From the answer given, I understand that because there is a privately owned hospital not for profit for referral, there is no need to provide another government facility like the health centre IV being proposed. In terms of responsibility, control and management, what control does government have on a private establishment? How will government ensure that the government policies and practices are implemented within the private health unit should there be a difference? 

I would also like to refer to Gulu for example. We have Lacor Hospital which is at the level of a national referral hospital, but still we have pertinent great needs which the government hospital which is Gulu regional referral hospital and Lacor coming together which they find difficult to manage.

Wouldn’t it be convenient in the interest of increasing the capacity of Uganda’s health management to provide a health centre IV as well as to encourage the private health unit to develop and share the burden of disease in Kalaki? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, on policy issues, we are going to have a general debate on the Budget. We are also having a State of the Nation. Please, focus on Kalaki.

3.43
MS BETTY AOL OCAN (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to just give this supplementary question on Kalaki because there is that private hospital and other private health units. In some countries like Rwanda, private health centres are treated the same way as government hospitals. Is there a way of doing it here so that private health centres and those of government serve people equally? (Mr Atubo rose_) Hon. Minister of Lands, this is for Minister of Health, not for lands. We can –(Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Aol to mislead the House that I am not listening to her? I was only asking her whether she is a spokeswoman for Rwanda. That is all. (Laughter)

3.45
MR PETER JULIUS EMIGU (FDC, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is the minister aware that the Lwala Hospital he talks of is one of the most expensive hospitals around and even clinics around it are slightly cheaper in spite of the fact that the government subsidises it?

Secondly, is the minister aware it is a missionary hospital and therefore the power that controls it lies with the Bishops and therefore the government does not have any power and they cannot determine the charges in the hospital?

In paragraph two, the minister is saying upgrading Kalaki health centre III to health centre IV would mean that health service delivery will have two referral centres. What is wrong with having two referral centres?

The next question is still on the paragraph where he says: “This will result in splitting primary centre funds allocated to health centre delivery.” Will these two health facilities lead to gross under-funding? Because of this reason there is no need of upgrading health centre III to health centre IV. How will there be no need honestly when we think services will go to the people?

The minister says many health centres have been constructed throughout the country, but some of them are not functioning. Doesn’t the minister feel ashamed to make such a statement when actually we want functioning hospitals? Are you really in charge as a minister? (Laughter) And even the way he appears, he does not seem to be ashamed at all. What have you done to remove the shame if you are ashamed at all, Mr Minister?

3.48
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Minister, would you educate Members whether this policy, applies to health centre IIs as well, of having no health centre II at the parish level where there is a lot for profit health centres in such a parish?

Are you aware that most of these health centres charge very high fees which the populaces are not able to pay, as they go for the service at the health centre IIs?

Lastly, would you consider changing this policy just for the betterment of the country? Thank you.

3.49
MR JOHN EMILLY OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The money is normally sent to the hospitals that are private not for profit. I would like the minister to be aware that even when money is sent there to facilitate these hospitals, they still charge very high fees for treatment and that is all over the country. Where ever you go, even in Serere you find the same thing. What is the ministry going to do to make sure that the money which is sent there is of benefit to the population not through overcharging?

In the response of the minister, he talked about theatre equipment which will be supplied to 11 health centre IVs. But it is now more than 10 years since Serere health centre IV theatre was constructed and there isn’t enough equipment. Is Serere Health Centre IV among the 11 now that Serere is soon becoming a district?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please focus on Kalaki.

3.50
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, Kalaki is now Dokolo. Is the minister aware that Kalaki health centre IV is not only for Kalaki but for all the districts near and bordering Kaberamaido district? Is the minister aware that most people from Dokolo are referred to Kalaki as a health centre IV?

3.51
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Madam Speaker, I am going to start with Dokolo. I am not aware that the people from Dokolo go all the way to Kalaki for treatment. It is quite a distance but if they are going to Lwala that is proper because that is a referral hospital.

On the question of the charges, when you look at the amount of money these health centres charge, it is affordable and besides, they will not deny services to anybody who goes there. Those are the missionary institutions. They will not throw you out and that is the agreement they have with the government. They will ask you to pay slowly. If you cannot afford they usually do not follow you up. I speak for a fact. Tell me anybody who has ever been imprisoned because -(Interruption)

MR EUKU: Madam Speaker, is the minister in order to deceive us that the charges are affordable and yet I am presenting to this House a crisis that we are facing in Kalaki? How more informed is he than me who is on the ground? Why would I have brought up this question? Is he in order to mislead this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, please explain to us what you consider affordable because perhaps you are not on the same wave length. You are saying it is affordable but he is saying it is not. Can you explain to us what you consider affordable?

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, I am aware of the charges at most of the missionary institutions in this country. They charge Shs 2,000 or Shs 4,000. If you are going to spend a night, sometimes they will charge about Shs 2,500 a night. Surely, I have seen some of these -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank Dr Mallinga, the Minister of Health, for letting me seek this clarification from him.

I know of a number of missionary founded hospitals that are supported through subventions from the Ministry of Health. I have personally had patients taken and treated by them. An example is Kuluva Missionary Hospital in Arua. The minister is telling us that patients who go to Kuluva, for example, or to Oriajini in Terego, or to Ovujo - I want to educate you minister that people are not charged only Shs 2,000. The whole of last year I took my own father to Kuluva Hospital and I paid over Shs 100,000 for the services. 

So, is the minister really telling us the truth? There are people suffering. The issue of Shs 2,000 does not arise. The minister is misleading us. Can you shed more light on that? I have given you an example of the hospital that even receives subvention from government.

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, I do not know what the honourable member’s father was suffering from. As you know, you are charged in hospital according to what kind of disease you are suffering from and what sort of services you utilise in that hospital. I do not know what he was suffering from. If you told me I would give you a rough idea of how much he should have been charged. Shs 100,000 for a Member of Parliament is not too much. (Laughter)

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, a few minutes ago, the minister informed this House that charges at those missionary hospitals are Shs 2,000 and Shs 4,000. Those are the flat charges. Now he is telling us that it depends on what you are suffering from. If it is Syphilis -(Laughter)- then maybe the charges will be higher but if it is Malaria perhaps they will be low. Is the minister in order therefore to dispute the figures that were given by a hon. Member who actually paid these charges?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, but hon. Members, the minister rightly said that he does not know what Mzee Wadri was being treated for or how long he stayed there. He may have stayed there for two months. But we shall deal with the issues of cost when we are dealing with the budget now let us deal with Kalaki and upgrading. Minister, please answer.

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, I think I have already explained very clearly to the honourable member from Kalaki that we send PFC funds to every health district and that is why when there is a missionary or a private not-for-profit institution in the same health district, we send the money to the referral institution which in this case is Lwala Hospital -(Interruption)

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from Dr Mallinga. Take Kumi County, for example, where you have Atutur Hospital and Kumi Hospital; in this case are you not sending funds to both? We even have Ngora Hospital. 

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, there is no Kumi government hospital; that is Atutur. So, which one do you mean? [Hon. Members: “Ongino”] Ongino is not a government hospital. It was a Leprosy Centre and the reason we have converted it into a general hospital is because there are no lepers anymore -(Laughter)- but the government of Germany is still sending the money. So to utilise that money we decided to open up a general hospital. Otherwise, everybody in Teso knows that that was a leprosy centre. The money is being utilised at Ongino, which has a board, which got permission from the Germany Government to use that money for the general treatment of the people in that area.

To summarise this, I would like to explain to the hon. Members of Parliament that we did this because of limited resources. That is why we are trying to strengthen the institutions that we have at the moment. If we are going to spend money at Lwala and at the same time spend it to upgrade the health centre III at Kalaki, it would be a very unreasonable way of spending the money. 

What I said was that the missionary hospitals in this country do not charge exorbitant fees. Most of them are affordable. Give me a single person’s name that has ever been imprisoned because he failed to pay a bill at a missionary hospital. It does not happen! Missionaries are here –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us get to the next question.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 68/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT

4.02
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): “Would the Minister inform the House when Government intends to tarmac the Mbarara-Kikagati-Kitwe Road that Connects Uganda to Northern Tanzania and Rwanda? 

Is the Minister aware that the said road is currently impassable? 

Would the Minister inform the House about the immediate measures his Ministry is contemplating to make the road motorable to alleviate the suffering of the people in the area?”

4.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS (Mr John Byabagambi): Madam Speaker, on the first question from hon. Alex Byarugaba, the MP for Isingiro South, I would like to say that the road that is going to be upgraded in the immediate future is the Mbarara-Kikagati Road. The Kikagati-Kitwe Road is on the list but we have not got funding for it. 

The Mbarara-Kikagati Road is going to be tarmarcked using the design and build method. The pre-qualification bids have already been received. The tender was advertised sometime back and they are now in the evaluation stage. We anticipate that we shall send out the construction bids by the end of August. We expect the contractor to start work by December 2009.

On the second question I would like to say that it is true that sometime back there were crossing culverts that were washed away at a place called Kakunzo, located on Kikagati-Kitwe Road. These culverts have now been replaced, and I can report that the whole stretch of Mbarara-Kikagati-Kitwe is now passable. 

I can also report that we already have got a vote on account for working on this road. The people working have not gone very far because they started only last week, but they are already on the ground.

On the third question I would like to say that yes, we have to keep this road motorable until it is upgraded. That is why is there is a vote on account for that road.

4.05
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, I thank you. I also thank the Minister for his attempted response to my question. However, if my memory serves me right, just last weekend I was in my constituency and I can report that the spot he talked about had not yet been worked on. The road is still very bad. Unless he is assuring me, and this august House, that the work was done during the course of these few days – Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday - otherwise as of Friday, Saturday and Sunday this road was still as bad as it had always been. If it has been worked on within these days - which I doubt very much - well and good, and I would like him to give me that assurance. 

I am saying this because this is an area that is very densely populated but extremely productive. I can inform you that three-quarters of the banana that you see being sold in Kampala, Mbale, Soroti, Busia –(Interjections)– not Soroti, sorry. (Laughter) I withdraw Soroti, but Busia –(Interjections)– Honestly, let us stop at that; I know the suffering that the people of Soroti are going through. I have friends from there and I do – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are now submitting on the use of the road. We only need a supplementary.

MR BYARUGABA: I would like to ask him to assure us. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, can you assure us? But before that, let us hear form hon. Byanyima.

4.07
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This particular road in question was got out of a contract. Because a number of contractors were not performing well, the vote on account was opted for. However, it is so disappointing to inform you that from the time the road was taken over by the central government, the work being done is almost similar to the shoddy work of the contractors.

Two, this is an eye-opener. Let the Minister tell us the timeframe within which the contractor will start working on that road.

Three, the same thing should be done for other roads. We should not be kept in suspense in the future. We want a timeframe. You have been given enough money, up to Shs 1.1 trillion, which has not been accounted for. Please, let this House be informed on the timeframe for each road so that people can be assured when the roads will be made.

I would suggest that in future when such a question comes, look at Uganda as a country for all of us here. Do not look at isolated cases because those ones are quite many. Look at the Suam-Kapchorwa Road, Karamoja Road and so on. They are always only on paper. 

4.09
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (Kinkizi County, East, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the Minister for his response though it was not written as our rules require.

I just have one supplementary question. The Minister said they are going to construct the road using the design and build technique, which means fast tracking. Can the Minister tell us the criteria the ministry uses to identify the roads where you use the design and build technique? The Rukungiri-Kanungu Road was designed a long time ago and you were not using this technique, so can you give us the criteria that you follow?

4.09
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to ask the Minister to clarify to this House what standards we expect on the road, both in terms of the geometric design and the surface finish. I am asking this question because I realise the traffic that passes on that road is heavy, and we do not want to have a narrow road constructed in this place like the one between Soroti and Lira. I would also expect that this road should have asphalt concrete rather than chippings.

Secondly, I would like to find out from the Minister about the source of funding for this road and how long this road has been in the plans by the ministry. Also, how much money has been secured for this road?

Thirdly, on the same road that we are talking about, that is Mbarara-Kikagati, I would like to know from the Minister how his ministry handles cases of emergency. This road should be treated as an emergency but I am surprised that it is taking forever to fix a mere line of culverts. 

This is not the first road on which we are experiencing such sluggishness. There is a time when the Tirinyi Road had a problem where a culvert around River Mpologoma collapsed and it took months to be repaired. People had to take diversions of so many kilometres to get round to Mbale via Butumba Bridge. It would appear as if –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you should ask: what is the time frame within which you respond to emergencies? That should be the question.

MR AMURIAT: Do they have a policy on handling emergencies on roads?

4.11
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): I have just heard from the Minister that the funding for this road is in the medium term. However, last year we passed Shs 1.1 trillion but we have not seen the roads that have been worked on. This is the money that should have been used for working on this road. Where have they put that money? We passed it here and we have not seen the roads. 

4.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS (Mr John Byabagambi): Madam Speaker, I think the question was on the Kikagati Road. It was on the Kikagati road and I prepared answers on that road. If you want answers on Shs 1.1 trillion and how it is being used, wait until I am responding on that and I will give you all the data.

On the additional question by hon. Alex Byarugaba, that he was there last week and the road was as bad as it was, I was there on Monday and I found our grader working on that road from Mbarara side. I want to ask hon. Byarugaba to take another trip and go to Kafunzo either today or over the weekend. He will find that the road from Kitwe to Kikagati is now passable because the culvert is fixed. It did not take us long; it was about three weeks. 

My friend, hon. Amuriat, knows the procurement system, so to install culverts using a contractor in three weeks I think is commendable. The least you should have said is that we worked very fast.

Hon. Byanyima, my former chairman, it is only about a week ago that we started using force account on that road. It has worked for only one week. I do not know how you are going to compare the work, which has been done for only one week with the work which was done by the contractors about two or three years ago. Please wait until the road is finished and then we can start comparing. 

What I want to tell you is that we are re-shaping the road. It was worked on about three years ago and re-gravelled, but because of the heavy traffic, it has deteriorated very fast so we have gone back to re-shape and not to re-gravel it. These are two different things all together. 

Members wanted to know the exact time that the contractor will be on this road. I have stated that by the end of December 2009, we expect a contractor to be on this road. I am not saying they will be there by 15th or 1st because sometimes we meet obstacles in the procurement process. You can procure and another contractor protests and you have to follow the PPDA regulations. Somebody can raise this in the administrative review and you need another month to solve that issue of administrative review. Therefore, if everything goes as planned, by the end of December we shall have the contractor on the road.

On the issue of other roads, I think again we were talking about Isingiro road. I have a response here that I am going to give you concerning these other roads in other parts of the country. I will explain and give the time schedule for each road and when it will start. For now, the answers, which I prepared, were specifically on Isingiro road. I will not go in for Kapchorwa, Suam and others until that particular time.

On the technique, design and build is not a new technique but has been used worldwide. It is just because Uganda has been lagging behind because of lack of money. All the money that we have been using has been from either loans or grants and therefore we had to follow their conditions of tendering. We have brought in this technique because we now have our own money and we can also use the fast tracking of procuring road contractors.

On the criteria of Kanungu-Kihihi, yes this was designed some time back but factors on the ground have changed. The vehicular traffic has changed, internal rate of return has changed and as such, we are going to review the whole design.

What is the design of this road? It will be a normal road because the traffic counts and load bearing of a stone and chipping can suffice at present. It is going to be a surface dressed road and not asphalt concrete. Asphalt concrete is a very expensive road. Of course it has high load bearing capacity, but it is very expensive and we cannot afford it at this stage with the amount of money we have.

Madam Speaker, I think those were the additional questions.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 69/01/08 TO THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT

4.20
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): “Could the Minister of Works and Transport apprise the House on the progress of constructing 30 modern landing sites with proceeds from the Fisheries Improvement Loan that Parliament approved in 2002? 

Would the Minister explain why it has taken so long to appoint the Executive Director of the Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation?”

4.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES (Mr Fred Mukisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The contract to undertake the designing of landing sites was awarded to MBW Consulting Engineers. This exercise was done in 2007 and the designs for the 30 landing sites were done and they are available and ready.

On the progress, so far construction of the landing sites has been signed for and these have been done in three lots. Lot one was awarded to Spencon, and this comprised of six landing sites that include Mwena, Kitobo in Kalangala, Bugoto and Bwonde in Mayuge, Gulofa in Bugiri and Majanji in Busia. All these are about 90 percent complete and we expect that –(Interruption)

MR KAKOBA: Madam Speaker, I would like to be guided because when I look at the question, it is directed to the Minister of Works.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the Speaker knows who is going to answer. I have said Agriculture. Proceed.

MR MUKISA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I was saying, these should be ready by the end of this month and we expect that they should be handing them over. 

The next lot comprised of four landing sites and these were: Bukungwe in Kamuli District, Butyaba in Buliisa, Kiyindi in Mukono and Rwampange in Nakasongola. This was contracted to Dembe Liberty Joint Venture. So far, about 35 percent of the construction work has been covered and the contractor expects to complete this work by October this year.

Lot three comprises of two landing sites Kagwara in Soroti and Namasale in Amolatar. This was awarded to MS Ampa Technical Services and mobilisation work has started. 

The delays were due to problems encountered in securing land free of encumbrances, and this was because the donor demanded proof of ownership of land before tenders could be awarded.

The second part of the question was about the Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation (LVFO) Executive Director. The Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation Executive Director has actually been appointed. He was previously the Commissioner for Fisheries. He handed over office on 30 June 2008 and he is comfortable in his new post. I thank you.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for having given us the opportunity to bring up this question. You can imagine this was a question I raised in January 2008. 

In 2002, we passed this ADB loan for 30 landing sites: 13 on Lake Victoria, six on Lake Kyoga, six on Lake Albert, three on Lake Edward and one on Lake George. What we have seen here is that they are not even complete, as this is 12 out of the 30. This loan was for five years running, from 2003 to 2008; and this is less than 50 percent of what was supposed to be done. I want to know from the honourable minister: now that the time of the loan came to an end, what timeframe do we have for completing the 12 you have given and the 18 remaining landing sites? I have a list here of all 30 landing sites. 

Secondly, he has raised the issue of Kagwara on lot three, which is being procured now. In 2004, I secured a land title for this landing site, so the explanation about placing Kagwara in the third lot is not true. I remember that during the budget debate, this matter came up and you directed the Auditor-General to have a special audit of this project. I wonder whether the Auditor-General has now submitted the report because you had given the Auditor-General one month. Maybe you could direct the Office of the Clerk to secure for us this report because these were issues, which we raised at that time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In relation to that, the Auditor-General conducted an audit and he gave me a report, which I passed on to the chairman of the Committee on Agriculture; can you report on this matter because I gave you the report?

THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Lastus Serunjogi): Madam Speaker, we received the Auditor-General’s report and we are analysing it. We will be reporting to the House in two weeks time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But it is a bit of time since I passed it on to you. 

MR SERUNJOGI: We have just received the report, but we are analysing it and we shall be reporting to the House. 

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, you are right. You directed that the Auditor-General provides us with a report. This morning we received the special audit report in the Committee of Agriculture.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This morning?

MR ODIT: Yes, this morning in our committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no! I sent that report to that committee more than four months ago. So, if it came this morning, there must be a problem. 

MR ODIT: Yes. As a member of the Committee on Agriculture, we officially received the special audit report this morning. I have my copy. What we are doing now –(Mr William Nsubuga rose_)-  there is no contradiction. 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank my colleague for accepting the information. We received the audit report towards the end of the last session but this morning we drew up a programme to meet the ministry officials together with the Auditor-General. We actually received the report sometime back but you know with the work of Parliament, we were busy then.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Otherwise, you were casting doubt on my office. 

MR OKUPA: I will reserve some of the questions to be handled at the time we get that report but on question No.2, about the appointment of the director of Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation, I am surprised. This is because when Members raised that issue, one of the issues was in regard to the Commissioner Fisheries at that time, who has now taken up this position at Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation. 

May I also find out from the Minister; I am in receipt of information that there were two officers who qualified for this position but along the way, one of the officers who had qualified was denied the opportunity and this commissioner whom we had queries about took up the position. I want you to comment on that.

Secondly, the commissioner who left to become director left in June last year, no wonder we have problems in the fisheries sector because the position has never been filled. Dr Mwanje was appointed to act but along the way, he was removed from this acting position and they have now given three people to act in this position - the Director of Animal Resources and two assistant commissioners. How are they operating? Thank you.

4.30
MS JULIET SEKITOLEKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I sit on the Committee of Agriculture and I have been on this committee for quite some time. The Minister knows very well that we have been visiting these sites with him and I am very surprised with his answer. I would have thought that he would in fact have asked Parliament to help him because he knows very well that this loan has backfired. He knows very well that this programme is ending in January next year and over 12 sites have not been constructed. As for the ones that have been constructed, the work has been poorly done. 

I am very surprised with the Minister’s answer. I therefore would like to ask you, Madam Speaker, to rest this matter because my committee today laid out a programme on how we are going to move, and we are determined to bring to Parliament a full report concerning this matter. Thank you. 

4.32
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you. I would like to ask the Minister some supplementary questions. Like my colleague has said, is he aware that out of the 30 landing sites, only 10 have been started and not completed and that the performance of this loan has been put at less than 25 percent? Is he aware that in this anomaly, taxpayers have lost money to the tune of over Shs 2 billion in what we call co-funding? Is he aware that the forensic audit by the office of the Auditor-General says that by 2007 when this loan was meant to expire, nothing much had been done apart from the aspect of training of their own staff who used this to benefit themselves by going to train abroad?

4.33
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): I would like the Minister to tell this House; when we passed this loan, every landing site was supposed to have an ice cooling plant and some other facilities, where did the officials in the ministry get the permission to chop off some of those facilities? I have been to Bugoto Landing Site and Bukungu; in these places, that facility was actually chopped off. This means that the cost would be less. So, could he inform the House who gave this permission to cut off these kinds of facilities?

Secondly, I would like the Minister to comment on Spencon. What is so special with Spencon? Spencon is the one that got most of the contracts and when the contracts were got –(Mr Piro Santos rose_)- can you give me time, honourable?

MR PIRO SANTOS: Thank you. I would like know whether it is procedurally right to discuss this matter of the loan of fisheries of 2003 when this House referred the matter to the Auditor-General, and the report has come back and the committee right now is discussing the matter and will bring it to the Floor for discussion? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, the questions were asked and my office undertook to clear all the outstanding questions, and this was one of them. But if you agree, we can hold on until you bring the report because I have got a copy of the report. 

MR KUBEKETERYA: What is special with Spencon that it got most of the contracts? In Mayuge, you find a machine being taken to Bugoto, it takes about two days and the same machine is taken to Bwonda, and this actually has delayed the works. So, what is special with Spencon or do we only have Spencon in this country to get these contracts?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, what do you want us to do?

MR SERUNJOGI: My request is that we defer the debate on this matter since the committee is already handling the Auditor-General’s report. It will be prudent to debate it at that time after we have analysed the report so that we can respond to this matter in totality. That is my prayer, Madam Speaker.

MR WADRI: I have due respect for my Vice-Chairperson of the Agriculture Committee of this Parliament, but these are specific questions asked of the Minister and when the committee comes with its report about the results and outcomes of the forensic audit by the Auditor-General’s office, it will be a wider debate. Here are issues where the minister has specifically been asked questions which demand specific answers. I will beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker, that the Minister answers these questions as they are being addressed to him. The general debate that will ensue there after when the committee brings his report is a different matter but these are specific questions. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Member I am the one who instructed the Auditor-General to conduct an audit and that one of the questions holds the gist of what we asked the Auditor-General to do; so  that one could wait but part 2 was not on the audit so can you answer on part 2? 

MR MUKISA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will answer part 2 as directed. Yes, there were two applicants and one of them was disqualified; I don’t do the recruitment; one of them was disqualified and I had to put in one name for Cabinet to approve. The one who took the job was Dick Nyeko the former Commissioner for Fisheries. It is true the person who has been acting, Dr Mwanja was replaced by the PS; three people were put in his place to work and I am trying as best as I can to work with them. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So can I ask the Committee on Agriculture to handle it quickly because I have an interest in that area since many parts of my area touch the water? (Laughter) Can you please handle it quickly?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.39
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT IN CHARGE OF SECURITY (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I had started saying earlier on, there have been reports in the media about the emergence of a “new rebel group” threatening the peace in the North and in other regions of Uganda. There was talk including among some Members of this august House that this so called rebel group was the creation of government intended to victimize them or some of their colleagues ahead of the 2011 general elections.  

It is my duty and that of government to shed light on these reports and allegations and to firmly assure the nation that there is absolutely no cause for alarm and the government is in complete control. I wish now to share with you some of the information that has been gathered and verified by   security services regarding this group.

In September 2008, intelligence received information on a new armed group emerging in Masindi District. The group identified as Uganda Peoples Front was mobilizing and recruiting fighters in Bweyale, Kigumba and Kiryandongo for onward training in a camp that had been established in Murchison Falls National Park.

The security services conducted operations and the camp was neutralized. Fifteen suspects were arrested in connection with these activities. The suspects revealed that they belonged to the Uganda Peoples Front a new armed group with headquarters in Nairobi. Out of the 15 suspects arrested, the following six were charged before court in Masindi with cases of treason and misprision of treason: Ogaga Owonga, Ochama James, Oundo Charles, Jama John, Okuku Obur and Odok Gwok Salim. 

A UPDF training camp in Murchison Falls National Park Falls was overrun and destroyed. One SMG with 10 rounds of ammunition, 1 hand grenade and 1 pair of camouflage uniform were recovered. 

Having neutralized UPF’s mobilisation attempts in Masindi, the group changed tactics and started clandestine mobilisation in Gulu, Amuru and Pader districts. They re-established their coordination lines with elements in the United Kingdom and the United States of America; held meetings in Nairobi and re-launched a new phase of recruitment in Northern Uganda. 

Further security intelligence work led to the discovery of the new recruitment rackets in Gulu and Pader in March this year. Preliminary security operations led to the arrest of UPF’s coordinator, Komakech Patrick in Namuwongo, Kampala on 6th March 2009. He was in possession of equipment which was recovered including one satellite phone, one global positioning system, one solar panel, first aid kits and documents. His arrest led to the subsequent apprehension of other four key leaders of UPF in Gulu and Pader namely: Okot Alex Langwen also known as 12, Apar Bichi, chairman for Uganda mobilisation, Otim Patrick also known as Pader mobiliser, responsible for arms and ammunition, Lt Okello Phillips Onekmon former Lords Resistance Army Commander now integrated in UPDF; he is a commander in UPF, Lt Emmy Mwaka, also a former LRA integrated into the UPDF. 

Further intelligence on this group led to the following: it led to the arrest of most of the key mobilisers in the country including Otim John the main link with Joshua Abonga in Nairobi who was arrested on 5th June 2009 and these operations also led to the recovery of 17 sub-machine guns on 7 June 2009 that had been hidden in Latanya hills and 37 walkie-talkies, two satellite phones, one solar panel, 21 pairs of gumboots, five rolls of polythene sheets, five back packs, one satellite charger, one first aid kit, one GPS, two laptop computers, one plastic boat, one life jacket and 50 voters cards.

Meanwhile five more suspects have been arraigned in the courts of law on similar charges to those of their colleagues. So, they are 11 that have been charged with the same offences. Another two suspects in the names of Patrick Kidega and Sgt Deo Menya, a police officer in the Emergency Mobile Unit, have been arrested. The process of charging them in the courts of law is underway. 

Financial and other material support is mainly from Ugandans living abroad who coordinated and financed the LRA but were sidelined by Joseph Kony during the Juba Peace talks. They have since been trying to form another armed group. 

One or two Congolese and some Kenyans and other foreigners as well as organisations based in Kenya have extended assistance of one form or another. Some of those coordinating the activities of this new rebel group such as Alex Okot and Ali Komakech were arrested and detained in Luzira in 2006 as members of the LRA. They were released under the Amnesty Law. 

The group was preparing to start ambushes on the Kampala-Karuma road and attacks on military units in areas around the Murchison National Park. Some key leaders are still on the run but their time is obviously running out and the law will soon catch up with them. 

The group listed in the newspapers does not include those arrested in Murchison National Park. These were arrested later on various days in Gulu, Pader and Bweyale and honourable members already know the names from the newspapers and these are: Patrick Otim, Alex Okot Langwen, Patrick Komakech, John Otim, Patrick Okello also known as Ocii, Jimmy Oceng also known as Billy, Lebel Alfred Olonya, Francis Akena –(Laughter)- I must sympathise with Akena, Lt Philip Onekmon also known as Kikoko, Lt Emmy Oryem and Michael Obol. 

I wish to point out that these are preliminary findings and investigations are continuing. I also wish to call upon the public to volunteer any information they come across concerning this group to the security services or to the army.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, there is no doubt that you are all aware of how terrorism negatively affects the development of a country and economic progress of individuals there in. You are also all aware that there has generally been calm in the security situation in the county particularly in the North after the LRA terrorists had been confined to areas far outside Uganda. The people of Northern Uganda especially the Acholi sub-region, like their neighbours in the greater North, have been settling down to a near normal situation. The people continue returning to their homes from the camps and resuming their normal duties. 

I would like to assure the general public that the security and peace that has been prevailing in the country will not be interrupted. The security services are fully alert and working round the clock to ensure that peace and tranquillity are maintained. No efforts by any group of people or individuals will take away that peace. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the statement is under rule 40(i), so it is not really for debate but you can ask some elucidatory questions for 15 minutes. Let me start with hon. Otada. 

4.52 
MR OTADA OWOR (NRM, Kibanda County, Kibanda): Thank you. I want to thank you for the opportunity and to thank the minister for the statement. My constituency has been widely mentioned in this report because when you talk about Bweyale, Kigumba and Kiryandongo, and when you talk about the Kampala-Karuma highway, then you are actually talking about the entire Kibanda County, which I represent. 

This particular subject matter has been a point of concern to my people. Actually, last weekend when I was in my constituency the people asked to put this matter to Government for clarity and I am happy that the minister has brought this statement here today. I just have two points that I want to seek clarification on. 

One, I had heard before that there was a camp in the Murchison Falls area that was rounded and overrun by the military sometime ago and eventually, I heard that 26 people were arrested, taken to Masindi barracks and eventually transferred to somewhere. Subsequently, I also heard that these people were actually found to be poachers in the game park. 

I want the minister to clarify that information because I have not heard, in my wide consultation in my constituency, any concerns of security of any nature in these areas that have been mentioned, save for the Murchison Falls incident that I have just talked about.

Two and finally, on page 2, the minister says that security conducted operations and a camp was neutralised and 15 suspects were arrested. In 2(b), out of the 15, six people were charged in Masindi Court. I want to know what happened to the other nine. Thank you.

4.56
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement and for his personal and official effort to bring about peace. I would also like to thank government because the minister is saying that the Northern region is regaining its peace. 

I somehow got lost as the minister made an absolute statement that there was no rebel threat, yet on page 5 he says that these are preliminary findings and investigations are continuing which means that the situation is not yet confirmed. I would like to appeal to the minister and invite him to play his national role because on an issue like this, he should not look at one region. He should come to the Floor when he has got a national perspective. 

For about a year now I have had very nasty incidents in Masaka. We have lost children and adults but we have never been told by any minister about what is happening. In fact Kyanamukaka these days has become a very common name to everybody in the country. But, unfortunately, we have not arrested people who are causing insecurity in our place. If there are some cases that have been highlighted, not everybody who has been affected has been guided. 

Therefore, I appeal to the minister to widen his interest so that he can highlight to us about what is happening elsewhere in the country, especially in Masaka.  

What I have seen –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think what you should have asked the minister is, “Are you taking an interest in security issues throughout the country like Masaka?” and you stop there. But now you are causing a debate. Just ask questions.

MS MUGERWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. I was reluctant to ask that because I have confidence in my minister and Government that actually they have interest in the security of the entire country. But let him pull up his socks and give us the specifics about the cases that are taking place. We are very concerned. 

I said that I would support him in his statement that there are no rebels because on Monday we had a meeting with our RDC and the IGP had gone to Masaka but they confirmed that there were no rebels. But what is happening? The situation is getting out of hand. Thank you.

5.00
MR SANTOS PIRO (Independent, East Moyo County, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. Adjumani District neighbours Amuru. We suffered for over 20 years because of the insurgency caused by LRA. 

I want to give information to the minister that this morning I received a phone call from the LC 1 chairman of Jie-Ipi sub-county that a uniformed person went to one of the villages and robbed Shs 3 million from the SACCOs of Jie-Ipi sub-county. 

I want clarification from the minister whether since he has confirmed that there is rebel activity in that area – my people are living in fear. Are the security agencies going to follow up this matter to know whether the rebels have now entered Adjumani District? This is now a matter of life and death. We are tired of war. Thank you.

5.01
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Monday I attended a funeral service in Bunyole of some young man who had died together with others having fallen in an ambush in hon. D’Ujanga’s constituency around the place where they are constructing a dam - Nyagak. We tried to seek an explanation on whether it is was thuggery or out of armed rebellion, but we could not get any confirmation. I want to find out from the minister, could you have heard about this incident? If so, could it be related to the statement you are making? Thank you.

5.02
COL (RTD) TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. This is a very heavy statement and we should take it seriously. 
 
On page 5 the minister says that, “I wish to point out that these are preliminary findings and investigations are continuing.” Having last week read in the press the coordinator of intelligence services saying that the whole story and hullabaloo is absolutely rubbish, how can now the minister say that these are preliminary findings and investigations are continuing?

Number two, I read in the press last week, the President saying, “Stop arresting people.” How can findings be preliminary, investigations continuing, yet there is an order from the President to stop arresting people? So, please, do assist us here and now to clarify these contradictory statements so that the country believes in peace. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.04
MS ROSE MUNYIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Recently I was in Busia attending the burial and a one Amin Sadik who is a Secretary for Produce Multi-purpose Association in Busia market approached me and gave me the information that some people who come and pose as Wembley staff have taken up the role of arresting people in Busia. What they actually do is to come and say, they have come to take them because they are failing to pay some debts.

I would like to understand whether these days it is the role of Wembley to take people who have failed to pay debt. An example of somebody they took is a one Mukiibi, former chairman LC III of Busia Town Council who was taken by people who claimed they were Wembley and they arrested him. He ended up in Luzira, where he was for some time. They even extract money from people whom they arrest.

There are several people whose names I was given, whom I do not want to name, but I thought I would point out that one. I wonder whether this has come to the attention of the Minister of Security. I thank you.

5.06
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Aware that our borders are porous especially the district which borders other countries, people move and come out and they come in and settle. Can the minister assure us that our borders are going to be secure especially regarding whoever is coming in and moving out?

And two, are these people Ugandans? We would like to know.

5.07
MS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. About four months ago, a man practically accosted me and a friend in Bugolobi and it turned out that he was a former LRA, who is out under amnesty. Is the minister keeping track of these former LRAs and their activities in the country? Does he know where they are and what they are doing since they were granted amnesty?

Secondly, some time in 2008, my relative who lives in Nairobi came across a big document which has become either famous, or infamous, the one which has been serialised in the papers. There was an attempt to recruit her into this so-called rebel group. I came across this document and as a good citizen I passed it on to security. I want to ask the minister if this is this the same group that last year I passed on to Security which is now operating in Uganda; or this is a different group?

5.09
MR STEPHEN BAKKA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker for the opportunity. My concern has been effectively put across by hon. Butime and I am patiently waiting for the answer.

5.09
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to know from the honourable minister what steps he is taking to address the so-called thuggery, for example the Kyanamukaka issue which has been referred to as thuggery and this thuggery has extended to the district of Sembabule.

Last weekend two people were killed under unclear circumstances in Matete sub-county, in Mawogola County, Sembabule District. I want to know what steps the minister is taking because we have reported many deaths under unclear circumstances in Lwemiyaga constituency, which is represented by my colleague hon. Sekikuubo. (Laughter) Lwemiyaga has got a very high rate of thuggery, deaths and many other crimes. What steps is the minister taking to ensure he addresses the issues of insecurity in Lwemiyaga constituency?

5.10
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to know - first of all, we all do not condone rebellion and we do not want it to happen anywhere. I would like to know from the minister whether you are not re-branding LRA remnants and calling them a new rebel group. You continue to refer to the LRAs who were freed after getting amnesty and went back, and probably some of the mines you are recovering in the bushes - aren’t you re-branding LRA and calling them a new rebel group?

I would like to know why all of a sudden in security you have decided to adopt the unusual practice of dealing with the matters of security more in the media. Initially we used to think that you have better ways of dealing with rebellion, but now it is more like a media issue, before we hear from the minister.

I would also like the hon. Minister to tell us now that you have not mentioned Teso here, would you like to call the RDC of Soroti and tell him to stop saying that there is rebellion in Teso because the minister has said there is no rebellion in Teso.  There is no rebellion and no rebels in Teso. So, please call the operatives in Teso and tell them that.

 I am not a spokesperson for hon. Mao, but I am concerned because hon. Mao is a chairperson and he leads a district. Now that you have not mentioned hon. Mao as a rebel, would you like to come up clearly and say that he is not leading a rebel group so that the people of Gulu and Ugandans like me are assured?

Finally, can the minister accept or deny the allegations that have been in the media that government is creating a UPF outfit for purposes of electioneering come 2011? Thank you.

5.13
MS REBECCA OTENGO (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Madam Speaker, the people of Lango denounced rebellion in 1987 but all a long they were saying that there were also some boycotts in Apac. However, today I am shocked because Apac, which is in Lango, is not here. Unfortunately, there were rumours in Lango that the people who were arrested, one or two of them were attached to one of the Members of Parliament and that he pays them. That is the rumour that is going round. The people of Lango are not settled now. I want you to assure them that they are not on this list and they are safe.

About a year ago, the minister and two of his colleagues went with us to London to talk to the people of Lango, who are all over in the Diaspora, to tell them to come back to Uganda and participate in the development of the country. Today I can see that all these countries where our people are have been listed. Can you let them know the kind of people with their names whom you are saying are collaborators so that either they come back, or they hide forever because the people of Lango are tired of living outside the country? They also belong to this country. I thank you.

5.15
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was the first - I wish the Minister for Security could listen. I was the first person to make a personal statement here regarding the allegations that there were rebels in Teso and specifically in Kasilo. This is a statement that came from the RDC of Soroti, Ben Etonu, who named me and the LC III of Bugondo as the recruiters and the defenders. So I am happy that I am not appearing on your list, but I want you to bring him to order. 

When I made a statement, there are things I requested from the minister because he wanted a comprehensive thing and that is why we have been asking that this report could have gone beyond. There are three issues I raised on the rebels in Teso and the killings. There is one person called Lt Opio who is based in Pingire. He is working with the GISO of Pingire threatening and intimidating people. The GISO is called Lt Opio Opoya and he is a soldier. I hope you have got the name correct. He is one of those going around selling my name as a rebel collaborator. He has been based there; I think he has been there for one year. 

There is also the GISO of Bugondo for whom the court has even issued an arrest warrant because he stopped the Police that had been ordered by court to evict some people. He went and organised a mob to shoot at the Police. There is a case registered and the court issued a warrant of arrest for him. So, you take note of those. Those are the kind of people messing up the security situation in Teso.

Finally, we addressed the issue of the killings because we wanted a comprehensive statement. We are worried whether you are safe. We have heard that somebody was found trying to sneak into your office. There was also a person who was killed at your residence. Also, somebody was killed and the body was found in the compound of my party president, Dr Besigye. So we wanted to know whether this is part of the rebel group. We want you to be safe. Thank you.

5.18
MR CHARLES GUTOMOI (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like the minister to clarify on the alleged six MPs because there was no mention of that allegation here.

I would also like to seek his permission to visit these arrested suspects, who have been mentioned, and make a statement of their testimonies here because out there some of them are denying these allegations. 

I also want to know whether we can go and verify these rebel training camps because there are people around there and according to the information I have, some of these areas are where people are farming. Can we go and confirm that training is going on in these alleged places which you have mentioned?

And then I did not understand you when you said that these were neutralised. Did you fight there, or is it because of these arrests? 

Also, can you tell the country, after all these arrests, who the rebel leader of the UPF is and whether he is living in Uganda or outside Uganda?  Ok, somebody wants to know if he is a Member of Parliament. (Laughter) You said the investigations are going on and you appealed to the general public to volunteer information to the army or the security. What about volunteering information to the leaders? Some people might fear to come to the security agents or to the army officers. Can’t we get this information and pass it on to you?

And then, when is this saga, these allegations of rebel activity, going to end? Out there they are alleging that this is propaganda for you to get foreign currency and begin touring the whole world in the name of the UPF -(Laughter)- we may go together; there is no problem; we can go out there together.

Then there is the last statement you made that no efforts, by any group, will take away the peace that is prevailing in North and Eastern Uganda. But with these tears, how can you make such a statement? Supposing tomorrow peace is destabilised, what will you tell this country and the world? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, I will give only two minutes to the rest of you, Members. Please just ask.

5.22
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Minister too. 

I have questions that have been derived from three possibilities. The first is the genuine possibility of the existence of a new rebellion or new rebel groups. That can be a genuine possibility, because the Minister, being a Member of the National Resistance Movement, which formed the NRA, a former rebel group in this country, comes up with a statement like this one – today, with NRM in power for 23 years, do we still have a genuine possibility for a new rebellion?

Let me talk about the second genuine possibility. We know that one of our most respected army officers, Commander Kayanja, is known for the Operation Wembley, which was formed to handle armed thugs. What I am saying is that there is a genuine possibility of the existence of armed thugs and robbers in Uganda. 

The question, therefore, Mr Minister is: are the people you are talking of as being rebels related to the genuine possibility of the existence of armed thugs and robbers like the ones Kayanja handled here?

The third genuine possibility is the reality of framing and blackmailing opposition political leaders like I –(Interjections)- yes, this is evident from the statement by the Minister and it reads thus: “There have been reports in the media about the emergence of a new rebel group.” Anyway, to refer you to that statement, early this year the media reported that 250 rebels had been recruited in the areas of Obongi and Yumbe by I, Fungaroo Hassan, before being trained and reorganised in a secondary school called Midigo SSS in Midigo sub-county –(Member timed out_) 

5.25
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I would like to say that I am an Acholi and for those of you who have the history of this country at the back of your mind know that there has not been no peace in this country for over 25 years.

I was born in 1978 and following that history, you may notice that I have never enjoyed peace except when the peace process began in 2006. Therefore, I would be the last person you would expect to support another conflict.

Hon. Minister, you referred to media reports in your statement but are you aware that there have also been reports that some Members of Parliament from the Acholi sub-region are directly involved in this rebellion? And would you like to mention them? I am saying this because we need to be clear. Madam Speaker, I would like to assure you that nobody would want to encourage war because enough is enough. I do not want to hear of any other rebellion because I want the next Acholi generation to enjoy peace in this country; Uganda belongs to all of us. We do not want intimidation in this country anymore.

Lastly, just about a week after the arrests were made, I asked the Minister - while we were debating the report on Human Rights - whether he was aware of the arrest and detention of these very people he is talking about today. I even made mention of names, including that of Patrick Otim who comes from my district, Pader, and he denied knowledge. How come today you are talking about the very arrests yet that day you denied knowledge of these arrests and detention –(Member timed out_)

5.27
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Madam Speaker, among the areas I represent in my constituency is Namuwongo. I have got an office in Namuwongo and I go there once every week. For the last three or so months, I have not received a report from neither local leaders, my campaign agents nor anybody informing me of a security operation having been conducted in that area with someone being arrested.

Namuwongo is part of Bukasa Parish where we have got Bukasa A, Bukasa B, Namuwongo A, Namuwongo B, Kanyogoga and Katongole villages. I would like to know, from the hon. Minister – because he talked about a one Komakech Patrick having been arrested from Namuwongo – which Namuwongo are you talking about? Is it Namuwongo A or B? 

Secondly, where is this Komakech Patrick being held, and is there a possibility for I, as area Member of Parliament, to access and talk to him?

Thirdly, when these allegations first came to light, it was the Army Spokesperson, Maj. Felix Kulaigye who said there were rebels. The next statement we heard was from Gen. David Tinyefuza, the coordinator of intelligence services –(Member timed out_)

5.30
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the Minister. On page 4, the Minister talked about one or two Congolese and some Kenyans plus other foreigners. And on page 2, he talked about the United Kingdom and the United States extending assistance in one form or another to these rebel groups. Hon. Members, I find these serious diplomatic allegations. I feel the substantiation that the minister has given is not enough. I would like him to explain more about that.

Secondly, on pages 4 and 8, you talked about arrests. Now in the past we have had problems with Human Rights Groups especially the International Human Rights Watch. We would like the Minister to tell this Parliament and the country at large where these people are and at what level of prosecution they are. It is not enough for you to just come here and say the process is still going on. We want to know when they were arrested – if it is not yet beyond 48 hours then you are still safe.

Three, there is this issue of Kyanamukaka. Madam Speaker, we have got a genuine worry and members of the public are suspicious that this is a creation of some mafia in government. It needs to be investigated, because the fact is people are worried that this is intended to destabilise the constituency of the Rt Hon. Speaker of this House and/or to create a budget line for a genuine supplementary. Thank you.

5.32
MR MICHAEL OCULA (FDC, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before this report came, I thought the Minister was coming with something very big. So, this size has really amused me. I do not know whether government and the Minister in the name of John Patrick Amama Mbabazi are in their normal state of mind to begin saying that a group arrested with one SMG, a hand grenade and a pair of uniform can tantamount to a rebellion in Uganda. 

My understanding is that they would qualify these people to be thugs or as some Member said, poachers arrested with guns, but not to alarm the country that there is rebellion in Uganda.

Two, I do not know why, and I want the Minister to answer, they want to give credibility to rebellion in Uganda. When you begin saying that Northern Uganda politicians are backing rebel activities, you are giving credibility to rebellion. When you say Mao is involved in rebellion, you are giving credibility to rebellion. Why are you doing that, Mr Minister? Why do you want to involve the names of high ranking politicians including I, Ocula, in rebellion?

Finally, is the Minister aware that during the last presidential elections, the Government of Uganda, in the process of trying to intimidate voters in Northern Uganda, distributed so many guns to the community? Is he aware that there maybe no records relating to those guns? What plan do you have to collect those guns from the people you distributed them to, to intimidate people in Northern Uganda?  And when are you going to do it? Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us have hon. Johnson Malinga, hon. Ogwal, and the Leader of the Opposition. But hon. Members, I think members from all the parts of the country have spoken on this matter, really.

5.34
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Madam Speaker, I have only one genuine concern. On page 1 of the report it is mentioned that the intelligence received information on a new armed rebel group emerging from Masindi District of Bunyoro. What is however confusing me – I am a friend of the Banyoro and I know the names of the people who live in Bunyoro. That means you would expect names like Kabakumba –(Laughter)- Kasaija, Besisira, but look at the names on the list that was given: Odaga Ouma, Ochama James, Oundo Charles, Okuko Oburu and Odok. 

I am just seeking clarification. Is it true that the other nine whose names are not mentioned here are Banyoro? Isn’t this an attempt to create hatred against a certain class of Ugandans –(Interruption)

MS ERIYO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Is it in order for the hon. Member of Parliament not to know that in Masindi, particularly in Bweyale, there are all sorts of people from different tribes including Kenyans, Congolese, Acholi, Lango and so forth? And is he in order not to know that even the Member of Parliament for that area is called Otada, which is a Langi name?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I do not think he has been to that side. Maybe that is why he does not know. Please, conclude.

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Well, I am not surprised by the reaction of hon. Eriyo. Madam Speaker, what I am asking is: what happened? I know very well that Bunyoro is one area that accommodates all tribes, but how come only foreigners can sit in Bunyoro and create rebellion there? My thinking is that this is actual framing; it is a design to create hatred against a specific group of Ugandans. And would the Minister be surprised when some voices rise to say, “Can we secede and go to a country where we can be loved –(Member timed out_)

5.38
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have got just a few questions to raise: first of all I want to thank the Minister of State for Security for showing that this government is very vigilant on security. I think this is very important, particularly for the people of the North who have suffered insecurity under the NRM Government for the last 24 years. I am happy that at least now there is some vigilance and we hope that the North will, from now on, be peaceful.

However, I have observed from the list that many of the persons arrested are civilians. Were they arrested by the Police or by the military? If by the military, how did the military side step the Police operation? How did they know who these people were and what they were doing before going through the Police? 

I would like to know whether the government - this is a very important matter; if I am a civilian and I have committed an offence and you have evidence that I am a rebel, definitely the Police must be informed and I must be arrested according to the law. That is why I want to know why this procedure has not been followed.

Secondly, since it is very clear from your report, Mr Minister, that this rebel talk has no basis, why have these innocent people not been released as you continue with your investigations?

Thirdly, I want to know whether the committee of Parliament could visit the rebel camp in Murchison Falls Park. We want to know whether the rebel camp actually exists. Because I know that sometime ago, we were told that there was a rebel camp in Lira and we went there and found an acre of land where there were supposed to be 100 people training. There was a saucepan of beans and another of Posho. If this rebel camp really does exist in Murchison Falls, we would like a committee of Parliament to go and have a look at it and be assured that there is a genuine rebel movement.

Finally and very importantly, there are persons who are going around telling former UPDF soldiers, Amuka and the Arrow Boys to register. We want to know why you want to specifically register those who were in those groups before. Whether you want to accept it or not, we are moving towards the elections and you know that in 2000, Lira was attacked with claims that there were camps just because 2000 was preceding the 2001 election year. There was a lot of commotion in Lango. Come 2006, there was the same problem. Some Members of Parliament were arrested as rebels, including hon. Reagan Okumu. In 2005 because –(Member timed out_)

5.42
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am looking at page 44, bullet eight, which states that another two suspects named Kidega Patrick and Sgt Deo Menya and an anonymous one whom the minister just refers to as a police officer in the Emergency Mobile Unit have been arrested and the process of charging them in courts of law is underway. May I know when they were arrested? 

Secondly, may I know where they are being held? Can the minister confirm that they were arrested more or less 48 hours ago? 

The honourable minister should know that in most cases weak politicians always want to have diversionary tactics and they start alleging that their opponents are rebels as a way of intimidating them and other people who associate with them. 

The Minister of Internal Affairs Al Hajj Kirunda Kivejinja Muwabe went to the press and alleged that I was a rebel and he is the Minister of Internal Affairs. Hon. Minister, you are aware that I have written to the Director General of the Internal Security Organisation sending him a personal file that they have on me because it was in my possession. Why? This was because they were claiming malicious allegations against me, including how to defeat me in an election. This is your Internal Security Organisation. It also included what ISO was supposed to do to defeat me in an election. All this had been availed to hon. Kirunda Kivejinja -(Member timed out­_)

5.44
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to know from the Minister of Security, if all or most of his intelligence officers are competent enough for him to trust all that comes to his desk. I say this because on 7th March, I was in Unyama NTC and later on it was alleged that I went to recruit rebels. This idea of recruitment of rebels was already in place. 

I also want to know, if at all the intelligence officers are normally given some reward whenever they report cases so that they misinform intentionally to get those rewards. 

On the 27th June, I was in Sacred Heart attending a national function of Uganda Wildlife Clubs. The people who were there came out very clearly and said, “Madam as a Member of Parliament, give us clarification on the question of new rebel activity in the North and take it to Parliament as well”. This matter prevented very many other clubs from participating although there were some from as far as Kasese. 
 
I would also like to know from the honourable minister if something is not really strong enough, why do we blow it out of proportion; why do we make a mountain out of it? For example, even the Catholic Archdiocese has been implicated in this; at least I am happy to note that it does not appear at all in your report that some rebels were found hiding in the Bishop’s home. 

5.47
MR WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will be very brief. I would like to thank the minister for the report. 

I do not know whether the Minister is aware that some UPDF deserters have actually settled on fish landing sites in some areas and they are posing as fishermen? 

Two weeks ago, it appeared in the local paper that some of them were in Apac, Kwania specifically, and they were actually photographed at the police station in Aduku, my constituency headquarters. I do not know whether the minister is aware about this.

Secondly, I do not know whether the minister can marry the President’s State of the Nation Address in which he stated that there is excellent peace in the whole country and the situation existing now on which the Minister has reported? Thank you very much.

5.49
MR ALEX PENYTOO (FDC, Gulu Municipal Council, Gulu): Thank you. The whole of last week I spent it in Gulu and I discovered a lot. I wish I had more time there. I also discovered that 13 UPDF soldiers were arrested on these allegations and they are here in Makindye. Can the Minister explain this?

Another issue is the relationship between UPF and PPF. Are there two rebel factions being generated in Northern Uganda, PPF and UPF, and one is being associated with Norbert Mao, my own Chairman LC5? And you know the Chairman is warming up to become the presidential candidate for the Democratic Party. Is this is a ploy to destroy his candidature, or a ploy that will be used to decamping him? These are the rumours going the rounds in Gulu now.

Thirdly, Sudanese walk freely with their guns all over Northern Uganda and the government is not even concerned. Why are they allowed to move freely with their guns even in Gulu town? Madam Speaker, this is a serious matter. Are they preparing for another rebellion in Sudan or Uganda? This is the million dollar question. 

I am just thinking aloud whether solar panels, plastic boats, GPS systems, voter cards, first aid boxes, are contraband? Are they exclusively for use in rebellion or by soldiers? That is a serious question. (Laughter) Because there is a claim that these things were found with those people; are they illegal? Are they really contraband because many of us even carry laptops and I have seen even laptops being reported as a tool for rebellion?

5.51
MR JULIUS EMIGU (FDC, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you. I just have two questions. Mr Minister, on page 2 you indicated that the headquarters of UPF is in Nairobi. And still on the same page, you also indicated that this rebel group has got links with some elements in the UK and USA. 

I wanted to ask, now that you have established that the headquarters is in Nairobi and others linked to the USA and UK, did you make an attempt to consult or contact these embassies, and if you contacted them, what response did they give you in relation to the existence of rebels in those countries? 

Secondly, now that you have confirmed that the headquarters is in Nairobi, when are you coming to Parliament to ask for permission so that our forces go and attack those enemies of Uganda who are based next door in Nairobi? (Laughter) 

Finally, these suspects that have been arrested, we have always heard that there are torture houses in Uganda, is it not true that probably they were tortured and then words were put in the mouth to make them confess what they confessed? Thank you.

5.53
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you. I have three questions for the Minister. I was in Luzira on Monday with some MPs and I had two hours discussion with these suspects. So, the questions I have for you are these.

Are you aware that out of the 11 people you arrested, five are security operatives who have been operating under cover and as a decoy to lure people? Are you aware that you have arrested your own staff -(Laughter)- and some of them are in Luzira? 

Secondly, Latanya, where the 17 AK47 were got is in my constituency. Are you aware that the boy whom they allege was found with those guns in Latanya was driven all the way from Gulu Police Station with the guns in a pick-up and taken up to Latanya, and that is where they took the photographs; a photograph I was able to see? Are you aware that the guns were picked from Gulu and taken all the way to Pader, and that is where they arrested that person? 

The last question -(Interjection)- because we know these things. Are you aware that the group of ex-LRA combatants that you trained in Northern Uganda and you wanted them to go and kill Kony, have refused to go back and they are they ones who have been arrested now because they do not want to go back to that dangerous operation you trained them for? (Laughter) Are you aware of that? Thank you.

5.55
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you. Madam Speaker, we are very lucky to have a former rebel as our Minister for Security. (Laughter) On page 3, the equipment recovered from this group: there are more walkie-talkies than the guns. I want to know from the Minister for Security, as an ex-rebel, whether it is normal for a rebel group to have more walkie-talkies than guns. (Laughter)

Secondly, in every district the RDC is the Chairperson of the Security Committee; I want the Minister to inform this House that in all the arrests that have been made, the respective RDCs or the District Internal Security Officers were involved in the arrest.

Three, global positioning system; this is a survey instrument. I worked for Kampala City Council a few years ago and all the valuers were given these instruments, has this item become a security item so that if it if found with me I am a rebel? 

Four, I want the Minister to tell us the difference between thugs and rebel groups because when people are caught with guns in Northern Uganda, they are rebel groups but when people are killing others in Masaka, Busia  and wherever, the government says that they are thugs. What is the difference between thugs and rebels? Are they categorized according to regions? (Laughter)

5.57
MR SIMON ROSS EUKU (UPC, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): I thank you once more, Madam Speaker. I would like the Minister to give some clarifications on some of the issues going around in some parts of Teso and also in my constituency. When I was in my constituency I found that there are some politicians who were in FDC and crossed back to the Movement and are now scaring the former UPA rebels who surrendered way back in 1997; they are also scaring the former UNLA and UPDF who retired and are now back at home; they are also scaring the Arrow Boys who actually helped government but are now back home at home. They are asking them to fill forms so that they are provided with Amnesty Certificates. So, I would like to know whether the Minister is aware of such a group of people. 

Secondly, I would like to know from the Minister whether he has assigned the RDC of Amuria because he is one of the people who was drumming that and even announcements were made on our local radios; hon. Max Omeda an one person from my constituency called Odit. I don’t know whether they have been given that assignment of registering and giving Amnesty Certificates to all the former rebels, UPDF, Arrow Boys and UPA and for whatever reason. 

I would also like to find out whether the Amnesty law or legislation is operating retrospectively? Because I am aware that if a law is created, it operates beginning then; it is actually forward looking. But the UPA rebels left war in 1988; I don’t know why they have been asked to surrender once again when they have already done it. That is the rebel group that hon. Ecweru claims to be part of. (Laughter) 

6.00
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the hon. Minister for his statement and all the Members for their contributions. I would like to once again start by thanking the Minister again. I wish this thing about rebellion could be handled in a way such as this rather than leaving us sometimes to even throw away our protocol and status to go and battle with the Army spokesperson who seems to find a lot of excitement in being seen to be the source of information on many things. (Laughter) At one time we raised this matter here but unfortunately you have not streamlined your administration in regard to the role of Army spokespersons. Let theses things be handled by those who can.

Secondly, I wish that on the issue of rebellion government could cooperate with us the way we struggled to get you to cooperate with us on the LRA. For many years we would say, “Let us sit down; these guys want to talk”. It was a struggle because this government at times – fortunately hon. Kabwegyere may not know what is on the ground –(Laughter)- it seems to be there and yet it is not there. The government ends up being given information that unfortunately should never even be given to government in the first place. Because people have now learnt that you can make money; you can even build your status if you are seen to be doing something particularly on security. And I can assure you if you go back and reflect on the sources of all this information, you will find there are guys who really want to be promoted et cetera. We know some of them. 

But let me go to what hon. Otada said; and I would like to concur with him. And before I do that, let me just tell Members, some time ago in 2007, we sat up there in the canteen and somebody told me: “Latigo, you have a problem.” I asked, “What? He said: “You know, they are saying you are a collaborator.” Then they told me the story where information was sent to the President that I had a farm where I grew crops and that I left those crops for the LRA to eat. Fortunately that day the Army Commander, Gen. Aronda was here and we went and sat up; I was actually briefing him because I had gone home on a security matter where some people had been arrested in my constituency. So, I said, “Let me brief you”. Then I asked Gen. Aronda: “General, I have been sitting with you so I am a rebel collaborator who should have been arrested long ago?” He said: “Yeah, you know this thing is very bad.” I said, “General, do you know? I have land in Bunyoro and I have never heard that the LRA crossed Karuma into Bunyoro”.

The fact was that there used to be a farm called Ogenga’s farm. Ogenga is not Ogenga Latigo; John Ogenga the father of Gertrude, Mrs Ochaya Lakidi who was the PS in Defence. And the RDCs up there sent this information because they wanted me arrested politically. The President sent people to verify the facts, fortunately; they flew there and there was nothing. Now this is a very similar situation.

I still go and many times I spend the night in Bweyale when I go to my farm. One time I heard this story about rebels being in the park. So I took the trouble to try and find out what happened. It took me three weeks to get to somebody who had a story to tell and they said “Oh, some people were arrested in the park but we hear stories that they were poachers.” Some guys then said, “We hear stories that some were Congolese”. We just left it like that. 

Somebody almost mentioned what I want to say about the names of the people on page 2. When you talk about rebellion, the first thing that comes to people’s minds is the Acholi. Look at the names of those who were arrested in Masindi - Odaga Owonga, James Ochama, Charles Oundo, John Jama, Okuku Oburu, Salim Odok Gwok. Except for the last one that is remotely related, Okuku is probably a Luo, Oundo is probably a Samia from Busia or Kenya but for all of you when this thing was being talked about, you thought the Acholi were fermenting rebellion.

Unfortunately, any smart analysts would say “Wait a minute; these names do not make sense.” That is what I would do, and Eng. Byabagambi would do the same. He would see that these names do not add up. It is embarrassing that they allow the minister in charge of security to bring a statement that does not sieve out things like this.

Secondly, let me go to the arrests that took                   place in Gulu. Among the list of things that were included on page 4 were 50 voters’ cards. Last week I spent a night in Bweyale and I got information that 50 people had been arrested and when I see these 50 voters’ cards I cannot wait to see the names. If it is the Oundos, I will ask how they came to vote from there or if they are residents. But I will wait, although you obviously know where this is leading. 

If you were keen followers of what was going on last week, the Monitor newspaper interviewed the wife of one of the former LRA rebels who was arrested. This is a boy who gave up rebellion. I have background information on him because my political assistant was an NGO officer and in his organisation, they received that boy. He actually came back voluntarily. The wife said that the husband was taken and a week later, the CID came back and went inside the house and came back with a first aid kit and a walkie-talkie or something that she could not describe, and then they were put there and photographs were taken. It is not helpful to this country. 

Let me say what we have said before; there is absolutely no cause for Acholi to suffer in any kind of rebellion. There is absolutely no cause for any community in the greater north to go back to suffering in rebellion, and it does not exist. 

As we have also said - and we have fought with some of our own people on this matter - there are people who are very angry with this government and assert that instead of the Government handling their anger, they sometimes incite it by posturing, by beleaguering, and by sometimes being very insensitive. 

When they see innocent people arrested, the anger surges. When they want to explain the arrests, they then slip false information to the Red Pepper that six Members of Parliament are involved. When they see that somebody like Patrick Otim, who we believe was even closer to the government system is one of those, then they say “You know, we fished him out of the official residence of the Archbishop of Gulu.” That official residence is in Gulu and yet Otim was arrested from his house in Pader town, of which hon. Odonga-Otto is the Member of Parliament and where Franca also originates from. You go and ask your NRM people who told you about their victory in Kalongo and they will tell you how angry they are with the government for alleging that Otim was fished out of the house of the Archbishop yet he was actually arrested from Pader. 

We leave it to government to pursue their cause and strategy. However, if we have to live together as Ugandans, then the sooner you engage after hearing rumours and you do not jump out to excite society, the better. If it is for politics, then let me tell you - and I could have charged you for this but it is free advice - the more you do this to any of us, the more we win elections without campaigning. It is free advice. Thank you very much. 

6.12
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank my honourable colleagues, those who had kind words and those who did not. I thank all of them for their contributions.

First and foremost, I want to thank you for all the questions that were raised about the guilt or no guilt of these people. My answer is simple; we are in the era of the Movement Government. We restored the rule of law and that is why I informed you in this statement that those that were arrested have been charged before courts of law. Of course they will be presumed innocent, but the fact that they are suspected and we think we have evidence against them is the reason they are in court. So, this is the civilised system of handling questions like those. 

If we have suspicions against hon. Kyanjo that he has committed a felony or something like that, what do you do? You take him to court, present your evidence and then it is up to the court to decide. Let us give our judicial system the opportunity to do its work. Let us not use Parliament to declare them guilty or innocent because another arm of Government has that responsibility.

The second point I would like to make is that not all those who were arrested were charged. Some of them were found to be innocent -(Interjections)– okay, I will tell hon. Otto. I think he is the one who needs to learn this from me. When the state has suspicions about you, the arms of the state that investigate do so. They may think that they have a case against you, but what happens is that they submit the file to the DPP and it is the DPP who is the prosecutor who determines that the information the Police have gathered is enough to prosecute or not. If the DPP says it is not enough, then you are innocent and you will not be prosecuted. That is a simple statement I was making -(Interjections)– Oh, since when? It is news to me that hon. Otto is a lawyer. Studying law and being a lawyer are two different things. I think there should be no cause for concern –(Interruption)

MR OTADA: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving me the Floor. I want clarification. When you look at page 2, the Minister says in 2(a) that the suspects revealed that they belonged. That was the confession they made. If they confessed that they belong, how can we find nine of them not chargeable in court?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Not everything you say will be used against you -(Interjections)- I am now speaking as a lawyer, a very senior lawyer. I am actually senior counsel, in case you did not know. So I am now speaking with maximum authority. We do not act on the basis of what you say, especially when it comes to charging you. 

Let me make this point very clearly – and this is the point raised by hon. Otada and the honourable who comes from Namuwongo. You do not have to be of the tribe in the area where you are arrested for that arrest to be effected. I just cannot understand the logic. If there was reason to charge hon. Fungaroo and he tried to run through Kanungu, we would arrest him in Kanungu and there would be no problem with that. It does not matter that he is not from Kanungu. I think that is not a serious matter. At any rate, the most important question is those that have been charged - is there a case against them or not? That one we leave to court.

There was a question about security generally and especially in relation to people that have been engaged in armed thuggery. Yes of course, armed thuggery is not rebellion. I was very careful in my first statement and I said there were reports in the media of the emergence of a new rebel group. I put it in quotes; it is not me that labelled these people armed rebels. This is what has been in the media. All I am saying, and what I have told you here is that there was a group for instance in Murchison Falls who belonged to the organisation called Uganda People’s Front, which has now changed name and calls itself Popular Patriotic Front and they were armed. I will come to that question about the level of arming.

I know very well, as hon. Okello-Okello said, what rebellion means especially armed rebellion. Not every one who is against government or who rebels against government is a rebel in that sense. Not every one who takes up arms qualifies to be called a rebel.

The concept of a rebel is that there is someone that has a just cause; there is a cause for him or her to take up a just cause -(Interjections)- if you want to know what a just cause is, look into your recent history about how NRA took up arms and the reasons why they did; you will have the answer. (Laughter) I do not know if hon. Otto will pass the test of a lawyer. I listened to him when he was speaking. I did not interrupt him, but he is trying to interrupt me. 

The other point I want to answer is what hon. Butime called contradictions in public statements. I think someone raised it - contradictions in public statements by the military spokesperson, the coordinator of intelligence, the President, and now the statement I have presented here. I would like to assure you that what I am giving you is the official government position of Uganda. It is the position that is synthesised, that represents the final product of all the work of government relating to this matter.

The coordinator, Gen. Tinyefuza – someone was calling him a Lieutenant General but he is Gen. Tinyefuza. Gen. Tinyefuza was categorical, when I asked him about the news item, that this is not what he said. I knew Gen. Tinyefuza knew this situation and that he did not say what the Monitor said he had told them. It was not true. 

Thirdly, I am also sure even in the case of President Museveni about what appeared in the papers, that he had told some people that they should stop arrests. I can tell you that if the President wanted to pass such an order, the channels are well known and I would be privy to that, and there is no such order. That is why I told you in this statement that in fact more recently, there were arrests. 

The other point I want to refer to is: are our borders secure? Those people who were arrested, are they Ugandans? Well, the fact that we have arrested these people - the armed thugs and those who have been trying to establish camps - shows you the effectiveness of the state machinery. It is true we have not been able to stop it completely, no one would of course, but the test of the effectiveness of the state machinery is precisely what has happened - people like these take up arms and we get to them before they can cause any damage to our peace.

That is what I assured you about, hon. Members and the general public, that we have now fully rebuilt a State of Uganda and for anyone who wants political power, the path to get political positions of leadership are known, through the democratic process. That is the only way. Armed rebellion now has no justification. The state has fully been re-established and that will not happen.

The LRA, those who either surrender as hon. Latigo was saying or those that we captured, have been treated the same. We put the young ones in rehabilitation centres. When they are rehabilitated, for those that want to serve in the forces we actually recruit them into the army.

It is true that we have ex-LRA in UPDF. Remember that most of these did not go into LRA voluntarily. They were conscripted; they were forced. So, it is our duty as a responsible government here to make sure that these are rehabilitated fully and given responsibility in society, and that is what we do. Of course, I have mentioned two of these who were arrested who were former LRA, but these are individuals who do not represent thousands of ex- LRA rebels that have been rehabilitated and are serving in the armed forces.

There were few statements, which I suppose are political, like the one of hon. Alaso and others, even my sister hon. Cecilia Ogwal. I answered it in my statement - the idea is that we are making up a story of rebellion for political reasons. Well, you know the last time there was a rebellion in the North, who gained politically? Who was the profiteer? Who profited from the rebellion in the North politically? (Interjections) I am responding to the points being made that this government is trying to encourage rebellion in the North for political reasons. 

I want to assure members of the Opposition that we intend to do better in the North next time than we did last time.

It has been our intention clearly. We had not achieved it. The recent by-elections in Kalong, for example, are clearly an indicator of where we are going. Therefore, since the Opposition benefited from the rebellion in the North all these political years in the past, we know how to get there. Yes – (Interruption) 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you my honourable colleague for giving way. I will give you two or three pieces of information. The first one is that if you want a contest where I am on one side and you are on the other side in Kalongo, come 2011. (Laughter)

The second piece of information that I would like to give you is that you may be right that we who come from the greater north benefited, and true some people benefited because the burden of leading the people of the North fell on even much younger shoulders who had not been -(Interjections)- I do not know whether that is benefiting but that is the burden that the war in the North threw on us. I had to leave the academic world because it was imperative that some people represent us - I can tell you why. Hon. Ambrose Okullu who was my Member of Parliament had to run into exile. He is in America up to now. That is how I came into politics. 

The other information I should give you is that even in the last elections, the campaign in the west was, “If you vote for Besigye these northerners are coming back.” The war in the North for a long time benefited government in the south. (Applause) Therefore, if you want to do a proper analysis of who benefited, the bulk of your survival for all this long was because of the North. Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Ok. I would like to make a clear statement that come 2011 in Kalongo I will be there on the other side -(Laughter)- definitely. I will be there and the Movement will be there. 

Now, there are many honourable colleagues who talked about their areas, hon. Okupa, hon. Otengo my sister who has not told you what name the Langi community gave me when I had great company with her in London - I and hon. Otengo had great company in London. (Laughter)

MS OTENGO: Madam Speaker, the government sent a team and on that team was hon. Omara Atubo, who is my nephew. So if there is somebody who gave you company, perhaps it was hon. Omara Atubo. You did not even support me to go. I used my own money because I knew that what you were going to do was helpful. But to mislead this House that you got good company with us - maybe because we met with our people who were in London. That is not true. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I am surprised that my good friend, hon. Otengo, has forgotten so quickly. (Laughter) We had great company and of course it is true that in the company we had the cultural leader of the Langi people, hon. Omara Atubo and the Langi community. Under the chairmanship of the cultural leader, they gave me the name Omara.

Hon. Okupa and others have been talking about their areas but I do not want to go into this. I just want to restrict myself to the subject matter of that group and those that were arrested. If there are armed thugs or acts of rebellion in any area we will handle them and I will come back here and tell you.

I think I have answered hon. Fungaroo very well because my answer covered all his three points. 

I would like to assure my dear sister hon. Franca Akello that she should not go by media reports. What I have presented to you are things that have been investigated and verified. I do not come here - and this answers my brother and good friend hon. Latigo. We do not go by rumours. Hon. Odit is also my brother -(Laughter)

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, I have been listening very carefully and attentively and did not utter a single word. But what I was pondering on was that of all these colleagues and all these honourable members, over 300 of them, hon. Amama Mbabazi chose the Leader of the Opposition only as a good friend. The rest can easily be charged with treason -(Laughter)- because he holds a very sensitive portfolio. (Laughter) That is really our fear. Can he assure us that all of us are his good friends? (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, the reason why I did not take my seat is because I had absolutely no idea on what grounds hon. Odit was standing up. I did not know whether it was information because if he had asked me for information I would have, as I always do; given way. 

I want to assure all hon. Members of Parliament, including hon. Odit that they are my friends, my brothers and sisters and I have absolutely no problem with them. Dr Baryomunsi is of course - (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, wind up. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to agree with the minister that hon. Amama Mbabazi is my very good friend and together with me and the Woman MP, we are the three MPs from Kanungu and we are doing very good work in Kanungu. (Laughter) 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Okay. So, the question of attacking Nairobi obviously does not arise because when I said there were elements in the USA and UK and some Kenyans and Congolese – these are actions of individuals; they have nothing to do with their governments. I want to make that very clear. There is nothing that I have said that should be taken to imply that any of the governments of those countries is collaborating with them.

Hon. Penytoo raised a question relating to his predecessor and current chairman of the district, hon. Norbert Mao and others. Let me say something about it. It is true that Mr Mao had, in his possession, a document that comprehensively spelt out the plans and programmes of this group. It is also true that we knew that Mr Mao was in possession of it for at least two months before he spoke about it. However, we did not arrest him and we have not arrested him. I have had occasion to say, elsewhere, that I have respect for Mao, personally. I think he is a young promising Ugandan; the problem is that he is not in the right place –(Interjections)– no, politically. There is no problem, but Mr Norbert Mao will have to explain. I do not know whether he has already done that; I do not have information. Anyway, the fact that he was in possession of it was not ground for us to either to believe that he was an architect of that plan or a collaborator. He needs to explain how he got into contact with these people and how he got to possess this document. And I do not expect major problems with that.

My brother, Gutomoi, asked many questions one of which was about I clarifying about the alleged six MPs who were said to be involved. What I can say is that I cannot respond to newspaper reports. And as I said, please do not go by rumours. And this answers my sister, hon. Sauda Mugerwa and others who commented on my statement when I said that that was still preliminary and that we are still investigating. I can confirm that the information I have given you is information that has been verified. Other stories that we read from the newspapers most of them have been found to be false. But I don’t have to come to Parliament to say, “Hon. Gutomoi, there was a report about you in The Daily Monitor or Red Pepper; I have investigated it and found it to be this or that.” First of all, that is not my work and secondly, I do not think it is necessary. So, just be confident that we do not have any problems except those that I have mentioned.

Hon. Odonga Otto, I would like to inform you that 11 people were arrested and five are security personnel. Well, you know, at the back of my mind I could not remember when we recruited Otto. Did we recruit him while in Luzira or before? To recruit him in security services for him to know this information, which I, myself do not know? (Laughter) Anyway, I take the invitation by hon. Odonga Otto; we will consider it favourably. 

Madam Speaker, I have already answered the question about the boy who was driven and more information regarding this will come in the evidence. 

On the question of LRA captives being trained to go and kill Kony – first of all, hon. Odonga Otto said it as if there is anything wrong with it. The way he spoke, “You trained LRA to go and kill Kony”, as if there was a problem with that. Then he went on to say that we later on arrested them for refusing to do that work. We should arrest them if they refuse! (Laughter) Hon. Otto, if you train people to go and fight a terrorist and they refuse, what do you call them? 

Madam Speaker, I just want to inform the House that we have never ever subscribed to the idea of assassination. If we had wanted to do so, we would have assassinated Kony and all the others we have fought, but we do not do such things, as a rule. Therefore, there is no truth in the statement that we are training a special group to go and kill Kony. What we have are forces that are fighting against Kony and when we eventually kill Kony, which we will do, it will be in a battle.

Hon. Okello-Okello asked me whether rebels can have more walkie-talkies than guns. The answer is yes. Second was about whether GPS, a surveying instrument, is now security equipment? The answer is yes. It has always been precisely for the purpose of surveying but whether it is a compass, surveying equipment or binoculars, these have multiple usages including for military purposes.

Finally, I want to assure my brother the Leader of the Opposition that in my statement, I hope I did not imply that I was talking about the Acholi because I am the last one to do that and at any rate, in the things I talked about, I talked about Acholi region and security generally. I was making a statement of fact that the people in Acholi, who had been displaced, were going back home and were determined to maintain the peace that has given them the confidence to go back to their villages. 

We know and I have stated over and over again that the people of Acholi have not supported Kony and his terrorism and that is why Kony kills them and cuts their noses and limbs and that is also why Kony has not had volunteers to join him. He recruits by conscription and abduction because the people of Acholi rejected him and I know this very well, more than hon. Otto. 

So, I thank honourable colleagues for the support that they have given to government. I want to agree with the Leader of the Opposition that it is important that government, in matters of this kind, does co-operate with the Opposition and I undertake at all levels and whenever an issue that requires that level - I agree with that; we have done it before and there is no reason why we don’t continue to do so because we don’t associate opposition in politics with rebellion or terrorism. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall not be able to deal with the other items on the agenda. The House adjourned to 2.00 p.m. on Tuesday. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.51 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 14 July 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)
