Wednesday, 5 July 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in the Parliamentary Building, Kampala.

(The Chairman ,Al Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

PRAYERS

(The Council was called to order.)

MOTION

(Debate Continued.)

MR OMADI (Butebo County, Pallisa):  Mr Chairman, I would like right from the beginning to join my friends who have thanked the President for his - but I have a question; my question is, this country has suffered for a long time, some of us have been in exile because of the turmoil that this country has undergone.  My question is, I have been patient, I have been listening to speeches by political leaders, by the people aspiring to become leaders of this country.  But, the question which I am putting to them is this.  Do we need this or do we need leadership in the country?  We need peace, we need security, we need stability, but if some people need leadership only and they do not consider the peace of our people, then they are wrong.  

I am saying this with due respect to those who are aspiring for leadership.  It is true that in the past we had political parties, but they have not spoken the truth, they did not take seriously the question of peace.  When we got independence in 1962, on the 9th October, it was one of those people who enjoyed the lowering of the British flag and seeing our own flag being raised.  At that time, the British had the complete control of the country and there was peace everywhere, we could go to White Nile, drink, dance, and do all sorts of things; because there was peace in the country and I think that is a state which we want to see prevail in this country.  

Recently, the CA passed a resolution to allow NRM to continue for the next five years.  The ordinary people in the village where I come from have no problem at all; we in the village have no problem and therefore, the other day when I went to Kibale, one of the areas I happen to represent or in the South, I had a talk with the elders, and what they want is the roads - the feeder roads should be repaired, the dispensaries should be provided with drugs, their Museveni’s regime, what they want is, the politics they want, they want politics of development and so, I call upon my friends here, in the House that when we talk, we must be very serious and we should talk in terms of development and therefore we must support the leadership which we have today in this country. (Applause)  

I do not see how one would be a leader if he is going to lead only a small section of this country.  We have undergone problems, we have seen rebel activities, we know that it means, for instance, in my own area, where I come from and where I have my house. When Lakwena came from all the way from the North, she passed through my own place and they terrorised people, settled in my 30 acres of cassava and helped themselves on my cassava; where they stayed for three days before they were in the area.  

So, when the President talks and says, he wished he had only statesmen in the CA, I think he is right, because most of these people now talking in the CA, have transferred their political thinking into the CA, instead of doing real business for which they were elected -(Applause)- I think that is a very serious matter.  The President has seen - in fact, by making us statement - he has seen that some of -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.

MR OMADI:  Some of the members have become parochial in their thinking when they are deliberating matters of great importance.  So, I subscribe and I wish to subscribe to the effect that we Members of this House, should show the example, so that in future when our sons and daughters and so on come here, they find a document which will not be tampered with, but let us for the time being, for the next, at least five years, support the government in power.  Some of us might not live to that end, but we want a Constitution which will last for a long time; which will stand the test of time; so that even if I am - I want to be very, very frank, even if I am a former UPC, strong supporter, I feel that UPC in real sense should follow what is happening.  So, for me, people have been thinking, what is your political thinking?  Now, look, I was UPC, okay, in 19...in fact, most of us here were UPC. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.

MR OMADI:  Most of us here were UPC and I believe -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order please.

MR OMADI:  Yes, you might ague and say no -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please, order please hon. Members.  

MR OMADI:  But what I am saying is true, because I was in UPC with hon. mayanja Nkangi. (Laughter)

MR MAYANJA NKANGI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to remind hon. Member that, I was appointed to this Parliament in 1962 by the Kabaka Yekka; I have never, never at any point in time, belonged to UPC. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MR OMADI: Mr Chairman, may be it was a slip of tongue, but there was KY/UPC. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MR OMADI:  Mr Chairman, I may inform the government, there is no doubt about it, that we form the government and my old colleague here, was a Minister for Commerce and Industry, a very good Minister.  Maumbe Mukhwana here, who today says he was not a UPC, is there, Okurut is here, he was UPC, and -(Interruption)

MR MAUMBE MUKHWANA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, through you Sir, I would like to inform the speaker that although I was a UPC by then, he himself, President of the political party UPC, expelled me from the UPC.  I was expelled -(Laughter and Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please, proceed.

MR OMADI:  Mr Chairman, I thank my friend for the information.  But what –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR OMADI:  What I am trying to say is that, many of us at that time, because that was the party which was available and we had to belong to that party.  But I do not see why today, we do not support NRM, because we are enjoying the peace which today is prevalent because of NRM.  But you see, UPC had also bad people, so in NRM there would be those bad people, who do not want to open the door for us all to enter -(Laughter)- the door should be open, conditions must not be there, because we belong to this country and, therefore, we have got to support something which - where there are no conditions.  

I came into the House after staying out in Obote II, because we disagreed with Obote, my friend there knows it, Abbey knows about it, he is over there; and Obote told me very openly that I would never see Parliament, but I have seen Parliament. (Laughter)  I mean, this is a fact.  He spoke it in presence of hon. Ongom, when we went to him to see him in his Kololo home.  So, I call upon my friends that the leadership is being rotated rightly -(Interruption) 

MR ONGOM:  Point of information.  I would like to inform hon. Omadi that what he is alleging I cannot remember, but I would like to say that inspite of what he is saying and may be, what transpired between him and Dr Obote, I am still a supporter of UPC and I will remain so, because I see nothing that will persuade so far to get away from UPC. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.

MR OMADI:  Mr Chairman, it is true, I might not have known what transpired between me and the President of the UPC, but all the same, I went with him there.  My submission is this, that the CA has passed a provision that NRM should go on for five years, but the question which is being now asked by the people, if the CA has passed the Movement to go on, now, what it is this elections of President they are talking about?  How is it going to be conducted?  Is it going - when NRM is allowed to run the government for the next five years, supposing two people stand, supposing Tiberondwa for that matter stands, and goes through, is he going to run the government against the decision, against the Constitution?

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that in 1990, this House decided to extend NRM Government for five years and there was no need for election, we just extended and continued with the President and other people, late last year, we also extended NRM for another well, until the Constitution is ready, in other words, the mission of NRM was not completed in 1990, it was no quite completed last year, so we said, we go on until we complete the constitution.  I think it would be a mockery to hold an election to continue since we have continued without elections in the past.  It does not make sense and therefore, some people are saying, if really NRM has been extended, as you have done before, some people are wondering as he is saying, why should we state time; having an election is it not just a mere mockery?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed, hon. proceed.

MR OMADI:  Mr Chairman, I am asking that question, simply because I have been asked that the CA has already passed that NRM should continue for the five years.  Now they -(Interruption)

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Point of information. I would not like to make any intervention when the hon. Member is making a very good contribution, I think it is important that I inform the hon. Member through you, Mr Chairman, that to my understanding, the Constituent Assembly has not approved the extension of NRM per se, but has approved the Movement type of Government system which embodies everybody and that is why aspiring Presidential candidates like our friend hon. Tiberondwa is free to stand in his personal capacity, not as a group of a political organisation.  Thank you.  

MR OMADI:  Mr Chairman, I said this question has been asked and for me, I am always very frank, what we are saying is that, those who would like to stand for the Presidency since the period has been extended to five years, should wait until five years elapse, but for the members, Mr Chairman, protect me -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, this issue has been persistent, some people have been wondering how one can be President of the National Resistance Movement.  This gives a chance to any member, a Ugandan above the age of 35, to be the President of the national Resistance Movement.  So, really, I do not see any contradiction at this election, yes.  

MR OMADI:  Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR OMADI:  We have a saying and the saying says, goes this way, ‘two cocks cannot share the platform’. (Laughter) I am saying this, even if you bring a cock home and it finds another one, they will first fight; and then they will settle their own differences in their own language.  But what we are saying, what I am saying, and I believe this is what those people whom I have talked to say, for the sake of peace in this country, for the sake of security, for the sake of stability, for the sake of development, let us all even if we are paying - allow or permit a situation where we are being led by the President of NRM; so that the type of the Movement - the Movement type of governance is continued in this country until the time which has been spelt out, which is spelt out in the Constitution elapses; so that there is peace and everybody enjoys it.  

Secondly, there is this question of silage development in this country -(Applause)- development should be shared in the country equitably.  We talk of in terms of decentralisation, when most of the things are going to only two sides - you are aware -(Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR OMADI:  I want to sound - because this is the time when you tell Government what people think in the rural ears; do not measure the development, the riches of this country in terms of people who live in towns; people are very poor in the rural area. Entandiikwa has come and I think it is going to help to a certain extent, but it will not solve the problems which people are really faced with.  So, I am calling upon government and more so, my friends who happen to come from there like Paul Etiang, to see that the feeder roads are -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, address the Chair please.  Order, order please.  

MR OMADI:  I am saying so, people are really disgusted the roads which used to exist are no more.

MR OKURUT:  Point of information.  I happen to have a daughter who was married in Agule.  It took me two hours to drive from Pallisa to Agule, it is not even a truck, it is not even a what, do not call it any thing!  Why do we not have a situation where we have got equal distribution of projects and development?  Agule is a disaster!

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I wanted to put the feelings of hon. Okurut at rest.  It took him two hours perhaps to drive some 100 miles or may be 75; it takes me 10 hours to leave Kampala to get to my home which is 35 miles from here. (Laughter)  

MR OMADI:  Mr Chairman, the observation from the two Members go along way to prove that the road system in this country, especially those which have been left in the hands of the District Administrators are in appalling state and government therefore to those problems; because -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  I would like to know from the hon. Member holding the Floor as to whether the feeder road equipment which has been given all over the district was given to that district.  Secondly, it appears there is a problem with the local authority.  I wish the Minister for Local Government was here.  The money which is given to support their hand is not properly used.   I think there is a problem within the Ministry of Local Government and District Administration, in other words, if the feeder roads equipment was there, why is it not being used?  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR OMADI:  Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for his information.  We were –(Interruption)

MR ETIANG:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, thank you.  I was listening attentively in the hope that the hon. Member holding the Floor having mentioned my name was going to link me either as Minister for Information or as the NRC Member for Tororo county to the conditions of the rods he is talking about.  It would appear as if he did not get that point and I wanted clarification from him as to whether in fact, Paul Etiang as a representative of Tororo County or as a Minister of Information has got any deliberate or direct connection with the roads he is talking about.  That having been said, Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR ETIANG:  I would also take the opportunity of informing the hon. Member holding the Floor that only the day before yesterday, I was in a place called Kigogola in the middle of Kyagwe in Namyeya county; it is some 10 kilometres off Kayunga tarmac road; from there to Kampala, it took me about two hours, one hour and fifteen minutes of which was from the turn-off point to where I had been invited.  But this, I want to draw the attention of the hon. Member that in whatever capacity he referred to me, either as a Minister in Government or as a Member of this House, that the condition of roads; particularly if I understood him correctly as referring to the feeder roads, the conditions of the feeder roads in the country are general bad and this is accepted, and they are not only uniquely to Angule which incidentally is in Gogonyo Gombolola of Pallisa district.  Thank you.

MR OMADI:  Mr Chairman, I purposely referred to him as hon. Etiang, because he is a Member of NEC and he is a leader of our former Bukedi today, so if I draw his attention to the fact that the roads are bad, I want him also to know what is happening in Pallisa.  The hon. Member there has raised a question whether the equipment which was given to the districts; were given to Pallisa; I am saying they are not - that is why I have said the development is lopesided, is one sided, we were not given those equipments and even the money which was given, I can even quote right now the money which is there, right up to last month, we had only Shs 13 million to cater for the feeder roads.  What can Shs 13 million do?  Recently when I went to inquire -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up hon. please.

MR OMADI:  When I want to inquire, I understand another Shs 5 million was sent to the districts; so it is Shs 18 million.  What people want is not big Pajeros, they want services, they want good roads, they want dispensaries; they want schools for their children.  They do not mind who is in the leadership; that is why they are supporting Museveni, so that he gives them those things!  So, if he has not been - let him now take the Ministries concerned to that task, because people are happy, the only thing is that they are poor and they can only work hard if the roads are there so that they produce more crops for sale and they will have them marketed in Kampala if the roads are provided.  

All in all, I want to end up again by calling upon all Members of this House - all CA Members to support the leadership which we have at the moment.

MR DRANI DRADRIGA (Ayivu County, Arua):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and hon. Members.  I want to give special thanks to His Excellency the President for giving us this very important state of affairs of our nation and let me thank the Mover of this Motion, the Minister of Internal Affairs, for being lucky, I am calling it lucky because this is a very important statement which gives actually the animal situation in the nation and thank him for moving this, and I want to associate myself fully with the Motion.  

One of the most important issue contained in the statement is the commendation given by His Excellency, the President to this House for its performance over the years.  I want to support this commendation by the President of this House especially in two areas: 

First, Members of this House have worked tirelessly to ensure that democracy in this country prospers down to the grassroots.  This has been seen over the years; members have been able to come in and out, go into the rural areas and in this manner, they have been able to make a contribution in part of the transformation, that we have gone through in this country and also this House, has been very active - what we call Parliamental activism.  This has made it possible as the President points out to come out with so many legislations that have assisted in guiding this country.

Secondly, regarding the Constitution making process, I have this to say, that it has been a healthy exercise, where people have disagreed in order to agree, although the electorate in some cases has never been involved in certain activities.  For instance, walking out without the consultation with the electorate, in my own view, has not been an honourable representation of the people.  I am saying this because, at home, I think many of us have been asked wrong questions are to why some people walked out.  Since I am not a member of that House, I have not been able to answer.  But I think people are saying it is not honourable to walk out even before you have told your people who have elected that you intend to walk out.  What we have tried to address, all this country is trying to address in CA is of extreme importance.  But unfortunately, what is happening is that, some of the delegates have not been addressing what is called the will of all, as against the general will; it is important for us to distinguish as politicians between the will of all, which is that ultimate common good that Ugandans want as against certain sector interests which I call the general will.  

However, it is my hope and indeed the hope of everybody in Uganda that we shall be able to come to the expected useful conclusion through that process.  Mention has been made of growth of the economy in the economic sector.  I want to commend our Government and indeed the people of Uganda for the contributions they have made in the growth of the economy, which has been estimated at about 7 per cent.  This is indeed a great leap forward; it is a sign of hope.  I think the challenge here; the greatest challenge here is that, this growth must be accompanied by distribution. The Member who talked before we mentioned something about equitable distribution; that is really the point. We should be able to go ahead with policies and schemes that continue to propel this economy. These programmes like Entandikwa and other poverty alleviation programmes are already having an impact in most parts of Uganda, but there is still a little bit of problem.  First of all, the financial injections are insufficient, I want to call upon the minister responsible to ensure that through this House, we increase on the funding of this poverty alleviation programme.  

Another area where we need a lot of improvement is accountability; we need to fight corruption in some of these institutions, and most important of all, there must be what I would like to call small enterprise development schemes down to the grassroots levels, if we have to transform the families for homestead of the majority of Ugandans.  Unless we do that, there is no way we can have a big leap forward, a big impact on the social economic well being of the people.  

Something has been mentioned about Karamoja.  I would like to register my dissatisfaction for the funding of Karamoja Development Agency.  I have seen over the years that - money is never sufficient and yet, we have put in place KDA, which is supposed to be an agency to transform Karamoja.  

Recently, somebody told me the region which most people did not want to go to, because it is as a punishment also, I understand is now the best region people want to go to and I think you know the reasons.  Yes, you know the reasons why; this will now be an eye opener.  In fact, I am proposing that with the mineral wealth we have in Karamoja, let us empower the two districts in Karamoja, Kotido and Moroto, by deliberately assisting them so that when it comes to exploitation of these mineral wealth, they can form public companies out f which they have some share holding as districts, they should have some share holdings, that is one way in which we can have a rapid transformation of Karamoja.  Another mention has been made of parastatals.  I would like to make two comments about parastatals.

(i) It is true that we passed a law here which was to guide in the disposal of parastatals.  I am happy to note that most of the parastatals which have been disposed are doing well.  In fact, my major interest here is the indigenisation of the ownership of these parastatals; I am not happy where the foreigners come in again and hold majority interests or even total interests in these parastatals; because this one leads to - whether you like it or not, flight of capital and it brings so called experts from outside, when actually we have our own Ugandan component of expatriates and experts, I mean experts not expatriates, sorry.  So, 

I want to - while I am aware that we need to build capacity, I want us to get the experience of some other countries, whereby in a few cases most crucial enterprises which I am going to mention, Ugandans are given a deliberate percentage of shareholding and are given a period of time within which to fulfill tax sector and if they do not fulfill it, then it is open to the rest of the people in the world.  

In particular, I am talking about the following parastatals, where the general public already has a big interest; these include Uganda Commercial Bank, the Uganda Railways Corporation, Uganda Airlines Corporation, Uganda Electricity Board, National Water and Sewerage Corporation and Uganda Posts and Telecommunications Corporation.  Many Ugandans tend to think that when you are disposing of these enterprises, give a special indigenisation bias; so that Ugandans are given some percentage share holding.

Finally, I want to talk about security. I want to thank and commend government for the efforts especially in my region of West Nile which has made it possible for war mongers, from neighbouring countries, especially Sudan, where a former Colonel in Amin’s Army, Juma Oris, has been trying to destabilise us, not possible.  This is a big achievement, and people of West Nile especially Arua where I come from, are saying, they are not going to allow any war in the region. (Applause) 

However, I want to call upon government to do more than what it is doing in protecting the people; because only last Saturday morning, when we were going to celebrate the Cooperative Day, there was an incident of a mine which a land rover belonging to the Veterinary Department was involved, this was near the border, which means, there is still more work that has to be done.  I also want to call upon the rest of Ugandans to continue to reject war; so that we can have meaningful peace that can result into the achievement of the ideals we have set forward for ourselves.  Thank you very much.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI (Bujenje County, Masindi):  I would like to begin by thanking His Excellency the President for coming out with an elaborate, important communication or what we would call a mission statement for this year.  Mr Chairman, as you may realise last year, we had a problem of the Communication from the Chair.  This one, the one of this year is quite good and it was well prepared, people took their time and did their work properly.  So, I have got a few areas I would like to comment about.

I would like to begin about the role of this Parliament.   I am happy that His Excellency, the President has praised the role of this Parliament; it is really in order that this Parliament deserves to be praised, because in the history - I do not want to repeat myself, but in the history of this country, we have never had a Parliament which had people who are upright, people who are incorruptible -(Applause)- people who talk their minds -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI:  People who have worked patriotically, who do not believe in tribalism -(Applause)- and people who are working for the good of this nation and they are in this Parliament.  I would like anybody to challenge me on that, that -(Laughter)- I do not want Mr Wanendeya to disturb me because -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please, get information from Mr Wanendeya.

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Member on the Floor that some of us are not on the Boards of Parastatals, may be, they see we are upright, but would those who are on those Boards and accepted to be on those Boards, when we as Members of Parliament are supposed to be impartial, would they say that they are incorruptible?  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Mr Chairman, I thank Mr Wanendeya for that information.  But as far as I am concerned, -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Mr Chairman, I am a member of PARAC - Parastatal Public Accounts Committee, but from what I have seen, many of our members from this House are not biased and they have done their work very diligently.  Anyway, in a family, you cannot rule out mal-practices, there could be some, but generally, our Members have done their jobs very well.  So, I was elaborating that this Council deserves to be praised and I can assure you, with your able Chairmanship, you have managed to run this Council very effectively -(Applause)- I have never seen any Chairman who has been able - because why I am saying so -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Recently, you know we have had another Chairman to assist but what I saw, I do not want to reveal all, but the public can judge. I would like to thank Government for starting Entandikwa; because I find that Entandikwa is the only help the wanainchi in the rural areas especially poor areas like our districts, where I come from, they are going to benefit.  This Entandikwa has just started - it started last financial year, but I can assure you, in my constituency, people have started praising the government for this innovation; they are very happy, because at least, many of those people are to benefit from this Entandikwa cannot even afford to start.  But at least government has made effort to ensure that they can get the little and then start.  There is no government since we got Independence who had ever started this kind of scheme, you see.  

So, I would like to commend the NRM for this matter.  The only thing I would like to add on Entandikwa is that, since this scheme is going to succeed, government should try to increase the amount of money; so that many people can benefit out of this.  

I would like to talk about the security aspect.  I am very happy that the security situation in this country is good and as you very well know, Mr Chairman, and Members, without security, there is no development.  

In my area - I am trying to talk, giving a real physical example from my village, from my county which I represent.  You find that today, almost every village you get 10/20 young men who are putting up houses, iron roofed houses, which was not the case.  This shows really there is some improvement, this I would invite any member to come in my constituency and witness this if you thin that NRM has not brought development.  So, the security aspect, the NRM has handled this properly and I thank the Movement for that and even I would like to thank the Government for having put LDUs in say, in our rural areas in Kampala here, for example.  The security has improved tremendously.  I happen to stay in Kawempe, I was not able even to have a house there, just because of the insecurity, but today, I am able to sleep very well and I am happy, just because the LDUs have strengthened and have reinforced security in that area and I commend the government for this.

I would like also to comment very briefly on the Constitution.  The Constitution making process is going on well, we are very happy and we would like it to be expedited so that, the tax payer can be saved of so much going; because people have said that democracy is expensive, but up to what time?  We should try to really make sure that we, the Members who happen to be in this CA, take their time, attend, be there punctually and deliberate and finish, because the public is waiting for what is coming out.  They do not want to walk out! (Laughter)  So, we would like this exercise to end and I am very sure with our able leadership, it will succeed.

I would like to talk also on the restoration of Kingdoms; because this is part of what is in the Communication from the Chair.  We Banyoro, we are very grateful to this government of having restored our Kingship, because we know, we are now Banyoro, we can be respected anywhere!  You see, formerly, I would like to inform you that, we have been taken -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI:  We were not respected at all, because every tribe was coming in with its own culture, you see, the whole thing was, Bunyoro, Masindi, Hoima and Kibale, all looked as damping grounds, because people bring every culture in that area.  So, Banyoro were almost being taken up.  But by restoration of the Kingdom, Banyoro have now an identity which is so important; we can move very proudly with our heads up! (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Mr Chairman, I would like to talk about corruption which briefly also, because I am happy that the President talked about corruption.  Corruption, really I would like - I am not saying that this country is really very corrupt, but today, I have observed, because of the exposure, this government has exposed so much about corruption.  So, there is no yardstick to measure that say, Obote II, they were doing like this, now NRM is doing like this.  But you can see because in Obote II, there was nobody who could report on anything.  People could not even read newspapers.  We were all on the run but today every one is settled.  We can read newspapers, we can criticise, -(Applause)- which was not there at that material time.  So, when people talk that this government is very corrupt, I think they are just being too unfair because they do not seem to reflect on the past. I did not go in exile, I was here.  So, whenever I talk a statement here, I know it but people maybe who have been in exile, when they begin writing some of these stories; they have not been here, they do not know what was happening during Obote II when people were running, when houses were being burnt, when people were being killed in their houses, when men were no longer respected as men. (Laughter)  

I would like to thank government for creating Public Accounts Committee.  There was Public Accounts Committee in Obote II but that Committee did not do any work.  Look today, these two Committees what role they have played, how much has been exposed?  You can see the performance.  I would talk say, on behalf of PARAC, how much we have helped these parastatals in order to improve their performance.  Those who have had the time to read our reports, you can check that yourselves.  You can see the performance of parastatals but that has come in because of this government.  Who could dare do that during Obote II?  

I would like also to thank government for starting the oil exploration.  This has started in Bunyoro and our people are very grateful to this government but that goes back - if there is not peace that oil will not be exploited and it has taken so many governments.  Even the colonial government looked at it and left it there.  It is only just the NRM Government which has taken this endeavour.  So, we must compliment it and the Banyoro people have got a lot of hope once this oil is discovered, once it comes out our problems will be solved.  I am aware and I am talking confidently because we have got a poor and infrastructure.  Everything is bad there but I know with oil being there, government will be forced to tarmac all roads in Bunyoro.  

So, I would like to conclude by talking about the economy aspect.  Our economy as you are aware, is quite buoyant and I would like on this note, to thank His Excellency, the President for the initiative he is taking and he continues to take so as to revive the economy because if we are very poor, then we continue to fight each other for the small bread.  You can imagine - I would like to tell you, the scenario of our politics in Bunyoro.  Everyone is craving to become a politician, everyone wants to come in as RC.  Then you ask yourself how many chairmen are you going to have?  How many MPs are you going to have?  How many RC V Chairmen are you going to have, but this is because all people believe it is only through the political line where people can eat.  Which is wrong.  But if the economy is buoyant, if the economy is doing very well, then some of us we shall even resign and say, my friend, I am tired.  You just go in business.  I have got my friends who are businessmen who are earning more money than myself and they do not even have the knowledge like the one I have about -(Laughter)- business management but they are too rich.  

Really, we must give credit where it is due.  I am happy that Uganda Revenue Authority for example has collected a record of 500 billion as of last Financial Year.  This is a big achievement.  We did not collect such tax and I would encourage government to continue the efforts to find ways of taxing people properly.  I am sure by the introduction of VAT, the problem will be resolved of under-assessing, over-assessing so that people will pay proper taxes and those loopholes which are still obtaining will be closed.  So, all in all, much as I do not want to expound much about the economy, people can know for themselves what it is today because how many cars are on the roads today?  Traffic jams everywhere you go.  What has caused that?  Houses springing up almost in every place.  That shows that people have got the money.  There is no poverty.  Poverty is for the people who are very weak; people who do not want to work. (Laughter)  

I would like to end by thanking you to accord me this opportunity so that I could air out my words.  Again, I would also like to thank our able leadership for running this country in this manner and we hope that this country will never go back to the dogs.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Mukasa please.

MR MUKASA (Workers Representative):  I rise to support the Motion, Mr Chairman, and in supporting the Motion, I want to start unusually to the last paragraph of the President’s Speech.  In the last paragraph, the President said and I quote; ‘We have restored hope, where there was despondence and I believe we have laid the foundation on which the future development of our country can be built.’  It is the hope we look for.  It is because of the hope that we are here.  When we lose hope, we even lose life.  I do associate with this statement that at least Ugandans have got hope.  They have got hope that is why we have seen many constructions everywhere.  There is hope that we have seen road constructions.  There is hope that we have seen hospitals rehabilitated.  We have hope that we have seen schools operate once again.  

I would like to associate with previous speakers’ sentiments that we should not, in any circumstances, condone fighting or coming to power by means of a gun.  I think this resorts to peaceful means of acquiring power.  Having said that, I think it is also in the interest of my Colleagues here and I think they do expect a word from me of what happened in Lugazi recently.  This is quite associated with hope and I would not like anybody to disrupt this hope.  It is by coincidence that the Mover of the Motion is the Minister of Internal Affairs and I would like to inform him as I Inform everybody - all of you here that recently 28th of June, death occurred in Lugazi of a worker who was shot by a policeman.  This is a worker who was claiming his rights.  Actually, workers moved from one camp to their head office - the union office, to claim for their salary which had been delayed for a month.  They were marching to the head offices to claim for their salaries which had been delayed for a month and their annual leaves which were delayed for not one year, not two years, not three, but even over five years.  This particular worker who was shot was one; of those who had claimed and asked for his annual leave.  He comes from Karamoja, he wanted to go to Karamoja on his leave.  Of course, when the leave was finally granted, he did not go alive; he went in a coffin.  May God bless his soul.  

I have heard Members murmuring that they were carrying pangas.  Yes, they were, and it is not peculiar in a plantation.  Plantation, they use pangas, they use slashers, they use all those sorts of tools and when they are moving from their house, they move with them to the plantation.  When they are moving from the plantation to their houses, they move with them.  They do not abandon them and when I contacted the police, they admitted that, that is the usual way of moving by these people.  They move with their pangas.  It is not peculiar.  They had not injured anybody, and it was alleged that they had tortured school children and teachers which is an unfortunate statement because these children belong to those cane cutters.  It is to say that the fathers had gone to torture their children.  There is no evidence to that effect.  They were marching peacefully and what happened, for the interest of the Members, these people were about to reach their offices, then the police came and then they ordered them to abandon their pangas and they did; they ordered them to sit down, they sat and then one policeman called Okoth, came and approached the man at a very close range and shot him.  I reached the place for instance, the blood was concentrated in one place, meaning that actually the man was seated.  I

 want to extend my gratitude to the Police personnel - to the police officer, in fact, through the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs who is here that they - first of all, they admitted their fault.  They arrested the man before we arrived at the place and we found him in the police custody.  I thank the police.  Secondly, the District Commander Officer, Police, the Regional Police Commander took interest, they joined us in a meetings and I thank them for that.  However, we demand that whoever gave the order to shoot, should be brought to justice.  Now, having said that, however, I am not saying that the offence was committed by the whole police.  It was committed by one man called Okoth and maybe by that person who gave the order.  

Having said that, I congratulate His Excellency, the President for having presented this speech as already praised by my Colleagues.  Uganda adopted SAPS (Structural Adjustment Programmes).  But the problem with this implementation of adjustment programmes; they were not accompanied by social dimensions.  They do not wear human face.  In the process, many workers have lost their jobs and the investors seem not to be bothered.  I approached one employer called Wavamuno.  I went to his place, he welcomed me and then when I started talking about the workers’ plight, he said, look Mukasa, when I was buying this plant and I bought it to make profit, to make money and I am here to make money.  I think, with respect to the policy of this government, it is not the intention; I think it is not the intention of this government or the policy makers that the new investors’ role or interest should only be to make money.  They should equally be interested in the people who help them to make that money.  When they have come, they have dishonoured all our collective workers’ rights.  We have concluded agreements where all workers’ rights are consolidated.  The right to earn a proper salary, the right to have a leave but they have all been dishonoured and unfortunately these people making these agreements have not called us near - surprisingly, with respect and I need the solidarity of this House that even the Ministry of Labour which is responsible for the working class is not always involved and whenever we rush to them, they say, what do we do?  We do not know.  One morning they find Nile Hotel is taken over, workers are at the gate prevented to enter by the police, they were recruited at interviews by management but they are dismissed by police at gates.  Now, this is abnormal.  That is why I am - this structural adjustment programme.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor through you, that workers’ rights must be fought for.  Workers’ rights will not be given on silver plates.  He comes from NOTU.  NOTU should educate their Members their rights so that their rights are enforced by them.  You see, the situation which happened in Lugazi is because workers are not educated on their rights.  If they were educated on their rights, they should have used their structure, they should have in fact sent stewart for that section to come and consult about their rights which were being trodden upon; yet they are not educating their workers and they are only taking from them is a problem to the union.  Thank you. (Laughter)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  This is a very important issue that is being talked about now.  Mr Chairman, it is very absurd for an hon. Member to stand up and misinform this august House on an issue of which he does not understand well.  It so happened that on that particular day, I happened to be there and the process was not because the workers were not being guided of what process to take.  In fact, what the workers were doing was the right procedure.  They were marching towards the union office where their leaders were; and they were ordered by that policeman who was drunk together with his counterparts to sit down and put down their pangas which they were using in plantation.  They obeyed and even that man did not even reconcile with his brains, he simply even mentioned the word that you guys, I am going to shoot above knee level.  Immediately after mentioning that word, he shot that worker of our and he injured four of them who are still admitted in the hospital.  

Now, when a Member comes here and mentions that those guys were not being guided to follow the proper channels and structures of which I am sure I can educate him about those structures and he goes ahead and says, we are collecting money from those people and not educating them and by record not to scard out several seminars on how administration is being handled about the Trade Union matters.  It is very indeed absurd and painful.  I would instead wish that, that Member would be now together with us in condemning such an act rather than saying, let the workers die because they did not know their structure and the method of following up their problems.  Thanks very much.

MR MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, thank you.  I thank Members who have given me those pieces of information.  However, much as I would not go into details, as how we train our people and how long the disputes lasted from what time but I would like to suggest it to the Member who said that we do not train our people, that even if a person is not trained, the response or whatever it is, it is shooting him.  You do not shoot him to teach him.  

However, I want also to remind that Member that the police have accepted their fault, the management has accepted.  Now, it is not because that they were not trained, they were not educated.  It is because the policeman was drunk and he shot.  It is in their regulations.  They do not simply shoot without an order.  They shoot in most cases to incapacitate somebody but not to kill.  But somebody was killed.  

I would have expected, with respect that whoever wanted to give me information from this House to be sympathetic with the instance.  However, I was saying that Structural Adjustment Programmes have not been handled with human face because take the example of Bile Hotel.  In the morning workers found themselves at the gate guarded by the police.  Police are not employers and they were told - and all their belongings were in Nile Hotel and then they were hindered to enter and their employment contract ended there.  They were not paid and until I met the Minister of State for Finance who was very cooperative and they paid them part of their terminal benefits.  I think this is not the way we should handle structural adjustments.  We accepted structural adjustment programmes.  We trade unionists, we accepted it and we only wanted to be involved in the process of implementation so that we work together, we accept wrongs and rights an then at the end of the day, if there is a credit we all share, if there is a blame, we all share.  

I was talking about privatisation.  Much as it is one of the solutions of improved economy of this country like many other developing countries, but we should be careful with these new investors.  We have had instances and we have reports that the investor of Nile Hotel every two hours he goes to the team, collects the money which has been collected.  He goes to his room puts it there.  Every two hours and at the end of the day, he counts the money in his room and then whether he goes to a forex bureau, whatever it is, this should be investigated.  Where does this money go?  Is it actually banked?  There was an agreement to expand Nile Hotel.  Now, those agreements - I think hon. Members should look at these agreements. (Interjection)  

Now, these agreements include the expansion of Nile Hotel, swimming pool but sure are we that he is not going to use - has he brought this money anyway in Uganda?  Now, is it not possible that he is waiting to use the very money he has collected from Uganda to make that expansion?  If this money is not syphoned elsewhere. When I start investing this matter, I get worried.  I understand the government is paying a lot of money to the use of Conference Centre.  Incidentally, at the end of the year, the new investor will collect money from government to pay off the money he is supposed to pay for a structure.  Now, there is the question of TUMPECO which was sold at 400,000 US dollars.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Information from the hon. Member.

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the member holding the floor that they should have concentrated on the problems of the workers.  I realise that whereas he is concerned about the death of the employee who was in Kakira, he has not told us that he has not fought to bring about the enactment of the law. Up to now, the person who died has been an amount of Shs 38,000.  

So, I feel that the hon. Member who is representing NOTU here - the workers here, should be more concerned about improving the workers’ plight because 38,000 actually is no money and for the last 15 years, somebody has been trying to draft the law and NOTU has kept quiet.  I am concerned and feel Mr honourable should work on that.

MR MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, I thank the Member for this information but I think if he waited for a while, I was coming to that very soon.  However, I was saying TUMPECO was sold at US 400,000 dollars but the complicate, the structure is worth that even the equipments in that place.  The factory is manufacturing plate numbers and there is security element involved, I think the government should ensure that people’s vehicles will be actually secure if such a plate is in the hands of a private investor.  

I am also concerned with job creation, in so far as new investors are concerned.  Now, I have listened to statements made by the Minister for Finance that so many investors have created to many jobs but how far is it true?  It is not true, in my opinion.  I have gone around.  How many workers have been employed by the investors of Nile Hotel?  There were over a thousand workers, they reduced it half way.  But when they were filling investment forms, they said, we shall be employing to start with 500 and then 500, and when they are given such a plant, of course, they do not create theirs, they buy our own plants here.  Now, they find workers they dismiss them and they report back.  We are now employing 500.  They are not new jobs, they are old jobs less those who were working.  

Recently, I happened to attend the World Social Summit which was attended by our Excellency the President.  It was attended by over 127 heads of state.  They all resolved that there should be job creations agendas.  There is no way you are going to improve the country’s economy when everybody is jobless.  Where are we going to end?  We have suggested this, we have proposed an employment policy and fortunately enough, we have created one - we in NOTU, I think my hon. Member should know this.  We have been working not resting.  We have actually instituted an employment policy which I am going to present to my Minister and then to the Ministers concerned but we should be guided by employment policy.  We request the government not to embark on the retrenchment exercise before an employment policy is put in place.  That will guide you as who should go and who should be reserved but you do not simply say to everybody, go.  We have seen people who even studied on our money, taxpayers’ money up to a Masters degree, PHD redundant.  Why did you educate them and what are you preparing for them?  

I ask this House of course, their solidarity that we should be mindful about job creation when we talk about government policy.  That should be on the Agenda No.1.  Employment policy - we have said elsewhere that redundancy creates a lot of evils.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Information from honourable.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of information.  Employment must be a policy.  However, the only way you can create employment is to widen the productive part of the economy at the base but you can only if you increase investment.  What is important and what is unfortunate sometimes is that there is a lag between the time of investment and the time when the investment employs many more people.  But after that investment, then there is a spill over and technological economies so that other sectors now can depend on that investment that we have created in the first instance both using the forward and backward linkages.  Therefore, the current policy of privatisation and that of creating a situation where there are greater assets put in place, is basically an employment policy.

MR MUKASA:  I entirely agree with the hon. Member, Mr Chairman, but he should not forget a very important fact -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, try to wind up please.

MR MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, I was only saying that much as it takes tome to create jobs, there must be a programme in place that we are going to invest, we are going to create employment in such a sector; whether public or private, whether agriculture or whatever it is.  There must be a programme known. 

I want to end my contribution by thanking the President in saying that there should be, during this Session about 13 instruments discussed by this House and approved.  He mentions the priority 4.  Unfortunately the labour laws were not there among the four.  I hope they are among the rest up to 13 but Trade union Movement in this Uganda has really suffered because we are still operating almost ordinances.  The Trade Union Decree left by the life President is still there.  We are still operating it and it should be amended and therefore, Mr Chairman, I support the Motion.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Kagonyera.

PROF. KAGONYERA (Rubabo County, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I support the Motion moved by hon. Kiyonga.  In supporting this Motion, I would like to make a few observations on democracy, the economy and education.  While some of us we were not able to make it to the CA to participate in making of a new Constitution, both as Ugandan citizens as well as members of the Supreme Legislative Body in the country, have a right to make comments and if necessary to be heard as far as making of the new Constitution is concerned. (Applause)  

Therefore, in opposition to what hon. Tiberondwa was saying in the House yesterday, as far as I am concerned, this House has a right to comment on the Constitution making process.  It is also important that when one feels strongly about a thing, one talks about it.  That is why the born again always stand up in public and confess their sins.  If a person feels ashamed of a thing being talked about, they should not do it.  I would like to mention that the Movement system of government that some of us are advocating, is a direct product of failure multi-partism in this country. (Applause) 

Therefore, anybody, instead of blaming us for advocating this, should blame themselves for having made it absolutely necessary for us to think the way we think today.  We belonged to political parties and we had to give them up not without regret but it was necessary to make a change.  Hon. Kiyonga was talking about eating yesterday and people laughed.  But it is true, Mr Chairman, that if we take stroke of what has happened in the last nine years, we can talk about the Movement system of government with pride.  I will bet -(Applause)- the fact that in certain circumstances, in certain parts of this country, we have had problems and we hope that with concerted effort on the part of everybody involved, we shall be able to overcome; we shall overcome indeed.  

I do not understand when people talk a derogative manner about individual ability; about people representing the electorate in their individual capacities.  In fact, people do not realise that in political parties are a means, not an end in themselves. (Applause)  

Therefore, it is necessary for us to remember that only yesterday or the day before, parties having failed in Britain, people presented themselves in their individual capacity, for the people to choose.  Major stood as a conservative but what the people were called upon to decide on, is the capacity of the individual to perform.  Therefore, that was a higher level at which the British people were being asked to make a decision.  Why should anybody be derogatory about it when we say it is not enough to sing slogans; you present yourself and let the people judge you in your right, in your capacity.

I would also like to appreciate the President’s statement on this House.  This House has not been given its proper place in the history of this country in the past but I personally believe and strongly so, that if one institution has contributed very positively to the development in that last 9 years, in this House. (Applause)  

Time and again, we are reminded that we are puppet, that we are rubber stamps.  I could not find any more words to condemn such a negative attitude.  It has been said here and I am adding emphasis that this House has thrown out government sponsored Motions.  Government Bills have been thrown out of this House.  Had it ever been done in the past in this country?  Never before.  

This Parliament has taken government bills and carried out what you would call massive surgery, plastic surgery, if you like; -(Laughter)- and we have turned these bills in bills that are not only acceptable to this House but are even responsive to the wishes of the people of this country.  So, how can anybody stand up and say that this House has been a rubber stamp?  We talk about freedom of association but there is a limit to it.  In countries like the United States where I have had luck to live, everybody knows only too well that in public schools, you are not allowed to say parochial prayers.  That is the fact.  Why?  Because the American people recognise that in the morning when the children divide themselves, Catholics in their room, Baptists in theirs, Muslims in theirs, Jews in theirs, Hindus in theirs, after the prayers, they will ask why are we divided?

So, in prudence and wisdom, the Americans say no, to public prayers.  Religion is a private affair in your house and in your time and in your Church.  These are people who are very experienced about probes that sectarianism can cause to society and we are saying that much as political parties can be good means, not an end as I said, can be good means to an end, you can compare them to giving a Rolls Royce Car to someone who has never driven.  We are saying, why do we not lay down the right environment for people to be able to ride these Rolls Royces of yours and the Movement government has said or recognised the cornerstones of democracy.  What are they? I can mention a few.  I am a student of politics but independence of Judiciary.  Can anybody in this House or outside contest the independence of the Judiciary in this country?  How many cases has the government of Uganda lost in our courts when in fact we know as a matter of fact that the offences were committed and the people who have committed these offences are free Ugandans enjoying their rights because we believe in the rule of law.  

Therefore, I would like to appeal to those who are moving a little bit too fast, to take a little bit of time.  The trouble is, we always look at ourselves and not our country.  When shall I be in such position? (Applause)  Is it absolutely necessary, Mr Chairman? (Applause)  Therefore, I think personally that it is regrettable of leaders who have been known on record in the past to be talking about multi-partism or chaos in this country.  

Let me make my observations on the economy.  Indeed, it is said that the people of this country are poor or even poorer than the year before.  That is perfectly true but what do you expect of a growing population and no growth in the economy.  Negative growth sometimes and yet, we have got evidence here to show that the Movement Government has done its best to alleviate poverty.  In today’s paper, I know some people going to say that it is a government paper but I think the source of the information can be reached; the Uganda economy picked 13th globally and if you look at the list of the countries -(Applause)- that have come before Uganda - all of them, China, Vietnam, Singapore, Thailand, Malaysia, South Korea, Indonesia, Taiwan, Papua New Guinea, Burma, Sri Lanka; are all in Asia.  Then, there is Tunisia in North Africa and guess what?  Uganda. (Applause)  

If the information in here is not authentic, I have got the East African and it is not published in Uganda, it is reasonably independent paper.  This week’s East African has this to say. On page 6, Uganda Records Highest Annual Tourism Earnings Growth Rate. (Applause)  I do not need to read through.  We can also look at other layman’s indicators of some growth in the economy of this country.  If one cared to find out, how many bicycles have been sold in this country between 1986 and today.  If one cared to find out how many tonnes of roofing corrugated iron sheets have been used and I am choosing those items because those are two items that are bought by the ‘Wanainchi’ not in Kampala, but in the villages.  They will be able to tell or to learn for themselves that at least something has been done.  I need not to talk about some people during the last coffee boom who were saying that they no longer drink local ‘pombe’ but they are also beer drinkers.  

I am not saying this, that I am oblivious of the fact that we still have problems in the country; however, if you look again in this paper, today’s - there is a very huge advertisement, I do not know what it was. But I think it was strategic.  There is a very huge advertisement somewhere by the Cotton Development Authority.  Some of the parts of this country that are in comparatively greater disadvantage monetary, are the areas that have been targeted by the Cotton Development Authority in which I am told the government is going to invest 30 million dollars and the Chairman of the Cotton Development Authority comes from one of those areas.  

So, the challenge we have as leaders is to find out how that money is being utilised.  Is it being used well?  Instead of saying government has done nothing.  Let us follow that money and other monies and put those monies to good use but to blame the government for doing nothing about economic growth like some people have been saying is in contempt of truth.  

I want to mention one or two last things.  One, I appreciate the statement made by the President on his government’s commitment -a living wage because without a living wage, the civil service will be a giant in zero inertia.  It just will not move unless the civil servants are paid a living wage.  Therefore, I would like this not to be a cliché and some people have turned it into that.  It should not be a cliché but a commitment as the President said that we must pay a living wage if we are going to expect returns from the civil service and unless we have a functioning civil service, even the rest of the economy we are talking about cannot move.  

That is why it is not surprising that the President in his speech to a recent meeting and also the Minister for Finance, they complained about inability of the civil service to deliver the goods.  Part of this depends - is a result of this lack of a living wage and when we are talking about that living wage, I want us to remember educational institutions because unless you have sound educational institutions, sound educational policy, the development, the progress, we are talking about cannot advance even in these giants, the tigers of Asia, I believe strongly that there are two things that they have had to address.  

One, is education and the foundation of that education is discipline because there is tendency for people to talk about knowing algebra, advanced curriculum, Shakespeare and what have you.  Now, if you do not address the question -(Interjection)- Mr Chairman, what I was saying is that in our schools, unless we squarely address the problem of discipline, we are wasting our time.  You can get a first class degree from Makerere but if you are not a disciplined person, that first class degree will be of no use to yourself and to your society.  

So, I strongly suggest that in the educational curriculum of this country, there must be core subjects on character building. (Applause)  Even in the University.  I do not see why a doctor besides learning medical ethics, does not learn about society.  What is expected of a citizen and many people take these things for granted, but it is surprising how little many of us do not know about our responsibility t the society we live and that is why there is a tendency for us leaders to look at ourselves instead of looking at our society.  

The last thing I would like to say is in a agreement with my friend over there from Arua and I also appreciate his commitment by part of this country to peace because when we do not have peace, we cannot grow.  When it comes to privatisation, we should be conscious because unless we privatise an economy in which the people of this country participate actively and positively -(Applause)- we can create problems and this is a concern to those who are concerned with privatisation that they should listen to what people have to say.  In fact, when the economy is not democratised and I am not talking about political democratising, I am talking about economical democratisation.  You will have problems. That is why even the workers, my friends were talking about might cause problems because the economy is not properly democratised.  So, I would like privatisation to be treated very carefully.  

Lastly, I would like to mention that ultimately it is the responsibility of the government to maintain peace and security in the country.  Therefore, I do not expect the government or anybody in government to apologise to anybody if government attempts to live up to its responsibility. (Applause)  We may talk about our freedom as individuals or as groups, but in the end when people die, when property is destroyed, it is the executive arm of government which is held responsible and, therefore, government is right to say no matter what we do or say, ultimately we must maintain peace and order in the country.  How else could we be developing faster than anybody else in this continent except Tunisia, if we did not have relative peace and security in this country?  I support the Motion, Mr Chairman. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Marwas please.

MR MARWAS (Dodoth County):  Thank you, Mr Chairman, for allowing me to add my voice.  I stand to support the Motion moved by the Minister for Internal Affairs but before I embark on the Motion, I would like to thank you for the speech you made to this House yesterday mainly on two issues.  

You have told us that since we have been peaceful and we have been tolerant to each other, we should continue and you have also appealed to this House not to change from the spirit of consensus that has enabled this House to have achieved the massive results.  I say this, because at the back of my mind, it reminds me of the other House we created, the CA where I have read in papers that some people have started again not to talk to others because they side agreed in the CA.  These are things that used to happen.  We thought that we had come to an end about disagreeing here and then following it up and not talking.  This House, I think the Members have ever disagreed but have always talked outside.  

So, I think we are not only superior, but I think we have shown these people of the CA, that this is the mother House because we have ever disagreed but we have always continued to talk outside. (Applause) I am saying this because in the speech of the President, since we are the mother House, I think we have a right to comment on what is going on up there.  The thing that has disgusted me is, this question in the CA of Members standing up and say, we have won; others stand up and say, we have lost.  I am asking these Members, what do they mean by loss in the Constituent Assembly?  

My understanding of the CA is where we must reach a consensus of how we shall all live in this country called Uganda.  So, when others stand up and run away and say, we have lost and others say, we have won, I share the president’s disturbance when he says, the problem we have is, we have sent politicians not to make that Constitution.  We must come out of this.  There is no loser and winner in that Constituent Assembly.  Ugandans must be the ultimate winners or losers.  

So, I am asking my Colleagues to wear that chance of being there.  My problem is that we have two people now. You have the 38 original Members of this Council.  For the last few years or so, we have been here, I want to say this - those Members who are still present today, have done an exemplary job for this country.  Up to-date, they have lived to the reason why they went to lead the war.  My only concern is, there are latecomers who came in later.  There seems to be a problem growing because there are those who think now they are more - I am sorry, I should not have quoted what hon. Kategaya said.  Some people claim to be more Catholic than the Pope.  But I am giving this warning especially to the hon. Members.  There are some of us who have come in our own ways and have entered the leadership, power of the NRM.  Some of these people are bringing us problems in the Movement.  Some of them have become so intolerant.  

I would also like to inform the hon. speaker and the Members that recently when I went to Karamoja, I was also very pleased at the level of security in the area and also at the unity of leaders in the same area.  So, there is a tremendous change of leadership.  I am pleased to find out that Naburi -(Interruption)

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, it is a pity and I would not like to dwell very much on this. But there is a person if hon. Members so wish and they would like you to substantiate this with the unity of this House; I will Mr Chairman.  

Hon. John Kazoora after this House spent a lot of time up to about six months panel beating the Press Bill he still writes and I quote those very areas to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, seeking that as the leader of Government Business in NRC, you are eminently suited to arrest dangerous train for the reaction of the Press.  In order not to compound the problem, may I suggest that the Bill should not be presented to the President for ascent before the irregularity caused by the Deputy Chairman is enacting of the Rule 61, 1, 9, is cured.  Because of the Act, he is ascented to it, will be open to being declared null and void.  

But all that we are saying here is that we have only one Attorney General to advise the Government.  We have only one Parliament and whatever has come on the Floor is 100 per cent ours.  Unless one of us does not know the Rules of Procedure, how do you appeal to the Executive Arm of Government, to do what?  The Bill has come here; it has been legislated upon and has been agreed and it is unanimous that it should go and seek Presidential ascent.  Just one person.  This may be seen as a village committee.  When he says that there was consternation in the House when the Deputy Chairman wrongly stopped me more than once from speaking or introducing the Amendment and one Member remarked that the Chamber had become a village committee.  Mr Chairman, you are in good control over the House than its proceedings.  All the Members should also know that whoever is here - there are 200 and so, I have no doubt in my mind that all these people cannot make very good law such that a person who is defeated on the Floor of this House should take another Parliament outside this.

Secondly, I would like also to touch on economy which any person may not understand the way I may not understand how grey my hair is getting everyday.  We are today No.13 in the whole world as far as economic growth is concerned.  I would like us to encourage ourselves that because of this positive trend, we should rally behind our leader and people in Government and also pass through legislature.  

Not only that, there was also a mention of corruption which has been exposed by both government institutions and the Press.  Exposer itself is not enough, until which action is taken.  For this, I am grateful to the Public Accounts Committee that I always read whenever they expose, they try to expose to the extent that such a person is apprehended and somehow brought to the book.  This is what is lacking.  So much mentions have been made of the IGG Office.  I do not know how many cases they have referred to the DPP; also Legal Actions.  If you are exposed and found to be prosecutable, you must obey to the law of this country.  There is nothing wrong with that.  

Not only that, someone somewhere I think I want the retrenched people in Lira District to be unnecessarily negative about this government.  There were people who were retrenched in 1993.  To date they have not received their packages.

AN HON. MEMBER:  I would like to give this information which is connected with the retrenchees but in another sector.  The workers of NEC have appealed to this House to assist; we have written to the Minister who is in front here to assist but nothing was done up to the time when they have appealed to the President.  I think this state of affair should be stopped.

MR MBABAZI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the information I want to give on that particular piece is this.  It is true that the terminal benefits of NEC workers, those that have been laid off, have not been settled yet.  But it is also true that NEC has made commitments to settle this.  The problem has been that initially their claim is a claim from the time when they started working for institutions.  Most of these institutions were institutions that had belonged to the Asians which were taken over by Custodian Body and some of them were taken over by the then Government.  So, there was a problem of sorting out what entitlement follows in what period and this has taken a bit of time mainly because of the bureaucracy and secondly, because of the re-organisation which we all know was going on in NEC.  

So, I would like to assure Members and those particular individuals who it is true have suffered because of this delay in payment of their terminal benefits that everything is being done to cover whatever their entitlement is.  I thank you. 

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, for this good information which to me should like consolation, because when they talk of arrangement is being made, it is a commitment and yet this commitment does not come by.  That is very unfortunate.  I would like to support in conclusion this very Motion which was moved by very able Minister who was my Chairman and because of his competence, he was elevated so that you were able to recognise me to replace him as Chairman of the Board.  With this, I beg to support.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  With this, we have come to the end of today’s session.


(The Council rose at 4.45 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 6 July 1995 at 2.30 p.m.)

