Thursday, 6 July 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. at Parliamentary House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

The Chairman, Al Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR CHILDREN BILL, 1995

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT (Mr Baguma Isoke) Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: ‘The National Council for Children Bill, 1995’ be read for the First Time.

THE CHILDREN BILL, 1995

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT (Mr Baguma Isoke) Mr Chairman, I beg to move that a Bill entitled: ‘The Children Bill, 1995’ be read for the First Time.

THE ARCHITECTS REGISTRATION BILL, 1993

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa) Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: ‘The Architects Registration Bill, 1993’ be read the First Time.

MOTION

(General Debate continued.)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Lady from Masindi, please.  But hon. Members, today I am requesting you to be very brief when you are contributing to this Debate.

MISS BINTU (Youth Representative, Western Region) Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the Motion. Mr Chairman, and I would like to welcome you from Masindi where you joined the youth of western Region and celebrated the Youth’s Day. The words you gave to the community of Masindi sunk into their minds and up to now they still remember those words.  

I would like to thank the President for his speech he gave us, and with this one I would like foremost to thank him for the formation of the four vocational centers which are supposed to train the youth and women with skill development. (Applause)

I commend the work the NRM has been doing, especially, in training the youth in skill development, but I am still optimistic, I do not know how these four institutions will operate, especially, with the Western Region which comprises of 12 districts.  This is the biggest region and its population is so big that I am wondering where the institution will be located; and far more, I know the target group is the youths, and it is not the youths who are somehow education. The target group are the youth who are from the rural areas, and I was of the view that these youths since we know they have a problem and they cannot support themselves, I was asking hon. Members here if we can thing of the way how we can help these youths in joining these institutions; by this I mean, there was a statement stating that they should pay at least sort of tuition fee, but I do not know how they will cater for this one, because these youths even if they have failed right now to join some of these secondary schools, and I am wondering how they will join this institution and then come out.  

I would like to appreciate the efforts of the Ministry of Health, especially, where we had cholera problem around Lake Albert; they came up, they helped the community around Lake Albert, but up to now that community has got a problem, especially with the water hyacinth.  Though I appreciate the effort the government has made to ensure that at least they have tried to remove some of this plant, but I would like to bring it to your attention that the community around Lake Albert right now are in a problems; they do not have water, because this plant has moved up to the shores of Lake Albert, and these people right now they are moving ten miles looking for water, and yet that place is a bit dry So, I was of the view that if the Government could think of another method, possibly of using gravitational method, of getting water from River Waki to supply the community of Lisa, I think it would be of great help.

Mr Chairman, as you said we should be brief, I would like to end by asking, and I was to actually, enquire how much the Ministry of Local Government has done to the retrenchees who were retrenched in 1993? We have 23 retrenchees from Masindi District who have kept on moving to Kampala spending more but there is nothing materialising.  So, I am seeking clarification on this issue.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR MUTEBI MULWANIRA (Bujjumba County, Kalangala) Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. (Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, in order for us to plan when to participate in this - on the Motion, if you could tell us when wee are ending then we could know when to come in.  Otherwise we may be sitting back, thinking you are giving us two, three weeks when, actually we are ending next week. So, if you could indicate that this debate is going to end on Saturday, then we can come in. Mr Chairman, I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  But we do not work like that; proceed please.

MR MUTEBI MULWANIRA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman for giving me this opportunity to contribute on this important Motion. (Interruption)
  
AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman. In Parliament ordinarily - I mean national and parliamentary ways, a Chair does not get advisedly the Members; it is for the Members and the House to work together.  It is wrong to influence a Chair, in my view; I am an old man in this House!

MR MUTEBI MULWANIRA: Mr Chairman, with due respect to hon. Obwangor, I am very grateful for his information.  I would like to make some observations in contribution to the Motion tabled by my Colleague and Brother, hon. Kiyonga.  The Communication from the Chair is giving us a number of ideas onto which I would like to comment and request my hon. Colleagues to take consideration of the reflections from this Communication.  

Mr Chairman -(Interjection) Thank you for the protection.  

As I was saying, the President reminded us that this is the last session and we should review the performance of this House for the last nine years; and I would request, Members who came here in 1989 before us to reflect on what have we achieved as this Assembly for this country.  He requested us that since 1989 the 28 original members who were 38 ushered in many more to make sure that this House is shared by all people in Uganda, and from 38 we turned out to be 282.  Just like you have got a CA. 

I would like Members to recognise that this House which has lived for nine years has taught us the spirit of reconciliation and the spirit of tolerance.  I would not like to see the end of this House to generate spirits contrary to what we have achieved in the nine years.  Also, in one of the paragraphs the President told us that we have here passed as many as 113 Bills, and I would like reckon on some of these Bills.  We passed a Bill for the Inspectorate of Government and we have see in course of time that there are loopholes in this particular Bill, as people were demanding more so, my Friend who has not yet come, hon. Wanendeya, demanding for better and strict observation of corruption.  But we recognise that we gave the body of Inspectorate of Government less powers than what should have been given.  

Also, we had one which passed committees for this House which included PAC, and PAC has also been coming up with resolutions and recommendations and the follow up was curtailed because of how far PAC had the liberty to execute what have found out.  We also passed out a Bill, those who were here before us in 1987, for the KDA, and KDA developed nicknames here, like Karamaoja develops Arua, we did not understand it.  But when you read through that Bill, I am sure my Brother David Pulkol realises that most likely they should revisit that Statute.  In other words, as we pass laws in this House, what have we got to consider?  

I am just appealing, since you have got a number of Bills coming, let us not work in haste, let us not make remarks that will derail us from what we want to pass as a bill, because these Bills end up like laws, and we should be in positions to recognise that what we are doing for us today here is going to tie us people in future for this country. 

When I talk about the 38 Members, amongst whom you were, I would like to make a quotation for Members here - I am sure Rev. Atwai will help me in case I go wrong.  In Matthew Chapter 20, verse 28, they said that the son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister and to give his life a ransom for many.  The 38 did exactly that, they invited us here, let them not find out at the end of the day that we are not giving them a service that is worthwhile.  

I would like to get another observation on the President’s Communication.  Those of you who have got the small one, I do not know on which page it is. Page 4, he said that; “for the first time in the history of this country, the people of Uganda had an opportunity to make their constitution in the very last stages of this exercise.  The people through a free and a fair election brought Delegates.” And many of them here are a part of that group, the CA. 

I would like to make a little quotation for those Members of the CA that here Ugandans have survived through a lot of struggles, and Rev. Ongora Atwai, do not be worried I am not very good at quoting Bibles; but if you look at St. Paul’s letter to the Corinthians, Chapter 4, you will find that Paul says; I hope this letter was about Ugandans; the Ugandans have been afflicted in every way, but not crushed, because we are here; we have been perplexed but not driven to despair; we have been persecuted but not forsaken;  we have been struck down but not destroyed and we are still speaking as robber activities go on; we are still speaking as people are suffering in various parts of Uganda, and I would like the CA Delegates, please - many of us are part of the CA, and President was appealing to us that above all it requires you to have vision of the future of this country; a vision of stability and progress.  Members of CA, some of us come and listen to you in the House, we admire you for walking out and entering back, and for that we respect hon. Tiberondwa whose exercise of walking out was short-lived, and we thank you for that; and I would like him to take thins message to hi friends who walked out also  -(Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA: Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that I was going for a short-call (Laughter)

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that it is a very expensive style of going for a short-call with all his books.

MR MUTEBI MULWANIRA: Thank you very much for that information and I am sure Members are now comfortable that hon. Tiberondwa was not really walking out in the other style.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Point of information.  I would like Mr Chairman, to inform the hon. Minister that it was better that these people walked out, because when reasoning is isolated, such that they cannot reason any more, the best they would do would be to fight; the fact that they walked out is better than fighting.

MR MUTEBI MULWANIRA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  That is a piece of advice from the pastor and I am sure people will take it very seriously.  The President also warned us that people here in Uganda in the past have used our cultural institutions and manipulated them in the main stream of our politics with disastrous consequences.  We have had ebyaffe here, we passed the Bill here in this House, we knew why we passed ebyaffe. Those ones in Bunyoro had their things; those ones in Busoga are having two Kyabazinga’s now.  Let us hope that political members do not start manipulating these institutions so that the outcome of what we passed in this House is jeopardised.  I would like also to appeal to Members to read on page 7; the emphasis the NRM Government put to the promotion of our cultural institutions should never be misinterpreted as an attempt to divide Ugandans.  

Fellow Members, we are all here, from different tribes and different counties; my being a person from the lake is nobody’s concern.  Others even fear to come to the lake, but I enjoy going to the lake; if people fear to go to the mountains, why do you bother hon. Kiyonga if you are born in the plains?  These are assets of nature; let us accept ourselves to survive in diversity but with unity and not to use tribes for sentiments. (Applause) 

I would like to comment on the address by the President on page 9, where he says that in order to improve tax administration, Uganda Revenue Authority will introduce VAT.  For those who take whisks, at first you are very happy because VAT is a good drink; but VAT coming in for CTL, taxation has got to be understood by our people.  When people do not understand the taxes and their values, and they continue demanding for services from government, then it means we are still a long way to go.  Let we, political leaders educate our people in the villages that the taxes have got to be paid.  We used to pay very little Graduated Tax but you saw being tied on the ropes, because the tax was so small the people were expecting to pay on the last day; the last day comes - today, when you read in the papers you will find that so many people are being netted, for how much? Five thousand; for how much, ten thousand, but in one evening he boozes ten thousand; to pay tax for one year at ten thousand, that is a very big tax! Let us educate our people that please, it is high time we paid taxes.  

The Investment Authority, page 10.  The President referred to the Investment Authority and how many investments are coming in? I want to appeal to Members, especially those who are politically minded that the investors are coming to Ugandan because this country is peaceful; the investors are coming here because they see political sanity.  I had investors asking me sometime that where do you think Uganda is going? And we were just preparing for CA. Are you sure you will contain the situation? Now they are already political agitators, before even the Constitution is finished!

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the speaker that tax collection is being - let me say, the tax collection, especially, in Embassy House and also in the Revenue House, has proved to be very difficult. If you go there you may spend hours and hours if not days.  So, I would like to appeal to the authorities concerned to tell those officials, at least, to respect people who are taking taxes for government.

MR MUTEBI MULWANIRA: I would like to thank the hon. Member for that information and also interject this way; we as leaders of this country, we are responsible to the populace.  Like we people in the ministries, sometimes we do not even get to know the complaints; even if you put a suggestion box some people will not give you the information.  If you get such a problem, like we brought this issue when they asked us to pay for say road license and what have you from the bank, then to revenue, we complained here in the House and we said, the whole system was laborious and there was a change.  If you see anything of that nature, sometimes these offices have got problems which are in-built, please expose them so that government can take appropriate action.  I would like, Mr Chairman, to also comment on -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Wind up, please.

MR MUTEBI MULWANIRA: Mr Chairman, I will definitely try to haste through and make one comment requesting my hon. Members to recognise why we have suffered in Uganda, and I want to give you five principles why we are suffering.  Sometimes we suffer because of the result of ignoring the basic law in this country.  You know the law, you ignore it and it causes a lot of suffering; and some of us know how we are doing it.  We can also suffer perpetually through accidents and natural disasters and God has given us a test of that.  We have had accidents, national disasters in the West, the locusts have come, we have also suffered as a result of power being in the hands of evil men and women, and I want to warn you hon. Members that we are jumping the hurdles to the next stage which is going to determine whether we shall continue suffering or not.  Let us take caution; the next suffrage, if we overlook this, will be the fourth one.  We can suffer in this country as a result of God’s remedial judgements, you may do me harm and assume that, after all Mutebi Mulwanira, what can he do? You robber me, I go down.  Then God one day is going to say let me bring a remedial measure, and when you suffer you say why am I suffering?  

The last one, Mr Chairman -(Interjection)- I am glad hon. Nekyon is asking when.  Hon. Nekyon is aware that some remedial measures came in respect of his suffering during our political days, because I was with him in the ’80s when we were campaigning and at the end of the day I asked where is hon. Nekyon, and he was a very big support to us, they said the man has run away because somebody somewhere wanted to cut his neck off and yet he is his brother; and at the end of the day, the brother now who is running away.  That is called God’s remedial judgements.  

I would like to go to the last one, Mr Chairman, that is number 5; you can suffer because of your dedication to righteousness - you do not know how much people suffer by doing the right thing -(Applause)- and people will incriminate you because you are trying to do it.  But for Rev. Atwai, he will take you to St. John and he will tell you that if you have persecuted me they will also persecute you.  Some of you are following the right track but they threaten you; because by doing so you are going to threaten their funny existence.  So, in which case, they will persecute you for your being right.

Mr Chairman, as you have asked me to wind up, I think the Presidential Communication from the Chair was so good that if people took time to read it the political future of this country will be very promising. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR BUTAGIRA (Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to begin by saying that my commitment to NRM is total. (Applause)  Having said that, my few minutes of contribution will be on the meaning of democracy particularly to the right to associate and the right to govern. The recent events in the CA which culminated in some people walking out have rekindled in my mind the issue of redefinition of democracy; maybe, we have to redefine democracy because it would appear now, contrary to the views we hold that democracy now means the right of the minority to prevail over majority.  

I will illustrate; someone tables a Motion, as indeed was done in the CA, the Motion is put on the Floor, it is debated and you expect at the end of it.  It will be put to vote; when it is put to vote and you lose, then democracy has been betrayed! What sort of reasoning is this?  I think we should be serious and inculcate in this country the spirit of democratic values.  (Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for hon. Butagira who is holding the Floor to say that in Constitution making the rights of the minority to get the majority realise that it is justice which is more important and, therefore, is it in order for him to think that the criteria for democracy and in Constitution making is the majority without taking into consideration the rights of the minority.  

THE CHAIRMAN: That is your opinion, proceed, please.

MR BUTAGIRA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  The test of democracy is also tolerance; tolerance is also a virtue of democracy.  Tolerance to hear someone’s views; but if someone does not want even to hear, then he cannot be democratic.  

The other point I want to highlight on the issue of democracy is the difference between the right to associate, which is being talked about and also the form of governance; these two are different, and I do not think there is a contradiction.  There is a right to associate right now; only yesterday, my hon. Friend, hon. Dr Tiberondwa, was associating with Mr Lukyamuzi and other characters; yesterday they were associating, a right to associate, with people of like mindedness.  But this right to associate when it comes to governing, the difference is that I am entitled to chose the form of governance I want. What has the Constitution done? This Constitution the provisions of which has passed, has entrenched the multi-partism, contrary to what people are saying that it has entrenched the movement only.  There is movement, there is multi-partism and there is any other political organisation you can think of.  So, it is a menu, and that people of Uganda are now being asked what form of governance do you want? Governance by multiparty, governance by movement or any other system?  They are being asked, why can they not be given a chance to chose; what is wrong with that?  

So the question is, at the end of the day, it is the people of Uganda who should chose how they are going to be governed, and I do not think  -(Interruption)

MR  OBWANGOR:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  I would like to inform you my hon. Friend holding the Floor of the House, the thing that has gone wrong, we do not respect the principle of democracy; we fear that I will be left out, whereas democracy we should go almost together and then you are elected, in a community, in a nation.  

Democracy is not in the desert; democracy is not in the bush, but democracy is in the community.  Allow us to have our voice, to chose what we want -(Interjection) oh, yes, that is natural, that is democracy; when you are not elected be precise to be humble and do your job, go and dig, you Butagira.

MR BUTAGIRA: I am about to conclude; I thank hon. Obwangor for the information; it just reinforces what I have been saying that at the end of the day it is the people who should chose how they are going to be governed.  So, there is no contradiction, and what has been discussed and passed in CA is exactly that; they are offering people a chance to choose the form of governance they want.  So, let us not confuse multi-partism with movement and form of government.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS NKURUKENDA (Women Representative, Masindi) Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I rise to support the Motion, and I would like to congratulate hon. Butagira in this recent conversation. (Applause) I would like to thank His Excellency for this Communication from the Chair, and I would like to thank all of you hon. Members and you, Mr Chairman, for the job well done. The fact that most of us came into or joined the NRM to save a situation or to participate in improving a situation, shows that we were more of statesmen and women than politicians. I sincerely hope, having gone through what we have gone through as a country, and having made up our minds to improve this country in which we live and we shall leave behind for our children, I hope that we shall all endeavour to be statesmen. I do appeal to hon. Members to set a good example.  

Mr Chairman, I am being disturbed here -(Interjection)- Haji is disturbing me.  Mr Chairman, in his communication the President made a comment on the restoration of traditional rulers. I thank him for that and I thank everybody here who participated in that decision.  Because as my Colleague told the House yesterday, hon. Kabuubi -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I was reading through the speech delivered by His Excellence the President and while talking about the restoration of traditional rulers I saw a sentence which was reading something to the effect that they were expected, or that when we passed the last year we were expecting them to be cultural and political.  I don’t know whether it was a misprint, whether it should have been a political or political.

THE CHAIRMAN: Proceed, please.

MRS NKURUKENDA: Mr Chairman, I am glad that that was pointed out, but it must have been a typing error or something, because it read cultural and political; and I do not think the political bit was what you passed as a House.  However, like, I was saying my Colleague pointed out that this restoration of traditional rulers has helped us identify ourselves.  I would like to assure the House that we feel we are now, especially, where I come from Bunyoro the Kingdom in which I have the honour to be a minister without portfolio, the change that has taken place in the Kingdom, the past year since the restoration of the Kingdom has been great.  You can see it in the way the people dress, in the discipline of our children, in the feeding of our people. So, all this is taking place.  So, we are very grateful and we are also grateful to the proposal, offered by government to send a group to the West African countries to observe how these traditional cultures go and we might a leaf from there, because in West Africa as, maybe, most of you may be aware we have traditional rulers, at the same time, we have these national governments and the two work together harmoniously.  So, I would like to thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister who conveyed that offer to the Kingdom.  We are all looking forward to visit West Africa. 

Another point I would like to comment on, Mr Chairman, is the exploration of mineral resources.  The Banyoro are looking forward to the day when oil will be explored in the Lake Albert, they are requesting that the industry is located within the  Kingdom; for instance, if there is a refinery, let it be in the Kingdom and benefit the people who sit on that oil.  Because, we have a Budongo forest; the world has ferried timber from that timber are the Banyoro who actually nurture that forest.  It is not that we are lazy; it is because of the regulations that govern that forest.  So, the Banyoro are requesting that at least when the float shares they should be allowed to buy some of those shares and benefit directly from the oil.  Regarding the infrastructure -(Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  The hon. Member holding the Floor of the House is taking us backwards, because there is divesture law passed by this hon. House; advertisements are in the Press everyday! Does the hon. Member read the papers?  This is now - everybody can buy shares; all Ugandans, not just Banyoro. (Laughter)

MRS NKURUKENDA: I would like to thank the hon. Member for that information.  I know he is a Brother across the river and he will be most welcome also to buy shares, but the Banyoro should be given the priority.  NURP does not serve Bunyoro, and I am sure the hon. Member will not allow to participate in the NURP benefits.  I wanted to comment on the infrastructure. We are looking forward for the day when this road will be tarmacked and that now there is oil, I am sure that will be done first.  

There is a proposal of the road through Pakwach, and a road through the Kabalega Park which unfortunately cannot be tarmacked because of the regulations of the park. We are proposing that there is a very viable alternative which will serve the same purpose as that of the Pakwach road and plus more service to a part of Masindi and Hoima if they could change that road or tarmac the road from Kafu through Masindi, Biso through Bulisa, Para and then Pakwach; that would be a more viable road; it would save more - it would serve more people on the ground and we feel while the North sorts itself out this could take place.  So, we feel that with the park, Kinyara Sugar Works, the beauty of the escapement, the fishing industry the oil that would be a very viable alternative.  

I would like to comment on the children. The children are the future of this country and I am appealing to hon. Members that when the Bill that has been tabled comes to be discussed that they will support and pass it very quickly so that the children have something in place and I would like to appeal to the hon. Members to endeavour to attend a symposium arranged for you on the 13th so that you are briefed more about these Bills as well as other, you know, foreign Bills concerning children.

Finally, I would like to comment or to thank the NRM Government for giving an opportunity to the women to participate in the governance and decision making of this country.  On page 12 in these little books, and I quote, it says; “all of us must be happy that women are coming to the top in politics, they are coming to the top in administration, the professionals, business and in all other spheres of human endeavour; it is not sheer tokenism, women have made a solid impression in the corridors of power, in boardrooms and cabinet, and we are very proud in the NRM that for the first time in Africa our Vice President is a woman.” 

I am very grateful to the NRM Government for this opportunity and I am very sure and hopeful that, that now we have come into this arena we shall continue playing out part as much as possible.  However, I am a bit disappointed.  You are aware that the women conference is taking place in Beijing China in September this year.  It is a world conference for women and there is a forum for women Parliamentarian, but I would like to inform you, Mr Chairman, I have seen the list of the delegation; they are 30 delegates, more than half of them are men and I do not know whether the women cannot talk for themselves, and I would like to express my ill feelings of this one, because I feel more women should have been given a chance to attend this conference.  We participated in the country paper, and according to this paper, Uganda has the most number of women in Parliament, and we are going to tell the world that women in Uganda are doing very, very well -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Thank you very much for giving way, hon. Member.  I just wanted to inform her that in fact, now because of the sensitisation of the gender problem, the men have taken it up much more vigorously than the women, and in fact, now the men are fighting the cause for women much vigorously than the women themselves.  So, I am not surprised that the delegation may reflect the composition she has mentioned.  Thank you very much.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I wish to inform the Member holding the Floor and also to use this opportunity to inform the House, that the formation of the Uganda delegation to Beijing is still going on.  The list she may have seen is not final and maybe not official  -(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Chairman, if the hon. Delegates cannot believe me then I do not know who else will be believed.  We also have got opportunity for the women Non-Governmental Organisations and indeed a delegation of young people will also be going to Beijing because matters concerning women are not for women alone but for the entire community composed of old people, young people and women themselves.  So, we should not worry about the proposed thirty (30) names.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Is it really in order for the hon. Minister to stand up here and to really deceive this august House when actually the list he has already made he has already submitted it to Beijing and he is here informing the Members wrongly on the contrary he is now telling us lies when actually the list has already reached; Beijing. Is he really in order?  And what methods has he got to change that list he has sent?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, at the moment I cannot really be sure whether he has submitted the list or not, therefore, I cannot rule him out of order. Proceed, please.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Chairman, I want to state categorically that the Government delegation is 30 and there is another delegation of 30 members of Non-Governmental Organisations what we have sent in order to book the hotel accommodation and other conference facilities is the number 30 for governmental and 30 none Governmental, the process of including individuals in the delegations continues in fact, up to the last day. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS NKURUKENDA: I thank the hon. Minister of State Gender and Community Development for that information it still gives us hope somehow that a number of women in this august House will attend this conference which actually takes place once every 10 years, who knows what will be happening in ten years time.  So, we would actually participate in this Conference while we can.  

Finally, I would like to end by commending NRM Government for the foundation it has lied down for the development of this future and we look forward to the NRM taking us to the 20 century.  Thank you very much.

MRS NJUBA (Historical Member:) Thank you Mr Chairman.  I rise to support the Minister for Internal Affairs’ Motion.  I wish to start by requesting that a formal amendment to the error that was mentioned some minutes back -(Interjection) that there be a formal amendment to this Statement which reads that ‘the cultural Leaders would be purely cultural and Political.’  So, I would request that there be a formal amendment because this statement could cause some problems since it is a Presidential Statement somebody can very easily quote it and (Applause) In this very first paragraph, the President  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed.

MRS NJUBA:  The President started by reminding us that this is the last Session.  This is the last Session - NRM Government, the NRM which is a freedom fighter, because NRM Government may continue but NRM as a freedom fighter this Session is the last one and the NRM is under going yet another qualitative change.  The handing over power from freedom fighting to pure politicking and I hope that we have laid a firm foundation to be able to continue politicking without have the necessity of going back to freedom fighting, I hope the foundation has been laid.  

There are some serious failures that we have had; of course we have had a lot of successes, but one of the biggest failures of the Movement has been to educate some of our leaders, the leadership they have done a lot of political work at the grassroots but I think may be, because I have heard many leaders some of them Members of this House saying that, they are perturbed, they are surprised, they are sad, that the Movement they joined has changed that it is no longer the Movement they joined what we have now -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MRS NJUBA: Of course, the Movement has changed, because has all Members know the only sure thing on this planet is change, if the Movement had not changed it would be a dead Movement but since it is a dynamic Movement it has obviously changed. A lot of things have changed.  At one time when most of us joined the Movement, almost all important forum would be chaired by Mr Museveni.  But as you can see, there are so many important foras which are being chaired by various people and taking very important decisions.  So, things have changed the Movement has changed.

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of clarification. Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to clarify the doubts has the hon. Mover holding the Floor of the House say that, we have got to through metamorphosis like a cocoon.  The idea why I am asking this is, when we started ourselves here as a team to work for our country -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed, please.

MRS NJUBA:  Mr Chairman, I am not going to comment on that information.  What actually could have happened, and I am saying ‘could’. maybe it was not the fact; but I am saying what could have happened is that at the time we entered this bus called NRM some people may have misread the destination label on the bus.  Maybe, people entered the bus thinking that the bus was moving back into the past Kumbe the bus was moving us into the future. (Applause) 

Because at the time we entered we had different objectives some people had felt comfortable with the past, they had privileges things like democracy were defined to benefit certain categories of people.  There were people who benefited by mere chance of being born in various circumstances, but some of us were worried about the past and we wanted a vehicle to take us into the future where the definition of human would include women, would include children, would include peasants, would include youth, would include workers, would include every human being that is where we wanted to go. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman for giving me this opportunity to inform the House and the hon. Member holding the Floor. I would like to inform the hon. Member that great thinkers have pulled us that there is what they call negation of negation which means as we go along others will fall out others will come in, so I would like to allay our fears that however, much the original Members of the House, the original Members of the Movement may be falling out the new blood are still coming in and in great numbers. (Applause) I would like to inform her again that other areas of the North which received the Movement much later than others are now in support of the Movement and they are moving forward with the Movement. (Applause) Thank you very much.

MRS NJUBA: Mr Chairman, because I said, probably there was a misunderstanding some people have found themselves stranded in a situation where women are talking so much, where youth are talking so much, where the workers are talking so much and they find themselves uncomfortable.  

What I would like to tell the Members of the Movement who are beginning to wonder whether it is the same Movement maybe, the tax was different and the numbers to be deployed were fewer.  Therefore, certain things had to be as they were, today the tax is different and we have many more people to choose from, therefore, a lot of changes are about to take place and people should not be discouraged it is the same Movement still having the same objective of liberating the people of this country.  

There are so many things that some of our leaders say or - which put the livelihood of our population at a risk, say; the word “Banyarwanda.” Banyarwanda has been used in an abusive manner, the other day a man come to my office and was telling me what was going on in Kigali, that in Kigali the language there is Luganda and the people doing business there are Ugandans making a lot of money in Kigali do you think it is in the interest of those people of ours who are making good business in the neighbouring country to hear leaders using the name of the country where they are making business in an abusive manner I do not think it is in the interest of Uganda for us to continue abusing or using the word Rwandese in an abusive manner, I think leaders should be more carefully, especially with matters related to our neighbours.  

I would like to touch on the concept of consensus the word consensus has been talked about recently so much that we should reach decisions by consensus especially in the C.A. and that the views of the minorities should be respected.  I do believe in taking decisions by consensus I also do believe in taking into consideration the views of minorities. However, consensus is only possible between people who are moving in the same general direction if we where generally we may not be exactly facing the same - but if general speaking we are moving in the same direction it is possible directions it is impossible to reach a consensus especially, if you have one vehicle like we have Uganda, some people are moving there others are moving there, how do you get for a consensus?  You cannot, in circumstances where it is impossible to get consensus the next best choice is looking for majority; what does the majority think?  It is the next base, all of us I have not heard any leader in Uganda who is saying that consensus is bad it is good, it is the best it is the ideal however, sometimes it becomes impossible to reach a consensus and we either stagnate and do not move or we take the next best alternative which I think is majority.

Now when we take a vote and a majority view is established it would be sad for some one to say that we should forget about the majority and take into consideration the views of the minority.  What then do you do with the majority? (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, thank you very much for allowing me to give this information in fact, I am giving this information to the hon. Member holding the Floor and to hon. Butagira who refused this information. 
When people walked out of the C.A. they explained why they did.  It is unfortunate that hon. Members who must have read and even heard why these people are using the opportunity to confuse the majority, they did not walk out because they lost on the Motion at hand they walked out because they did not want the party to entrenching the Movement in the Constitution.

MRS NJUBA: Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MR ETIANG:  Point of information, Mr Chairman. May I offer this information to the hon. Member who has just given the information that in the New Vision of the day before yesterday  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  

MR ETIANG:  On the front page of the New Vision of the day before yesterday it was reported and if it was accurately quoted, it was reported that those who walked out had now come back because according to them that those people who stayed behind had reached exactly what they wanted. (Laughter)

MRS NJUBA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I appreciate the information, but if the Members who walked out - (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MRS NJUBA: Suppose the Motion which was moved by the people who walked out had carried the day they would have accepted it, but if it does not carry the day then they walk out because they do not want to be a party if they had not wanted to be a party they would not in the first place sat in that House, but now that they had sat in the House they are a party to every letter that will be in that document. (Interruption) 

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that these people who walked out what we read in the newspapers that whereas they walked out they have been entering registering and signing and once somebody signs that is witness enough to confirm that you were party and parcel of whatever has been done. (Laughter) Thank you.

MR B. MAYANJA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Lady holding the Floor and in purpose of the information which I have just been given that I for one did not sign or go to the register during the period of the 14 days or so that we were out of the House.

Secondly, I would like to inform the hon. Lady that the making of the Constitution is somewhat different from ordinary legislation which is normally controlled by the majority which can be changed today and tomorrow but that it must take into account the whole process.

Thirdly, I wish to inform her that although in the Odoki we thought it was clearly stated that people who wanted Federo countrywide but especially in Buganda were in majority in the memorandum nevertheless the C.A. Delegates acting in their wisdom rejected Federo. Thank you very much.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Thank you Mr Chairman.  First of all, before I give the information, I am glad to inform this august House that the C.A. this afternoon has completed the stage of reconsideration and has passed all the amendment and Provisions in the Draft Constitution in accordance with the wishes of the hon. Delegates and we have gone on recess until the 31st of July, 1995 when we shall come back for reconsideration. But I want to give the information that at the end when we were concluding and approving the Preamble to the Constitution our Colleagues who had walked out were seen in the House and indeed the last enactment did was an amendment moved by hon. Joseph Mulenga to say that he is not withstanding the provision of Article 96 it is one of those that we passed when they were out that the political parties which are in existence today shall continue to exist and shall operate in accordance with provision of Constitution which we have passed.  That is an acceptance of all the provisions that we have passed when they were not there, I thought this information was very important. (Applause)

MRS NJUBA:  Mr Chairman, I appreciate all the information that I have been given and I hope hon. Members have benefitted.  I want to comment briefly on this concept of fundamental right of Association. While we all accept and cherish the fundamental right to associate we must also agree that as a population as a society we must be concerned about what people are associating to do.  It is alright to associate but we must have a say on what people should associate to do or what people should not associate to do, nobody is saying that people should not belong to political parties, nobody has said that.  

All that some people are saying is that in order for association to start seeking political power the population of Uganda should be asked. So, we want the population of Uganda to say whether the want associations to be formed for the purpose of acquiring political power.  Because these political parties are not ordinarily associations; they are associations whose sole purpose is achievement of political power.  If an association gets political power this association has a lot of effect on other associations it is possible for this association to cause problems to other associations, therefore, the population should say, yes or no, to whether associations should get political powers or not that is what we are saying, nobody is saying that people should not associate, people can go ahead and call themselves DPs, UPC, CP and whatever but the question is when Kabaka Yekka wants to get political power it should seek the permission of the population not the permission of other associations.  The difference here is really whether the people want to be led by people or by association. So, I do not see why some of our friends fear this idea of a referendum because after all they have already agreed that the people of Uganda are supreme, they have the ultimate power to association or to individuals to lead them.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that on the realising how important the referendum is to the Ugandans I experimented in the fund-raising in a local area and I quoted it in the monetary terms, I brought two people when I said, we are making a constitution in the Constitution here is a consensus of whether we should be a multi-party.  We should go for multi-partism or we should go for Movement.  So, if you two people if you can tell people to give you money, the multi-parties got 300/= the Movement people got 15,000/=. (Laughter) 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman. I would like to give the information that the peace prevailing now is introduced by the system.  I would like to say, that peace has been introduced because the multi-parties who have been suppressed have not taken to the bush and they rather fight by the ballot. (Applause)

MR KIVEJINJA KIRUNDA: Point of information.  I would like to inform the Informer and the House that actually multi-parties have taken to the bush, that we had Lakwena also went to the bush; she tried.  We have also heard October 9th, it has been in the bush it was very much well known the UPA all these have been political parties that have taken to the bush and Itongwa is also in the bush.  So it is not correct that they have not taken to the bush but they have gone to the bush and they found that you do not go there just for fun.

MRS NJUBA: Mr Chairman, let me leave that issue because the hon. Member had given very good information.

I would have felt much happier if the presidential seat, the president had mentioned some thing about the big debt that the government owed the former employees of the East African Community. Because as said from the beginning we are coming to the end of a certain period and I would not like this Government to -(Interruption)  

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that the issue of saying the former East African Community, their Bill is already been taken to Cabinet to decide memorandum to that effect.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MRS NJUBA: Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for that information I hope the Cabinet will fight for that Motion as one of the agent one the former employees of the East African Community to get their retirement in a much more comfortable manner.  I would like in addition to that I put my last point.  I would also like to mention on bringing the attention of Government that our taxation procedure is still more complicated for the taxpayer.  The taxpayer has to pay a lot of money to people who in order for them to government taxes.  This is alright for big companies which can afford but for a tax payer, it is a bit expenses and makes some people to decide to keep a blind eye to the taxation as if they begin to be harassed by government.  Thank you very much, I support the Motion.

MISS NAMUYANGU (Youth Representative): Thank you Mr Chairman, for giving me this chance to contribute.  I want to make some few points about the President’s Speech.  First of all, Mr Chairman, I would like to extend my sincere gratitude to the hon. Member of this House who enable the Youth to be represented in this Parliament and C.A. (Applause) 

I want to talk about the ‘Entandikwa Scheme.’ The Entandikwa Scheme was one of the ways which was set up to eradicate poverty in this country and you find that the Youth and Women were allocated 30 per cent of this Scheme.  But you find that on the Committees which are responsible for consideration of applications there is only one Youth Representative and other Members are elders. You find that the chances of the youth applications to get this money is very little. I do appeal to the Minister responsible that the Youth should be considered because you find that this 30 per cent may pass when they have not got. 

I want to thank the President -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. On 30th last month we had the National Youth Council Meeting and wee got reports from all delegates throughout the districts of Uganda they told us that the only youth and women who are benefiting from this scheme are either wives of the people on the steering committee or the old sons and daughters of these people. (Laughter) 

So, Mr Chairman and hon. Members -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, protect me.  Mr Chairman, the Youth are saying, unless Government comes and puts a separate Entandikwa for the Youth they have not benefited at all from it. (Applause) Thank you Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.  Proceed, please.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member who was informing the speaker that during the National Youth Day Celebrations the President promised to put a separate ‘Entandikwa’ for the Youth.  Thank you.

MISS NAMUYANGU: I would like to thank the hon. members for their additional information. Mr Chairman, I would like to extend our sincere thanks to the President who promised us three (3) vehicles for the Secretariat and one motorcycle for each district for the Youth Secretariat and one motor cycle for each district for the Youth. (Applause) 

I would like to comment about the living wage for the Civil Servants. When considering the living wage for the civil servants you find there certain civil servants who are considered and others are left behind, people like teachers in classrooms, doctors, nurses in hospitals, most of the civil servants who are considered are the people who are working in the offices.  We are appealing to the Minister responsible that when they are considering this living wage also teachers, doctors, and others are considered. I do recognize that efforts government has made to bring peace and security in this country.-(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MISS NAMUYANGU: Thank you Mr Chairman for your protection. I do  recognize the effort made by government to bring peace and security in this country, but you find that in certain areas some of the Police posts are neglected in the way that they have no means of communication. You find that certain people who call themselves rebels do attack these Police posts because they are very far away and they do not have means of communication.  We do appeal to the government that give these Police Posts - available by giving them at least one Radio/call. they would make their work easier.  We find that the taxes to these youth is very high this is because most of the youth are unemployed and the Minister responsible they do appeal that if they are given ‘Entandikwa.’  They will set up themselves and then they will begin to have a place so that they can get some money to pay these taxes.  With these few words, I thank you Mr Chairman.

MRS ALLELUYA IKOTE (Women Representative, Pallisa): Thank you Mr Chairman.  I rise to support the Motion.  The communication made by His Excellency the President to this Council on Tuesday, 13 June 1995 was indeed a clear and precise exposition of Government policy.  It was an accurate description of the overall picture.  As the overall picture was good, I can confidently say that the chairman of the National Resistance Council was not blowing the President’s trumpet.  The Policies of Government are good and well sort out and logical, but the problem does not lie in the general policies themselves but in the mechanics of these good policies.  The problem lies first with the interpretation and secondly, the implementation of the policies.  

I will give some examples. The policy of divestiture is an excellent policy, but implementation has been afloat with problems. You recall that PERD was abolished again without consulting this House, however, privatization has continued, in fact, we read in the press that PERD was abolished and replaced as a project in the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning in order to expedite privatization why the rush?  Before exercise seems to proceeding with indecent haste, why are we in a hurry to see the assets - to sell off the assets of this country?  

It also appears that PERD was abolished to get -(Interruption) 

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman. Yesterday hon. Mukasa of the Trade Union was making a point in connection with Nile Hotel, to sell that hotel.  That plus other outfits are literally being given away for nothing; but let me tell you about Nile Hotel.  The amount of money which is supposed to be brought in by the investors is nowhere to be seen.  As a result that hotel is making merely 100,000 dollars every month and that is gong to pay worth the purchase price and yet we paid very highly for that hotel and the renovation. 

I would request that the Government look seriously into that divestiture programme especially in view of the fact that we have got a stock exchange law coming before this august House and if those assets can be purchased by Ugandans -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Wanendeya are you giving information or contribution? Proceed hon. Member.

MRS ALLELUYA IKOTE: Mr Chairman, I am grateful to hon. Wanendeya for that information. It would appear that PAD was abolished simply to get rid of the PAD coordinator Mr Robert Rutagi.  I do not know him personally but I am told he had been doing a good job.  (Interruption)

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that actually PERD was not abolished.  What happened is that PERD was restructured in terms issuing management.  Because when we were passing the Bill we did not say it was going to be a cooperative body, what has only happened is that it is a department of a Ministry it has only been put back in the Ministry to be operated there.  But PAD itself was not abolished.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and also to inform this House that the chairman and Managing Director of the Uganda Commercial Bank has presented a very, very well researched paper about the prospects for the Uganda Commercial Bank and he is trying to appeal to this Government to stop the sell of the Uganda Commercial Bank to foreigners. (Applause) This is not because of his position but the Kenya Commercial Bank was privatized slowly by selling shares to the indigenous people of Kenya and I would like to appeal to the hon. Member and also this House that the whole idea of privatization be reviewed by this House which set up PAD, because at the moment the assets of this country are being given away at a low prices and these prices are - enterprises are even being sold on credit. So, for the sake of the economic development of this country. I would like to use this opportunity to appeal to the Government to hold the sell of the Uganda Commercial Bank. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: Proceed, hon. Member.

MRS ALLELUYA IKOTE: Mr Chairman, I am grateful for all that information but we know that one day PAD was changed from the position it was to another one and it would appear that the dismissal Mr Rutagi was the sole target we have now lost this intellectual assets to Kenya when Mr Rutagi is now doing consultancy work in cooperate restructuring and divestiture.

In the Financial Sector I would like to comment on the banking sector and this is in total chaos.  Two of the most promising indigenous banks were recently ceased by the Central Bank because of none performing loans.  The biggest bank in the country is about to be privatized when it has just gone through a very painful and restructuring exercise and had started making profit.  Many banking experts agreeing with problems - with our banking institutions are. One; poor or non-existing living criteria lending to non-performing loans, poor or not follow up of the projects lent to the banking institutions are not lending to the people most well equipped to cause development, our young and talented professionals with technological innovations energy exposure just because they have no collateral, Sir, the Financial Institutions continue to ignore their intellectual assets.  

These banks lent to personalities not their ideas innovations or project viability they did not carry out analysis of projects of the personalities they lend to or to those; they do not.  Instead of saying, you will fail because you do not have 40 or 50 percent of the collateral why can’t the bank assist these entrepreneurs not to fail by giving them capital together with consultancy in the areas they feel they are not well equipped in.  

In this country if your idea was not invented in colonial times you are doomed to die with it on the streets of Kampala.  There are very many angry and frustrated youth out there, because they are not able to contribute to this nation forget about the 10 per cent growth which was recorded which made Uganda 13th in whatever of this world. This country is capable of doing 20 per cent or even better by involving forward looking men and women. (Applause) 

Another example of policies which are - with implementation - is the policies on corruption.  There is an example of the Leadership Code and anti-corruption Bill. Julius Caesar asked, ‘Who shall guard the guard themselves?’  Mr Chairman, I put it in this House through you who indeed.  We set up the Uganda Revenue Authority and although they claim to have recorded over 15 per cent over and above expected collections recently we read it in the New Vision.  I think the phrase from the Bible ‘Tax collectors will never go to heaven.’ (Laughter)

CAPT. GASATURA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, just to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that it is not true that the Bible says; tax collectors will never go to heaven but rather they will tell when they asked John the Baptist and we what shall we do?  They were told do not collect more than you are supposed to, and indeed one short man, a little shorter than I, your Member Zackary was received and indeed as several Members had been informed here before, Jesus said, even those who came afterwards at the sixth hour have equal as the first.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, just to supplement on to what hon. Member has said. Indeed it was not acceptable to eat or to dine with sinners. Zackary was a tax collector who; because of his entire attitude, wanted to know Jesus more even to the extent that he climbed. He was called down in manners of humility he came down and on the very day Jesus dinned with him a sign that a repentant tax collector can go to heaven. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MRS ALLELUYA IKOTE: Mr Chairman, I prefer to agree with Rev. Atwai the tax collectors will not go heaven unless they repent.  But, this all goes to - I am trying to show that there is really not much good to say about the methods of collection of this revenue collecting bodies.  

After all these examples, what is failing the good Government policies?  In my view the blame lies squarely on the shoulders of politicians and civil servants on the other way round civil servants and politicians whichever you want it.  With civil service it is made up of top echelons are filled with those civil servants who have been almost honest. 

All the regimes of post independent Uganda up to now.  I think we can maliciously say that, they could not have been unscarred by ‘magendo,’ embezzlement, corruption apartheid, partisanism, nepotism etc.  But although these are highly suspects, the president cannot do much these are the people he has to work with.  As for the politicians, myself into them, their job is to interfere unnecessarily with the implementation of government policies.  They behave as though they are the experts in the implementation of government policies.  Everybody before or after does not know anything about it.  

To wind, Mr Chairman, allow me to commend my fellow countrymen in the CA for what they have so far achieved. (Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of clarification.  Thank you Mr Chairman. We are saying, when we are debating, we should be clearly level headed and looking at the world in front of us. We politicians here in this House which this country at times it tries to belittle.  We are the brains to make any country work.  When we make the law, it is the executive that, implements the law.  Possibly politicians, but what are we really in this country, without politicians in Uganda, they cannot breath. (Laughter) 

Therefore, I would like to inform my hon. Mrs Lady, my Friend that, we, politicians, we do not quake.  We make policies cogently provided through Uganda to progressively go ahead, not for nonsense.  (Laughter)

MRS ALLELUYA IKOTE: Thank you Mr Chairman.  The hon. Member was obviously not paying attention to what I was saying.  What I did say, was that, we make the policies and then follow the implementors and interfere with implementation.  Mr Chairman, winding up, allow me to commend my fellow countrymen in the CA, for what they have so far achieved and disguise for everybody; the Movementists, the Multipartists, the independent, the political marxists, the political opportunists etc. (Laughter) To borrow but a few of the expressions that are recorded by our illustrious pressmen and women, it is indeed a unique and exciting experience after the years of intolerance - of divergent views and should act as a difference for the rest of Africans.  In CA, people are exchanging and discussing these views, walking in and walking out, name calling in the case of arguments and then apologising after tempers have cooled.  This is very healthy.  (Applause) At least they are not being picked up or disappearing in fleets of cars. (Applause) Of course, DP, UPC, CP etcetera are screaming that, this regime is dictatorial, militaristic and so on.  But these people should look how far we have come and where we have reached.  I support the Motion, Mr Chairman.

MR KARUHANGA (Nyabushozi) Thank you, very much, Mr Chairman. As we know, many times, I have taken the opportunity, when granted by you. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Continue, please.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I was saying that many times when I get an opportunity to make a contribution on this Motion in the last years since 1989, I have always used it as an occasion to speak my heart out; to speak on behalf of my constituency, to complain about bad administration to attack various ministries, and to make the point that, I would like to see my country better than it was before.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR KARUHANGA:  Now, Mr Chairman, many times when I get this opportunity to make a contribution in this very important debate, in the life of any Parliamentarian; I always use this opportunity to speak my heart out, to say how I feel about the affairs of the country, on behalf of my constituency, and I use this as an occasion to actually speak out against ministers, and ministries, and government department, and authorities; that I would like to see them perform better.  This time I know that this is the last session of the NRC, which started in 1986; which I joined in 1989.  Which occasionally I want to use to have a recap of what has taken place, since I got here, and what I see coming ahead of us.  

I first of course, mourn our friends whom we found here, and who have departed and left us.  I also welcome those who have come in their steps; and together for those who were able stay on, I thank our Lord for the opportunity to serve our country in this capacity.  This occasion, I am going to use it, being the last occasion, to say how I feel about this regime.  I am going to thank those who have performed and I am going to discredit, those who have let us down.  

I recall from the start that, we have a difficult time.  When we arrived here, we did not know each other.  In fact, I was always wondering how we are going to sit.  You remember, I was sitting in between hon. Tiberondwa, hon. Butagira, hon. Kanyomozi, hon. Ongom and others.  And, of course, we did have our differences.  But I want to use this occasion, to say that; as we went on, we elected from amongst ourselves unanimously various Members of our Parliament into positions of leadership.  

On my part, as a Member of the Presidential Committee, we elected hon. Tiberondwa to be our chairman.  And since that time, hon. Tiberondwa has performed wonderfully as our chairman. (Applause)  

As a man in charge of handling the President’s office, the State House, Intelligence Section, the Prime Minister’s Office, the Vice President’s Office, the Vice Chairman’s Office, National Assembly; Karamoja, Ministry of Foreign Affairs - hon. Tiberondwa had access to all the important matters of state, and I was there as his Member.  And I want to say that, in spite of our political differences, the Movement helped us, to know how to work together for the betterment of our country.  

I also know and I did attend committees edited by hon. Zackery Olum.  I was very pleased to see the level of performance coming from our dear Brother Zackery Olum. I did have occasion to attend other committees, headed by hon. Kanyomozi.  To that, I must say that, was the exemplary performance.  I have also attended the Legal Committee headed by hon. Butagira to these people. I cannot say that, without them, this Parliament will not have picked, the way it has.  There are other; hon. Rwakakooko, hon. Wasswa Nkalubo -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, with all due respect, and I appreciate his analysis.  But when I brought here a Motion at one time to get committees of Parliament established, some people did not look far enough.  And when they make these praises, they all know that, it is Wanendeya -(Laughter)

MR KARUHANGA:  It would not be fair for me not to praise hon. Zackery Olum, who has also been chairing one of the important Committees of Finance on our behalf, Okello Luwum.  And of course, hon. Bwanika Bbaale who was in charge of Social Affairs.  I must also add hon. Rebecca Kadaga who started chairing the Legal Committee.  But at that stage, it is very important to know that hon. David Magezi did a wonderful job as chairman of Environment and natural Resources.  Having said that, there are of course all of you who are distinguished Members, who have performed wonderfully in our respective capacities; who were not lucky enough to chair these committees.  Hon. Wanendeya, of course, thought I would forget him, and many times he has pleased us in various capacities reading his Motion; especially when he wakes up.  (Laughter) 

Through the method of committee work, I felt that; we started achieving tremendously, and I must add really that, this thank you to Members and the House would not be complete; without thanking our Vice Chairman.  (Applause) 

It has of course been my bounden duty to make sure that when I look and when I attack, I attack where it can work until its social effectiveness is envisaged.  But honestly, our chairman, I do not remember anybody who has really singled him out for attack, in his conduct of his activities as our chairman. (Applause) And sometimes, I get so surprised because we sneak out, we go to help ourselves, but I have always been wondering about his position on his constituency towards the bladder. (Laughter)  Because the Member rarely goes out if the duty is on.  And when we do meet in the next session, I hope that, he will present himself to the electorate to able to be a Member of this House so that, we can also elect him as speaker in the next Session. (Applause) 

Through this type of work, in spite of our political differences which obviously exist, we were able to be surprised even to see at Cabinet level that, Members belonging to the Cabinet who were of different political persuasions who held meetings every Wednesday in the evening, in the afternoon or morning and came out together smiling.  We had hon. Semogerere on one hand, hon. Bidandi Ssali on another; hon. Kiyonga on another, and hon. Kivejinja on the other. Surprisingly, while we have learnt how to work together, how and this has helped the country.  It was a pity to see that, one Member of the cabinet resigned, and could not afford working with the rest of the team that, had lived together with him, trying to hold hands, to move our country forward in the last hour, in the evening of our time.  It was such a sad occasion and I really missed and felt sad, when I heard that hon. Ssemogerere, has decided to abandon the ship at the time when it was about to land at the coast. 

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on Floor that, indeed as he feels sad, about hon. Ssemogerere. I also feel sad about my Brother hon. Francis Butagira.  (Laughter & Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MR KARUHANGA: Maybe, the words of hon. Tiberondwa remind me of a little story which Abraham Lincoln told some of his people who had no longer served the purpose in his Cabinet.  He told them the story of the own of a dog which was vicious, and he was always harassing his neighbours.  The neighbours of this man, who had this terrible dog organising to rid themselves of this dog and have peace.  So, they built a small instrument and put there dynamite and covered the dynamite with meat; and place it in front of the dog when it was coming to bite their children.  The dog swallowed it, and from a remote control they switched on the machine which blew the dog up into small pieces.  And the dog flew up in the sky, which pieces of meat came falling down.  When the own of the dog came, looked at it sitting; he said, oh, my God, it has outlived its usefulness. I just wanted to say that, the continued existence of hon. Butagira in UPC.  I think has outlived its usefulness. (Applause) And I would like to tell hon. Tiberondwa that, maybe his time there too, is about the same state as that of a dog.  And the sooner he comes and joins Butagira the better, and he will not regret it any more.  (Interruption)

MRS KIRYAPAWO: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor that, in fact hon. Tiberondwa declaring as a presidential candidate when he knows that, the party which he belongs to, does not allow him when the party president is still alive, that alone means that, hon. Tiberondwa has also crossed.  Thank you.

MR KARUHANGA: I am very grateful to hon. Kiryapawo.  Because I really believe that, yes; indeed hon. Tiberondwa has definitely joined the Movement.  In fact I was very please to hear that, he is standing as a presidential candidate on the Movement ticket, and on the Movement system.  And of course, i am sure the Movement is very open to challenge.  It was also good to see that, President Museveni can get another Movement person to put in say forward, in the Movement system.  Because I know very well that, UPC’s Delegates Conference still has a president whom they would like to put forward as a candidate.  

And now having said that and having welcomed our friend, I want just to wind this up by saying that, our friends in the front seats here - the Cabinet, who have also been moving up and down; I must say, have done a good job.  Many of the ministries which we have sat in committees examined and looked at have had tremendous improvement.  In the beginning it was difficult to work with these people.  But now, since we started in committees, they have become very cooperative.  They respond and even the president has met our committees.  To this, I feel that, our country is moving forward and we are beginning to see results.  The first result is what hon. Kagonyera talked about, the economic success of our country.  This is almost now unprecedented say, for the life of our country.  The peace ushered in by this regime is almost unprecedented.  The international respectability which has been available to our citizens.  When previously it was a shame to call ourselves Ugandans.  Now, we walk all over the world with our heights high, claiming you are a Ugandan even before they ask you.  I was surprised to see even the whole President of the World Bank, spending four days in Uganda, when he could only spend one day hoping in the other countries.  But we were lucky to visit him.  I was surprised to see a whole administrator of U.S.A. coming to Uganda to visit our country.  I am pleased to see that, through this type of corporation, when regretted another body called C.A. when also they did not know how to work together, they have learnt from us and today we have now produced for the first time in our country, and since the CA started - this afternoon, where we worked without lunch.  We have completed the consideration stage, from Chapter 1 to Chapter 21, and completed it, and gone on recess.  Ugandans can know that, this house produced a smaller House which has given the Constitution for the first time, this afternoon.  (Applause) 

What is remaining now, is a reconsideration stage to amend what we have passed, which will be amended by Parliament if Parliament in future wants to do so.  So, today is a historical day in our country, and it is something that, this House is very proud about. (Applause) Now, we move into election time; elections are very difficult.  They can be dangerous.  In other countries like India, you hear 30 people have died.  In other countries you hear, so much death is taking place. But I think through the Movement method of work, whether you like it or not, it has taught us one thing; toleration.  Being able to listen to others and letting them have their say, and then you have your say.  I hope that, we shall not have the problems, other countries have.
 
On the question of women, on the question of youth; the Movement has helped to espouse the cause of these marginalised groups and bring them forward for the general joint development of our country.  For this, we must thank the National Resistance Movement Government. (Applause)

I must also thank the press which started over at a very, very low end, and now at least you can read a Newspaper and get a good story and know that, it has got some bearing of truth.  I am very pleased, even the Uganda Confidential, is now reporting things which are completely will researched and in some of their articles, you can rely on them. But I am pleased to say that almost every political, human, social and economic department is on the match forward, not on the match backward.  There are Members in our society who are keen to make sure that they pull us back. I call upon the Members in this House, and the public to stop and resist them.  No matter how much they slight one tribe against another; no how much they slight the people in Katwe that, all roads, going through Masaka were built because they are finally going to go to the West;  no matter how much they ask the Baganda to hate the Westerners; and no matter how much they make the Northerners hate the Baganda.  We must resist them. We have seen the examples of working together.  We must resist and bring these people to shame.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, with that, we have come to the end of today’s Session.  We adjourn until tomorrow at 9.30 a.m. in the morning.

(The Council rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 7 July 1995 at 9.30 a.m.)







                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

