Wednesday, 7 July 2004

Parliament met at 2.47 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. I just want to inform you that some time ago I received a petition from Kalangala about a programme, which is going on there apparently, which is being talked about by many people. I have sent that particular petition to the Committee on Agriculture but I do not know whether they have finalised it. But this is to inform you that there is a petition from Kalangala. I think they were trying to say that we do not understand them, their programmes and the things that are helping them; and that we seem to be hampering them. I sent the petition to the Committee on Agriculture and soon they will report back to this House.  

2.49
MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): Mr Speaker, this is only to request all Members of Parliament from Kampala and others interested to join us as the Committee of Works in receiving a brief from the consultant for the National Transport Master Plan. He is to give us a brief about the progress of that work tomorrow at 3.00 p.m. I beg to inform the members, especially those of Kampala, and all of you that we would like to take a few minutes of your time tomorrow at 3.00 p.m. in Committee Room 013.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not know whether you are going to make it. My fear is about the programme here because if it is at 3.00 p.m. and then the committee is carrying on business - I think when Parliament is sitting other committees should not be sitting, they should be here. But in this particular case you can adjust the time if you can so that it is done between maybe midday and 2.30 p.m. At least ask them to come at 1.30 p.m. so that you have an hour?

MR WAMBUZI: I oblige, Sir.

2.51
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance on a matter, which has been variously considered subjudice. This pertains to our Rules of Procedure in this august House vis-à-vis the matter of the court ruling. I just wanted to know whether we shall stick to our own method of sessional committees dealing with Bills, or whether there is a possibility that a Private Members’ Bill or Government might come up with a proposal in form of a Bill to amend the relevant Articles of the Constitution, which developed this impasse? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not see any problem of amending the Constitution if it is necessary because, as you know, for four years we had amended Article 90. We did that in 2000 and that was the law that was controlling the situation until January when the Supreme Court said, “Where is the certificate of compliance,” and the certificate was not produced. So, should we find it necessary to amend Article 90, and we have the powers to do so, I think we shall do it.  

MR AWORI: Essentially, Mr Speaker, supplementary –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: And it will not be subjudice.

MR AWORI: That is exactly the whole point; it is no longer subjudice.

THE SPEAKER: When we do it, we shall do it in such a way that it is not subjudice.

MR AWORI: So, even as a Member of Parliament I can now talk about it freely without any –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: We shall do it.

MR AWORI: Thank you. 

2.53
MR ISSA KIKUNGWE (Kyaddondo County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am just seeking some clarification. Some time back before we broke off we had two important reports, which had come to this House, that is, one on Tri-Star and another one was on AGOA. And when I look at what is coming up for debate, they are not featuring anywhere. May I know what the fate of these reports is?

THE SPEAKER: Offhand I cannot say what the position is, but my recollection is that we disposed of these reports. I think they were presented by hon. Bright Rwamirama on behalf of the Committee on Finance, we discussed them here and I think we adopted them. Maybe you were not around, but I will have to check in the Hansard and then you may be informed.  

2.54
MR ISAIAH IMUMET (Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to express a matter of concern to the Minister of Defence, and good enough the Minister of Internal Affairs is here too. In my constituency there are people who have come in with cattle. They are grazing in the swamps between my constituency and Soroti, and what annoys people is that these people are dressed in uniforms in the evenings and they are armed.  

The road, which we were making between Soroti and Katakwi has been trampled on by the animals and the situation is getting out of hand because if your animal entered that herd, you have no right to retrieve it. So, the situation right now in Katakwi is so bad and people are wondering what is happening. We cannot tell which people these ones are but what is happening is that Fuso lorries come at night, go through Gweli sub-county, the road going through Kabujani sub-county in my constituency, the animals are offloaded and in the morning people find the animals there. 

The origin of these people is not known. So, we are wondering who these people are who are armed within the country. They cannot even report to the LCs, they are just there in the swamps. So, it is a matter of concern. Mr Speaker, I would like to know from the Minister of Internal Affairs and Defence whether they know them. The Minister concerned with Lands and Environment is not here, but it is a big concern in the village right now.

THE SPEAKER: You mean the Minister of Defence is in charge of animals?

MR IMUMET: Mr Speaker, I am asking the Minister of Defence because of the presence of uniformed people. The uniforms, I know, belong to the Minister of Defence.

2.57
MR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The situation in Kumi District is not very different from the situation in Katakwi. Since this matter of unexplained illegal immigrants into wetlands came up in November 2001 in this House, NEMA had attempted to follow the necessary laws to instruct those fellows to vacate the wetlands in Ngora. Indeed, the restoration order was to elapse by 31 May last year. In fact, now the status quo is getting worse. More of them have come into the wetlands in spite of the restoration order that NEMA had issued to those who were there earlier.  

Yesterday we had the privilege to meet the NEMA Executive Director and his team and when the matter was raised again, indeed NEMA said they have tried to follow all the technical procedure they could but the matter of those immigrants and settlers in the wetlands is now political. We want to understand what exactly is happening because there is a lot of foot dragging, the indigenous people down there are now tasking us to explain why they are being denied access to the wetlands while others who have come from wherever they have come, are allowed access with impunity. I think this matter needs a –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: So, honourable member, you appreciate now that the question is meant for Minister of Water, Lands and Environment but the question was now directed to the Ministry of Defence. I think yours is different from his but you should complete.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, the NEMA, under the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment has confessed that they failed to achieve the necessary targets using the appropriate law. They have said the matter is political and, moreover, down there everybody still fears these people at the wetlands. There are still a lot of reports that the night movement of Fusos into those camps of the wetlands’ settlers still leaves a lot unexplained. And it is not only Fusos, there are also reports of posh Pajero vehicles. We wonder where these vehicles are coming from and where these magnets are coming from. I think this matter is both political and military.

3.00
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issues raised are new to me and I have no answers immediately but I will seek for more and -(Interruption)  

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, the matter of illegal settlers has been debated in this House several times before. I know that the substantive minister may not have been in the House when the matter was raised but I am also aware that he does not move with his office. Is the minister in order to come to the House and reveal to us that he is ignorant of what goes on in the House and yet he is a full minister of this Government in a sensitive ministry, controlling a big budget? He should have more ears than any of us. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know how you want me to decide on that issue. The subject that prompted the minister to stand to answer, it was narrated as if it were new. So, as the subject that prompted him to stand was new –(Interruption)

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. So, I was saying that I will seek better particulars from the honourable member, and I will undertake to carry out a thorough investigation of the matter. I am surprised because I have not heard a report from the field. Of course, in the area we created a territorial force, which is the Arrow boys and girls, they are the ones who are supposed to take charge of the home security. So, the immediate suspicion is that those who are in uniform in the area and they move about unchallenged by the local security, would be the ones in charge of the local security but I will get the particulars from him and we will investigate that fully. Thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Maybe before you proceed, allow me to welcome the Member for Kigulu South. (Applause).

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, thank you. I would like to seek clarification from the Minister of Defence. Should I understand that what he has just said now gives the Arrow boys and other auxiliary forces the express authority to evict and drive out from the wetlands these illegal settlers? We have had the problem in Ngora, we have cried out to Government and nobody seems to be responding to us. Now it has caught up with Katakwi and I think it might be a blessing that since we have the Arrow boys they could be utilised to solve the problem once and for all. Is that what you mean?

MR MBABAZI:: Mr Speaker, I deliberately did not address the question about the wetlands because as everyone knows, NEMA and wetlands are not under my charge. I, therefore, did not address it. I assumed someone relevant would. Thank you.

3.05
MR JACOB OULANYAH (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As you recall on Monday when most of us came here there were groups of people trying to settle outside Parliament and they looked like they had complaints, which they wanted to raise with Parliament. Yesterday I saw the Public Relations Officer addressing them on this wing of Parliament. I also met with hon. Dr Kasirivu from Bugangaizi and he tried to brief me of what had happened and being the chair of a committee in charge of Parliamentary Affairs, I thought we could invite them so that we could see what will happen.  

I am happy to report, Mr Speaker and honourable members that this morning we were in the normal budget process and we were discussing the policy statement from the Inspectorate of Government. The IGG and his full team were before the committee and before we released them I invited the leader of these people from Bugangaizi to come and share with us what they had. Their biggest problem was that they had failed even to get access to the Inspectorate of Government. So, when they appeared before us, led by the hon. Dr Kasirivu, they outlined their case. 

They had won a case against Government and Government had started paying them. It has paid three times now, amounts to the tune of almost Shs 4.0 billion but most of them had not received this money. So, they had a case that they thought would be settled.  

But the crisis that we now had, they were in the precincts of Parliament with no money and no food and we opened the discussion. I am happy to report that the Inspector General of Government has offered to provide buses to send these people back while initiating investigations to sort this matter out. So, they are going to leave today or tomorrow morning by bus from the Inspectorate of Government. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.07
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much.  Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the Leader of Government Business and guidance –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, as I had indicated before, this kind of facility that was given to members is only for very urgent matters. It should not be for general debate but something, which has happened and needs an immediate solution. That is what should come after the communication from the Chair, not any other matter that can be formally handled by a motion or by a formal question. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I will certainly stick to your guidance. I am rising on a matter of clarification from the Leader of Government Business and guidance from you. Yesterday the Minister of Justice was quoted by the Government paper the New Vision to have told the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs the following and these are very important matters; 

“A provision of Uganda Shs 22 billion has been appropriated for the referendum instead of an earlier said Uganda Shs 30 billion, and we think this will be enough for the Electoral Commission to do its work.”

Mr Speaker, as a representative of the people of Lubaga South, I would like to seek clarification. Recently Parliament passed the Vote-on-Account and –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You are a Member of Parliament because you are a representative of the people, and being a Member of Parliament, instead of picking matters from a newspaper you are free to go to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee and get the right information and even seek the reappearance of the minister and ask her while the committee is handling this matter. Do not depend on newspapers when you can really go to the right source. This issue of Vote-on-Account, you asked about it I think three days ago, please do not resurrect it. Go to the appropriate committee and you will get the assistance.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. Then the second inquiry is what I will stop on, I will respect your ruling.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, the 13th day of May this year is the day when we broke off for recess. On our agenda in Parliament we had some very important matters. Among those important matters were two reports, which greatly impacted on the taxpayers’ interests, namely the report on the BIDCO Oil Development Programme and the Electricity Tariff Petition report. As I speak now, the people who demonstrated over the electricity tariffs have been on my neck seeking to know whether there is no report coming and we are trying to see if they can plan for a fresh demonstration. 

The clarification I am seeking, Mr Speaker, the Finance Committee took up the BIDCO affair following the reported agreement, which was fraudulently signed between the Government of Uganda and BIDCO. As I speak now, I have got an invitation to the effect that His Excellency the President is going to launch the Oil Palm Development Programme in Kalangala on the 19th day of this month. What assurance do I have, following what we have had in the past  - a very bad experience - that the report on BIDCO will not be sidelined so that everything is forgotten? Because you all remember that Parliament at one time went to the extent of passing a resolution advising Government not to sell UCB. Even after passing it, they went ahead to sell UCB. So, what assurance do I have that Government will not carry on the fraudulent acts as reported in the earlier scene with reference to the report, which they are sitting on? Is it deliberately done to ensure that the President signs and we forget about the fraudulency involved in the agreement? 

Finally, in regard to the electricity tariffs petition, this petition was presented last year. The report has long been ready, many developments are going on within the electricity sector unabated. What do you expect John Ken Lukyamuzi to do after presenting a successful petition? Do you want me to urge people to demonstrate? I can do that now. (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, as far as I remember, when Parliament was prorogued I saved all the pending business that we had.  Therefore, if the report on BIDCO was there or the one on electricity tariffs, they were saved. And the way we do things here is that when a session starts the Business Committee sits and decides on the priority. The Business Committee sat and gave priority to some things. After we have exhausted them then we shall deal with that report. However, I must say your having a report is not an injunction to other arms of Government to function. If the report is considered, it will be considered and necessary adjustment will be made.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. It is on record on the Hansard that you said in your own words that we would begin from where we stopped.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, we did, did we stop only at BIDCO, did we not have other items to deal with? I remember you asked the Deputy Speaker when she was here, I was following, and she gave you the right answer.

3.14
PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (Sheema County South, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker, I am seeking your clarification on a matter raised by the Chairman of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee regarding people who were camping in the compound of Parliament displaced from –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It is not the compound of Parliament. They were near –(Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: It is outside Parliament, and he was gracious enough to call them into the meeting to listen to their grievances. We are told he contacted the IGG who provided transport for them to go back home.

The clarification I am seeking from him is, our understanding of separation of powers between the executive, Legislature and the Judiciary is that the responsibility of settling claims from citizens wronged by the state is surely a function of the executive arm of Government. Are we confusing the two roles? This could end up in courts of law where there is confusion between what should be the proper role of the executive arm of Government. What should be the proper role of the Legislature and what should be the role of the Judiciary? Unless these are distinctly separated, Mr speaker, we are likely to have trouble. So, I am seeking your guidance on whether the gesture by the Chairman of the Legal Committee, much as it is welcome, should not have been directed to the executive arm of Government to do.  

THE SPEAKER: I entirely agree with you that we should adhere to the separation of powers between the executive, Parliament and the Judiciary. And I want to say that those people who camp out there are not camping in the compound of Parliament but they take advantage of the vantage point. They know you pass there and you are the representatives of the people so that you look at them, they spend the night there, they have no toilet facilities - it is only to attract your attention as good Samaritans. I think that whatever must have been done in this matter was a good Samaritan saying, “My dear friend, why are you here?” And when they did invite the IGG who had something to do with that, the IGG is not part of Parliament. He is part of the executive and, therefore, they advised him -especially as the IGG reports to Parliament - I think they must have advised him and he agreed to help. So we have, as good Samaritans, been able to assist in the situation.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance on a matter of House decorum. It is generally accepted that only honourable ladies of this august House are allowed to bring in their handbags. Generally, male Members of the august House are requested to leave their briefcases outside the Chamber. Noting with great concern in these days of terrorism, is it in order for the hon. Minister for Luweero to bring a big briefcase into the august House knowing that Luweero was the cradle of revolution in this country? (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: I think he has heard. You know, normally we expect to see the big box with the Minister of Finance when he is bringing the Budget here. But I think he has heard. Let us proceed.

ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON HUMANITARIAN AFFAIRS IN THE WAR AFFECTED AREAS 

(Debate continued.)

3.19
THE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COMMITTEE ON HUMANITARIAN AFFAIRS IN THE WAR AFFECTED AREAS (Ms Alice Alaso):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg that I start by making some comments. These are just clarifications that were required of us in the report.

The first one was to do with Apac District and we accept the factual corrections that were given to us concerning Apac District. We also want to put it on record that we wrote to the district asking for data, unfortunately, we were not able to get it on time. We also invited our colleagues from all over the region to come in and participate. That would have updated the issues of Apac to the committee quite adequately.  

Mr Speaker, I also want to take note of the fact that besides Acholi, Lango and the Teso sub-regions, the issue of Labwori and Kotido being affected and having internally displaced people has come up and we as a committee believe that is true. We want to have it on record.   

I also want to clarify, because there were some assumptions that some of the data we got could probably have been got from people other than those with authority in the camps. So, we got all the memos from the camp commandants, LC IIIs and district authorities.  

There was clarification, Mr Speaker, put to us by hon. Nyombi Thembo and it had to do with national reconciliation. He wondered why in our way forward we should have national reconciliation. In the course of our work we found there are so may people at the grassroots who felt that there have been a lot of differences in this country. So many NGOs and so many individuals had all sorts of complaints. It was evident from their feelings that they had past and present hurt feelings arising from past policies, past practices and even present issues. And so, they felt that Government should go ahead and put in place a national reconciliation programme. We should formulate the context and the agenda so that all of us are able to bring issues on board and be reconciled one to another.

The committee was also asked to clarify why we did not do much on the issue of security. Mr Speaker, as you note, we had a small bit on security in the region. However, I want to remind members that the Sixth Parliament had a select committee, which came up with a wonderful report on security in the same region. I would urge members to read that. It is partly the reason we did not do much in terms of looking for information on security. 

Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Cabinet, Members of the executive for the responses they have given us in the course of our work. We not only did the probe but we also lobbied and we were able to have some responses from the executive even before that. 

I, however, wish to restate that the 54 recommendations and 14 issues on the way forward, which we put to this House, we feel they are still as valid today as they were yesterday. We continue to invite Members of this House and Members of the executive to visit these regions. Besides going to follow His Excellency the President when he invites them for a Cabinet meeting maybe in Gulu or Soroti, or besides going for a funeral or coming from that region, we continue to urge Members of this House and Members of the executive to go to the region so that they will be able to appreciate more.

The other comment I really wish to restate is that the IDP policy, the sooner we see it, Mr Speaker, the better.

Lastly on comments, we are happy that we have been able to bring this report here. I am very confident of one thing that after we have spoken and spoken, at the end of the day - you know, even the Bible says that we reach a point in life where we begin to always see and never perceive, always hear and never understand, because we close our hearts. It is my prayer that we will not close our hearts after hearing so much, after listening to so much, we will not close our hearts; we will have something more tangible on the ground.

In my closing remarks, Mr Speaker, let me say this. We want to thank God for His Mighty hand of protection. The members of this committee were very prayerful, every morning we prayed. It was not easy to assume we would go there and just work like that. We thank God for His protection.

We also want to thank the Clerk and the staff of Parliament, particularly the clerk who was assigned to work with us, Mr Tumukwasibwe Robert. He had a committee, he had other work but he worked so hard. We want to thank him and we want to thank the rest of the members. 

We also want to thank you, Mr Speaker, for the confidence that you bestowed on us, you picked us and you gave us this task. To us as a committee we feel that that was a sign of confidence in us. On my own behalf let me thank the members. Permit me to mention the members of this committee because this House has appreciated our report and I want to put it on record –(Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: I am sorry to interrupt the honourable member, but as I watched the video, I saw a number of UPDF in the company of the group, and when she was appreciating God’s protection she did not mention the protection given by the UPDF. I thought that God worked with the UPDF to protect the team.

THE SPEAKER: I thought she was going to say, “Last but not least….” (Laughter)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I want to thank, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa. The –(Interruption)

LT GEN. MOSES ALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have just come here to request to add Adjumani as one of the most affected districts on the list of the districts mentioned. Although Adjumani was not mentioned by the chairperson –(Interruption)- not by her directly but other members to whom I am very thankful. 

Many of our people I am sure are not aware of the geographical position of Adjumani. I want to take this opportunity to say that Adjumani is one district of West Nile, east of the Nile. If you see the Nile passing through West Nile going to Sudan, it is the only district of West Nile, which is east of the Nile. It is the only district of West Nile, which shares landmass with Gulu District. Culturally, we belong to West Nile region but geographically we are in Gulu District, therefore, in the North. So, all what you hear happened in Gulu happened in Adjumani and I am glad that although Kotido is not mentioned, when you are launching this trip, Sir, I am glad that Kotido is now included. That is why I am encouraged to mention Adjumani to also officially be included. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

LT GEN. MOSES ALI: On IDPs, Sir, I heard her mentioning IDP policy, their policy is coming very soon. It is already in Cabinet. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. Let me start with what my honourable sister, the Minister of State for Defence said. As you know, when we started presenting this report, the first lot of people we thanked was the UPDF, the Arrow boys, the Amuka and we do not mind thanking them again. I want to thank the UPDF again for taking very good care of us. But I am telling you I want to thank God again because I believe His protection was mighty.

Mr Speaker, I also want to state that in our report we had said Adjumani was affected but I am happy it has been mentioned again. I deliberately restated the question of the IDP policy because in November last year we were told it was in the process of being taken to Cabinet. In February when we met the Office of the Prime Minister, it was in Cabinet; we have been told now it is in Cabinet. That is why I am deliberately urging that we get this policy in place. I do not know at what rate it is travelling but it is travelling quite slowly and it is worrying.

Mr Speaker, before the interjections I had said that I want to thank the members of the committee and I will specifically mention them for the record. I want to thank hon. Prof. Latigo, hon. Angiro Gutumoi, hon. Mathias Kasamba, hon. Eriyo Jessica, hon. Jack Sabiiti, hon. Onek Hillary, hon. Rainer Kafiire, hon. Hood Katuramu and hon. Bintu Jalia.  These are the members of this committee who went round and made this report. (Applause) 

Let me thank Parliament for the interest you have shown in this report and the corrections and every other thing, we have learnt a lot. Mr Speaker, I also wish to particularly thank you for dedicating so much time to this report. I am happy that justice has been done to this report. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I want to plead with this House to transform those sentiments, the sympathies, the feelings and every other thing you have said about the Lango, Teso and Acholi sub-regions into tangible terms. If it is not reflected in any budget, it is as good as that. The people in the region need more action, more tangible things than promises to analyse, to study, to explore; they cannot feed on those things. So, if this House would translate these feelings into budgetary provisions, I am so sure that it will go well with Northern Uganda. 

I want to end with a question that we were asked by the Chairperson of Kaberamaido District. He asked us that, “If Northern Uganda is not a disaster area, then what is it?” Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, thank you very much, chairperson. I thank the committee for this report, which has brought us together. I had to consider this matter and find proposed ways of solving this long-standing problem, and I am optimistic that very soon people will be liberated from the problem they have been suffering for the last l8 years. Thank you very much, chairperson. 

My duty now is to put the question that this report be adopted and as I indicated yesterday, this is not a matter of tug of war between the committee, Parliament and the executive. This is a report we are adopting to assist us as a government, that is, the three Arms of Government, to be able to deal with this problem. I ask those in favour of adopting the report to put up their hands.
(The Members voted by a show of hands)

THE SPEAKER: I have not found a person against adopting the report. Apparently there were few people who entered when we had voted, so I cannot say whether that is abstention or not. The number I have is 97 members in favour of adopting the report; so the report is adopted. I thank you very much. (Applause)

(Report adopted)

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS DELIVERED TO PARLIAMENT ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT ON 4 JUNE 2004

3.37
MRS DOROTHY HYUHA (Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I am moving the motion that, “Thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President to this Parliament.” 

Mr Speaker, honourable members, I believe that all of us received this State of the Nation Address, and the motion I am going to move.
 
In light of the importance of the speech delivered by His Excellency the President to this Nation at the State Opening of the Fourth Session of the Session Parliament, I find it a pleasant duty, privilege and humble experience to move the motion that this House do record with thanks the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in President Yoweri Museveni’s Address to this august House at the International Conference Centre on 4 June 2004.  

His Excellency the President made a number of major points that I request this august House to deliberate on. He first gave a genesis of the NRM revolution for which he gave the two cardinal reasons why the Front of National Salvation (FRONASA) and later on the National Resistance Movement (NRM) fought. The reasons being to give the people of Uganda total sovereignty over their affairs and ensuring security for the people and their property, which he said were still their eternal and primary goals.

Honourable members, I believe that these goals have been achieved with security prevailing in most parts of the country. The people’s rights have been greatly observed. As you may remember, there was a time when there were a number of fighting groups like FOBA, UPA, NALU, ADF, West Nile Bank Front and all these have been stopped.  

When the President stated that Kony terrorists have greatly weakened, this gives everybody much hope and confidence though there is still a problem of acquiring core assets.

Mr Speaker, the President gave the registered achievements and commented that the remnants of the Kony terrorists are now fugitives trying to hide. The President’s Address is a testimony to show that he is actually committed to eradicating the war and insecurity in Uganda and I beg that all the Members support him in his struggle.

On this note, I wish to take this opportunity to commend the Army and the Movement Government for the job well done in fighting the terrorists to bring peace in the North. But I still appeal to Government to work tirelessly to bring peace in the North such that war in the North is history.

Mr Speaker -(Interruption)- I wish I could be protected from hon. Aggrey’s comments. This will be possible if we all work together and especially help the executive in combating the corruption in the Army and having improved welfare in the Army.

The new UPDF Bill will certainly go a long way in addressing these problems. I request all the leaders, including the executive, Members of Parliament, local councils and civil society, to work together to enable the country achieve total peace.

Mr Speaker, I wish to elaborate on this point. I know in this august House, we have received stories of ghost soldiers. These certainly, if at all they exist, would deny the Budget to do what it is supposed to do. So, when we talk of corruption, these are some of the elements. When we were debating the select committee’s report, which has just been concluded, a number of sentiments were expressed. If I may quote, hon. Otto said, “You find some soldiers having exorbitant storeyed buildings in Gulu.” So, if all of us can work together to eliminate corruption in the Army, then we shall go a long way.

Mr Speaker, still on the same point, if all of us can mobilize for the recruitment of the auxiliary forces or militia and we all, as Parliament, support the increase of the budget for Defence, certainly we shall go a long way still. 

I want also to use this opportunity to thank some of our colleagues, who have been involved in leading the Arrow Boys like hon. Eresu, hon. Mukula, hon. Okot Ogong, to mention but a few. So, if all of us can be involved where we can play a role, I know we still have hope of achieving total peace. (Mr Kiwanda rose_)

THE SPEAKER: You did not mention hon. Kiwanda.  (Laughter).

MRS HYUHA: Hon. Kiwanda, we appreciate. These are some of the good examples where all leaders can contribute to achieve total peace. This gives us some hope, Mr Speaker.

Honourable members, the President gave other important reasons, which FRONASA and NRM considered very relevant for the future of our country and Africa as a whole. These, he said were: one, fighting colonialism, the black people’s enslavement. Secondly, transforming the Uganda and African societies from pre-industrial to modern societies. And thirdly, Pan Africanism, working for the end of political balkanization of Africa so as to guarantee the future of the black race and other black people. Honourable members, you may have noted by now that Uganda’s relations with the international community is commendable and has greatly improved.

His Excellency the President also addressed the House on economic factors and related matters where he promised to do everything possible to expedite the Customs Union, which Uganda has ratified, so as to give the people a stronger voice while bargaining for our legitimate interests as well as rationalizing the use of our natural resources. As you all know, Customs Union will bring together the East African states, which will give us better bargaining power internationally and create a bigger market for industries. Export growth is one of the Movement’s visions and we all know that with higher export growth the revenue collection would be high, which leads to economic growth.

Mr Speaker, honourable members, the President pointed out that value addition and ending slave practice of exporting raw materials to get high value is another point of the Movement vision. He promised to ensure that Ugandan companies get involved in converting our cotton into fabric and garments, roasting our Arabic coffee, processing our honey and other products, adding value to raw materials in order to improve our economy. The President pointed out that one stimulus could help our society into transition by paying our scientists class wages or salaries so that they use their knowledge to help achieve the strategic goal of adding value to our raw materials.  

Mr Speaker, I wish to emphasize this point by saying that even with effect from this Budget, and I want to quote the Budget Speech, which was read on 10th June. Bullet 36 and 37, page 11, is about science and technology, and I quote: 

“Government will continue to prioritize science and technology in order to accelerate the modernization and transformation of the economy. In addition to the existing Technology Innovation Fund, I am announcing the establishment of the Presidential Scientific Award with an allocation of Uganda Shs 400 million for this year, 2004/2005. This award will go to scientists developing new and appropriate technologies of great national and international importance in order to keep pace with the current science demands for the development of the economy. 

The National Council of Science and Technology will be revamped and the law establishing this council would be amended accordingly.”

Bullet 37 is about higher science education: 

“Government will from now on sponsor a dedicated number of science students pursuing courses in critical disciplines at higher institutions of learning. Furthermore…” - and this is where I want to emphasize – “salaries of such professionals will be enhanced both at higher training institutions and also in service.” In other words, His Excellency the President, with effect from this financial year is already having this vision and we should support him, honourable members.  

The President also pointed out in his address that despite Kony’s terrorist attacks, lack of tariffs, free access to international markets, the large export of raw materials, Ugandan exports have remarkably diversified and have grown in terms of earnings from a mere US $253 million from export of goods and services in 1992 to now US $929 million in this year, 2004.  

Honourable members, the President stated that apart from the growth of exports, Uganda received an all-round growth in the whole economy with average of growth of the last 14 years being 6.5 percent per annum and an average rate of industrial growth being ten percent per annum. This kind of growth would contribute a lot to the improvement of our people’s status.  

The President further commented on the infrastructure development in his State of the Nation Address, having the percentage of access to safe water in rural areas rising from 16 percent in 1986 to 58 percent in 2000. Household developments where families have permanent buildings have also increased, honourable members. The physical infrastructure plus the generation of electricity from 60 megawatts to now 390 megawatts, including the rise of tarmac roads and telephone lines, are also a sign of economic development.  

Honourable members, you all know about rural electrification and with your permission I can mention that rural electrification in districts like Sembabule where a whole distance of 30 kilometers was pulled from Mbirizi to Sembabule town, this is condemnable of His Excellency.  

We are all aware of some tarmac roads that have been constructed in many areas. I wish to emphasize here Sironko-Kapchorwa road, Ntungamo-Rukungiri, Mebende-Kyenjojo is under construction, Iganga–Pallisa–Mbale, Budumba Bridge in Tororo, to mention but a few. These have been constructed and some are under construction. If yours is not mentioned I still want to refer you to this Budget Speech page 10, bullet 30 where it says they are providing Shs 7 billion to complete the on-going projects. He mentioned the Kapchorwa-Nebbi, Sironko–Kapchorwa, Gayaza-Kalagi–Busunju-Kiboga road and other on-going projects like Hoima road. The other day I went for Malaria Day in Hoima and I found the road under construction, for example. He is promising reconstruction of Jinja–Bugiri road; I know my colleague hon. Aggrey Awori will ask about that.

Honourable members, I am happy to note that the President is very much concerned about the economy and I am sure that the figures he quoted are very important to us. But most important to me, Mr Speaker, is not the figures that really excited me but the truth in which the President gave out the figures and the tremendous economic growth at which Uganda is moving.

The other issue, which the President mentioned was education where he commended the great success of Universal Primary Education. He informed the nation that his dream was to start universal secondary education. I request honourable members to support and advocate for the move for universal secondary education.  

It should be noted that after primary seven many children could not afford secondary education, which creates many primary seven dropouts. We are all aware that the number of school going children has risen from 2.9 million to now 7.5 million children. All these children must be catered for after their primary education. I, therefore, request all sectors in planning for this nation and development partners to take the planning of Universal Secondary Education as a top priority. It is important because UPE has helped to educate the girl child and if these girls also get secondary education the nation will improve in many social aspects. Educate a woman and you would have educated the nation, Mr Speaker.  

On this issue I want to thank His Excellency the President for his consistent and persistent concern over the education for the people. If I can expand a little on this point, I just want to emphasise that some developing countries like Sri Lanka and Kirala in India have good health indicators. If you analysed the history of these good health indicators like infant mortality rates, they could be talking of eight children dying per 1,000; they could be talking of maternal mortality rate being 80 for every 100,000 whereas here in Uganda and some other countries in Africa we are talking of 500 women dying for every 100,000. They are talking of eight we are talking of 80 children dying during their infancy out of every 1,000! But one of the interesting factors is that most of these mothers where they have very good indicators have achieved secondary education. When you talk of a balanced meal they are conscious, when you talk of family planning, they are conscious, when you talk of immunization they are conscious. That is why I want to emphasise that one of the factors, which will help us to improve on some of these social factors like our health indicators is that we need to educate a woman to secondary level. (Applause)

One time we went for a World Bank program with my colleague hon. Rwamirama to Ethiopia and we noted that they were already implementing free secondary education, which is no different from what we are doing in Universal Primary Education. With good planning, Mr Speaker, I confidently feel that Uganda can implement universal secondary education. We need to support the President on this programme. (Applause)

The President ended by thanking the Speaker for his leadership of the House, and all the honourable members of this august House for working smoothly with the executive, but went on to appeal to this House to urgently work on some of these Bills: The Referendum and other Provisions Bill, 2003; the Uganda People’s Defence Forces Bill, 2003; the Domestic Relations Bill, 2003, and the Amnesty (Amendment) Bill, 2003 so that our political transition, security and peace can be properly regulated.

I wish to emphasise here, Mr Speaker, that the Domestic Relations Bill is dear to me as a woman in Uganda. Many of our women suffer and live in terror through domestic violence and other mistreatment. The passing of this Bill will improve the lives of our women in Uganda –(Applause)- so it should be given priority.

In delivering the State of the Nation Address, I am very confident that the President tried his level best to give guidance in as far as national matters are concerned. I request the Speaker to open the debate and ask colleagues to contribute to this important motion. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move. (Applause).

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: Seconded.

3.53
MR NYOMBI THEMBO (Kassanda County South, Mubende): Thank you Mr Speaker, I stand to support the motion. I entirely agree with my colleague that great thanks be given to His Excellency for a precise presentation of the State of the Nation Address. 

Mr Speaker, the address gave the historical background of this country; it also highlighted the achievements, which the Movement has made for the last 17/18 years. It also highlighted the strategic challenges that still bedevil this country, both on the economic and political fronts.  

In his opening remarks His Excellency emphasized the issue of participation of the people in political decision-making. As representatives of the people there is no better time to remind ourselves of this very cardinal principle of the NRM revolution, than today. As Members of Parliament we should put our political antenna at full length to make sure that we detect those contentious issues that need arbitration of the entire population. As you know, Mr Speaker, the issue of people’s power is not a matter of semantics when it comes to NRM revolution; it is a reality. Our people have always been called upon to make very important decisions in our history. You remember very well in the constitution-making process resulting into the 1995 Constitution, the presidential, parliamentary and local government elections –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much hon. Thembo for giving way. I am standing on a point of information. I was saddened to hear the hon. Thembo saying that the Movement Government takes seriously the issue of the people’s powers. The exercise of people’s power is done in several ways. The information I want to give hon. Thembo is that the Movement does not respect people’s power, especially the power embedded in Parliament.  

Recently we passed a resolution urging Government of Uganda not to sell UCB. Immediately after doing so, they sold UCB. Where is the trust in people’s power? What are you talking about?

MR THEMBO: Thank you very much, honourable member for that information but you know we use different spectacles to look at these issues. You can take your observation, but that is my observation and I think it is the observation of the majority in this country. (Applause) So, there is no problem with that.  

Mr Speaker, I was continuing with the people’s power because to me this is very important. Our people, since the revolution started in the 1970s in the battlefields, in the 1980s fighting dictatorship, the people have been at the center of those decisions. Of recent we have seen the people involved in solving the problem of insurgency. When we talk of the Amuka Boys, the Arrow Boys, from all over the country, people from Kamwenge like hon. Nulu Byamukama had to join their colleagues, people like hon. Kiwanda from Buganda had to join the people in Teso, working together with the Government to solve insurgency. All that shows that the Movement revolution is perfecting this cardinal theme in our politics of people’s participation beyond a cultural issue to becoming a philosophical issue.  

On the economic front, Mr Speaker, the President emphasized the issue of value addition of course to get better value for our exports. I should at this point thank His Excellency the President for not seeking cosmetic, short-term solutions to our economy. He is such a great leader who does not panic when it comes to economics. We have seen quite a number of leaders in Africa who panic. When you are managing the economy, you have to be steady; you have to look at issues strategically. 
Our President is a long-term visionary. That is why you see, Mr Speaker, slowly but surely our economy is becoming independent, self-sustaining and integrated. I am not saying this sentimentally; I am basing my observation on concrete data. 

Mr Speaker, you will note that in the last two years our economy is becoming less and less dependent on the donors when it comes to our Budget. When you look at our sectoral performances, you will know that our economy has been greatly depending on agriculture, and it is still depending on agriculture but there is structural transformation. From that dependency, our economy is moving slowly to depending more on industries and services. That is a great challenge.

It is also gratifying to note that commodities like cotton, fish, flowers, which had hitherto completely disappeared on our export list, are re-emerging as key foreign exchange earners. That is a plus on the part of the people in charge of our economic policy.

Mr Speaker, the President hinted on the remittances of our people who work abroad, who bring in close to US $700 million. This has not happened as an accident; it is because the economy is well managed. Those people who work abroad are very sensitive to their expenditure of every dollar. When you see them bringing in a lot of money, it means they have seen that there is a sort of purchasing power parity between the dollar from wherever they are working, and Uganda. And of course it means they have seen that the economy is sustainably managed. So, I think we should thank the President very heartily for that achievement.  

Regarding infrastructural development, Mr Speaker, my colleague has said most of the things but allow me to add that because of the decentralisation policy, infrastructural development in this country is now more even. Nearly in all the 56 districts in this country you will find a major infrastructural project because of decentralisation. I am sure this infrastructural development would have not made sense if it were not evenly distributed. But because of decentralisation in each and every district, either you find a water and sanitation project, a rural electrification project, or a road construction project. So, I think we should also thank the President for that great contribution to our even growth in this country.  

However, this raises a very important point: the districts. The capacity at the districts to monitor these great achievements of the NRM should be looked into, especially when it comes to water and sanitation projects. The community committees, which are supposed to maintain these water points, to a greater extent have a lot of things missing. I pray that the concerned department looks into these issues very seriously to make sure that the enormous resources Government has put in these projects are sustainably maintained. 

Mr Speaker, on education, I am happy to observe that UPE is doing miracles and Government has delivered on most of its promises on UPE. Desks, classrooms and textbooks are no longer very critical compared to the situation three years ago. The critical problems that remain are like those of teachers both in numbers and quality, inspection of schools, teachers’ houses and sensitisation of parents. Sensitisation of parents in this field is still a very critical challenge because some parents seem to think that Universal Primary Education means a complete abdication of parental duties in education of our children. So, I pray that the concerned ministry puts a lot of emphasis on sensitisation of our parents so that they supplement Government effort in this area.  

I was overjoyed when the President intimated that he is going to embark on Universal Secondary Education. As UPE offloads its products, the need for Universal Secondary Education becomes more vivid. Any delay in the implementation of universal secondary education not only means loss of fast brains that cannot afford to pay for secondary education but it also undermines the social, economic benefit of Universal Primary Education. The enormous figure of indicative expenditure that the President quoted of Shs 700 billion to implement this programme should not discourage us but should strengthen our resolve for this very necessary and essential service.  

Mr Speaker, I also hope that when Universal Secondary Education starts, we should be a bit more innovative. We may not need to start the whole programme at a go; we may phase it out. We can start with the first class secondary schools in every district to train the best brains of that district. Then afterwards we can roll over to all other secondary schools. I think the Ministry of Education should be noting that one very seriously.  

Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I ask you to kindly allow me comment on security. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you hon. Nyombi Thembo for giving way although there was a lot of reluctance to do so. The information I want to give my good friend hon. Thembo is that the issue related to Universal Secondary Education is very important. It took the Uganda Government quite some time to achieve its perception from Primary Universal Education. In the same vein it is not enough to perceive universal secondary education when you have not put in place a mechanism capable of sustaining it. Before embarking on free universal secondary education, why doesn’t the Government remove the taxes paid by private secondary schools to date? Then we would know that we are moving in the right direction.

MR THEMBO: Thank you for the information. I hope it is useful to my contribution but I think the concerned people are hearing what you are saying. 

I was concluding, Mr Speaker, and I had asked you to allow me to comment on security. Security in any part of Uganda of course affects the whole country. So, all peace loving Ugandans should be celebrating when the President assured us that the insurgency in Northeastern and Northern Uganda will soon be solved and the situation will soon be turning to normal. Sincere thanks go to the gallant sons and daughters of this country of the UPDF, the Commander-in-Chief, the Amuka Boys, the Arrow Boys and such other related auxiliary forces in this country, who have done a great job in solving insecurity in those mentioned parts of our country. Mr Speaker, -(Interruption)  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of order and a very vivid one. Yesterday I was attentively listening to the Minister of State for Defence and in her own words she admitted that over 98 percent of the rebels of Kony are abductees. That means if you are abducted today, tomorrow you are a rebel and you can just die when you confront the UPDF. Is it in order for hon. Thembo, because he is enjoying a free flow of ideas, to imply that we should celebrate when most of the people being killed right now are recent abductees and our own brothers and sisters? The situation is fluid and does not call for any rejoicing at any one stage. Are you serious about what you are talking about?

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR THEMBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was saying that the partnership that has been exhibited between the civilian population and the Government in solving insurgency in the mentioned parts of this country is a great security innovation, which I think should be taught in military academies the world over, especially when it comes to the partnership in Teso.

Lastly, the social, economic transformation taking place in this country as highlighted by the President, is for real. What we need to do is to further strengthen our institutions and re-orient our attitude to the new challenges that will come along with this change. Our methods of work as Parliament should be revolutionary and as Parliament we should give a lot of support to the executive, especially the President, for we have seen that the vision he espouses is the only path for prosperity, peace and stability for this country. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to support the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

4.10
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for according me the opportunity to examine His Excellency the President’s address to the nation. Mr Speaker, I give credit where it is due. I would like to give credit to His Excellency the President for accepting his constitutional responsibility to address us notwithstanding the substance of the address. 

Mr Speaker, my main concern is over major issues that for whatever reason were omitted by the President and those issues that he deliberately distorted for his political advantage. 

One, the biggest problem in this country at the moment that is nationwide is the economy. Security is a serious problem but somehow the intensity is confined to a certain section or a certain region of this country. But the economy is biting hard nationwide. Mr Speaker, my predecessors on the Floor have given all kinds of figures to show that the economy is improving. I would like to inform the august House that as far as I am concerned, my constituency and my region, that is Eastern Uganda, Busia district, since he gave us his last address to the nation; we have become the poorest people in Uganda. We are poorer this year than we were the previous year and statistics can confirm that. The Ministry of Planning and Finance, they have told us that in Eastern Uganda and especially Busia, if you are looking for the poorest man or woman in this country that is the area to find them.

MR THEMBO: Mr Speaker, thank you. I happened to work in Busia for some time before I came to this Parliament. What the hon. Member of Parliament for Samia-Bugwe North is saying could be a bit true, but what is the cause? The cause could not be Government economic policy. The cause is lack of re-orientation from an anarchic sort of political management in this country to an organized system. There is no organized Government that will ever allow smuggling to go on unabated. So, I want to inform the –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Member of Parliament to use a word, which to the people of Eastern Uganda is a taboo. The people of Eastern Uganda are engaged in cross-border trade and they hate the word “smuggling”. Is he in order to use a word that is a taboo to us?

THE SPEAKER: Is it your position that smuggling is cross-border trading?

MR THEMBO: Sir, I have been a facilitator of cross-border trade in that area, I know the difference between cross-border trade and smuggling. What I am informing the hon. Member of Parliament for Samia-Bugwe North about is that the people of Busia have to be re-oriented in their attitude. Smuggling should never be an economic activity in this country. They are very hardworking people, re-orient them, let them go into production; they will be the richest in this country. Thank you.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my honourable colleague. As a matter of fact I would like to add that he is the best RDC we ever had in Busia District. (Applause). I also regret that he ever came to this august House; he should have stayed with us; maybe he would have helped us in reducing what he alleges to be smuggling.  

However, as much as I would like to accept his information, I also would like to challenge him. Do you have any data on smuggling? Do you have any evidence to show that we move so much across the border illegally? No, it is all perception. What you see between the two countries day and night is what actually has been accepted by the two countries. Certain amounts of trade, like in cereals, one bag at a time, two bags at a time, is accepted -(Interjections)- it is true; unless the Government has now accepted that smuggling shall within such and such a period be acceptable and within certain figures. So, really my honourable colleague, the former RDC of Busia, the best we ever had, has got his information upside down.

CAPT. BABU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. For that reason the governments of East Africa have decided to formalize this and we have now, according to the speech of His Excellency the President, the Customs Union in Article 75 of the Treaty of East African Community clearly stipulates the ultimate goals in this Union. I think that will solve this problem and we shall now not call it smuggling or cross-border trade; it will just flow. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, I think when certain issues are being raised, we should appeal to our colleagues to objectively look at them without any misguidance or guidance of the politics, especially in this House. It is unfortunate for my colleague, hon. Nyombi Thembo, who is an economist by training, to look at who is making the orientation of the people of Busia, whatever their tribe is. There is no doubt whatsoever that there is a decline in the rate of growth of the economy. Government by its own admission - all its planners have accepted that poverty is on the increase. Are we lacking guidance and orientation in Western Uganda?  

So, if there is a problem, it is absolutely necessary that we look at it. An economy, especially of the third world country like Uganda, is like a patient on oxygen in an intensive care clinic. So, it is absolutely necessary really to listen to each other and we find a solution to that kind of problem without politicizing anything, without speaking about this and that. 

There is a general problem; planners in the Ministry of Finance have accepted it; poverty is on the increase, our capacity to earn from outside has degenerated. One can speak even quoting statistics from Government literature books.

DR WANDIRA-KAZIBWE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to give information to hon. Guma that while we are debating the Budget and the status of the economy, we should not debate it as if it is in isolation of the world economy. Many countries in the world are experiencing recession. So, if we debate, let us tell Ugandans that while we are making this kind of progress, the statistics show something else. Because Uganda is not a country on an island, its economy is linked to the economies of Africa and of the whole world. We cannot debate poverty of Ugandans while not looking at poverty when we even want to trade.  

So, when we look at the President’s speech, we the representatives of the people should enlighten them about what is happening. And I would like the honourable member, a Harvard alumna, to also give us the source of the data so that we can analyze it further and help him diagnose the problem of Busia. I thank you very much.

MR AWORI: I would like to thank my honourable colleague who has just arrived from Harvard - I can see the Harvard input. (Laughter) However, in the same breath I would like to inform my colleague who by coincidence happens to come from the East, and who again by historical fact is my grand daughter, that indeed in the East we have suffered serious economic decline in the last decade. And there is data in the Ministry of Finance and Planning to prove my points. Likewise, the UNDP has the same data, even in the last report they gave this government they said that the greatest economic decline in Uganda in the last 12 months has been in Eastern Uganda. The North, notwithstanding the security problems, is even ahead of Eastern Uganda. Why? I can give some of the reasons.  

One, again Eastern Uganda has received the minimum number of investments. If there is any fresh injection of capital it has been in acquisition in former parastatal bodies such as Tororo Cement, and that is about it. The rest have gone into total decline. Jinja used to be the leading industrial hub in the whole of Uganda but now it is even behind Lira in terms of industrial programmes, notwithstanding security problems. Mr Speaker, this can only be blamed on poor planning and direction of the economy by those people in charge of this country. 

When you look at Tororo, it is a deserted town now; very little serious capital has gone to that area. But if you look at towns in other parts of the country, there has been serious input, on the insistence of the Government. If you look at the investment rate per capita, again you find that in the last decade there has been less than one dollar per capita investment in Eastern Uganda. So, there is no way I can be proud of this regime’s economic planning or strategy as far as my people are concerned. 

To say the least, when you look at what went to the Teso districts, which suffered insurgency, in terms of cattle restocking, again it is minimal and neither meaningful nor sustainable. These are the issues that make me state categorically that there is nothing I can be proud of in the President’s Address to the Nation. There was no specific programme he addressed. As a person who sits at the hub of information, I would have expected him, from economic intelligence, to know the various regions of Uganda, which are least in progress. One is on the decline is Eastern Uganda, to say the least about Busia. So, Mr Speaker, I have nothing to be proud of in his speech. 

Mr Speaker, this economy has been elitist; only a few people are getting richer and richer. One percent of the total population of Uganda own Uganda. There is what we call in Swahili “wenye inchi” and “wanainchi”. Wanainchi are the ordinary folks like me; wenye inchi are the real owners of the economy who make things happen, who influence political decisions, who influence policies, and who really control what happens to me and the rest of the people below me. 

So, really this country is progressively being owned and controlled by a small percentage of people. You find people in this country who own as many as ten houses. Where are they getting this capital from, and yet I know for sure that there is only one financing institution that specializes in mortgages, and that is Housing Finance, and they do not give more than Shs 60 million per mortgage. Yet you find somebody who earns less than Shs 1 million per month, taxable, owning five houses. 

Mr Speaker, should anybody challenge me, “Where is your data?” I refer him or her to the Sebutinde report on URA; you can see the filth in that. Should anybody challenge me, “Where do you get your data?” they just have to look at Potter’s report; there is filth in that. Should anybody challenge me, look at any commission of inquiry in this country that does not show that corruption is on the increase.  

Corruption takes place sustainably in an area or a country where the economy is in the hands of a small percentage. If all of us had equitable access to wealth, there would be little corruption in such a situation. But wherever corruption is on the increase, it means only a few people have got access to wealth. Does the President –(Interruption)

MR KIWAGAMA: Thank you very much. The member on the Floor is mentioning ugly statistics, which he is not substantiating. For instance, he said a person earning Shs 1 million has five mansions; can he substantiate? He says corruption is on the increase but he is not quoting any source of information to confirm his allegations. Is he in order to go on rampage, mentioning this without substantiating?

THE SPEAKER: To be authentic, can you give us the source of your information, please?

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker; I can. Given time I can bring in the Sebutinde report, Potter’s report and the UNDP Human Development Report, 2003/2004. These are documents I cannot read here and bore you. I know my honourable colleague has just walked in or he has not been with us but I can understand the problem. However, I can quote from various sources but I do not think I have that kind of time.  

One more point; the way the President is leading this country is making us a consumer society rather than a productive society. How do I prove it? Look at the amount of imports and exports. When you consider our balance sheet, you see that every year there is an increase in imports and a decline in production or exports. He has been telling us over and over again that we should go, add value, and add value, but value to what? To raw products! Where are the facilities? 

I belong to the committee, which has been examining one of the most serious aspects of our export efforts, that is, the question of exporting textile products like garments. We are at the moment, notwithstanding our US $6 million investment in one company, exporting garments worth US $3 million per month. Mr Speaker, do you know how much we are importing in used clothes? US $28 million per month. As a matter of fact at one time I was tempted to move a motion in this august House that within a certain period, given a grace period of six months, certain used garments should not be imported. They are a health hazard and I am referring, with due respect this august House, to the undergarments of ladies. They should not be allowed; likewise for men. Undergarments of any type regardless of gender should not be allowed into this country for health reasons, and even for economic reasons. These are things we can produce here.  

Mr Speaker, let me very quickly talk about the question of Defence, which is really a problem to us. Again for some reasons the President told us what we always hear everyday; “The security situation is going to be improved, this problem is going to end tomorrow, tomorrow”. We have heard that statement for the last 14 years! At least for the first four years in power he did not know, but now he knows. So, every day we are fed on this diet of “the war is ending tomorrow”. 

To make matters worse we are told only 1,000 of Kony soldiers are left. But how come 40,000 UPDF soldiers have been fighting 1,000 soldiers for 14 years and more? Mr Speaker, these are serious issues. Even with a military programme we have adopted to stop the Kony issue, things are serious. For instance, Mr speaker, we have been given a programme here in a White Paper called “Modernization of the Army”. I cannot believe that any Commander-in-Chief would talk about modernizing this army or her army in the total absence of a programme for training paratroopers. There is no programme whatsoever for paratroopers, and yet we know those of us who have got limited military knowledge that is the best way of dealing with a guerrilla situation especially that which has its sanctuary outside the country. You can cut them off by dropping paratroopers. We had equipment here called a C1-30 military aircraft for paratroopers; we have never used it. Instead it is now rotting away in South Africa.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much hon. Aggrey Awori for giving way. Mr Speaker and honourable members, when we carried out this comprehensive programme called the defence review, we started by security threat assessment. We identified 134 ideas of possible security threat and we categorized them. We went further and put down the capabilities for defence that we would require and selected security threats that are under the Ministry of Defence. The Government of Britain assisted us because these are the most experienced in defence reform. We included the component of training. We may not have used the word “paratroopers”, which hon. Aggrey Awori would like to read, but when we talk about the mobility of forces, that is entailed in the mobility whether air capacity or land. 

We did not use the phrase “training of paratroopers” otherwise we would have gone into details. But the component of training is included in that transformation programme. I thought I should give you this information because the way you are debating, it appeared to me that you lacked the information. I thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you. Now I can see your problems. With that kind of information coming from the Minister responsible for Defence, we are in serious trouble. Why am I saying so, Mr Speaker? In military language there is no substitute for paratroopers. When you say airborne you know the nearest you could have told me is that hon. Awori, –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: No, I think the point is that you said there were no plans. Did you know there was a plan? The information is that they have a plan, which they have worked out. You said there is no plan.  Now she is telling you there is a plan. But you can proceed.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am happy you have assisted my honourable colleague. I did not want to differ with her on that one otherwise I will be differing with the Speaker and I cannot afford to differ with the Speaker. But as far as I am concerned, yes, I have been involved in that programme. I have been sitting on the Committee of Defence, I was in Shelton Hotel when you brought in your British experts and I was one of those who listened very carefully. 

Definitely, airborne troops were minimum. As a matter of fact I even raised it and there is no way you can talk about airborne troops unless you include that equipment. A paratrooper does not jump from a hill into a valley. He jumps from an aircraft, which is less than 2,000ft above the ground. Such a programme is not there. I have looked at that programme, even if we were to look at the White Paper, which was presented to us; it is not there.

Mr Speaker, let me go to things, which probably the honourable colleague here is familiar with. The issue of militia due to the trouble you are getting into; we are paying UPDF to do a certain job. When you abdicate from that responsibility and hand it over to civilians in form of militia, that is serious abdication, we should even charge you with most serious offences.

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member on the Floor in order to say that the UPDF is abdicating its obligation to defend the people of Uganda when they work with trained militias that they have under command and control? Is he in order to say that these gallant sons and daughters of Uganda who are in Northern Uganda, in Teso, in Lango carrying out the command and control together with the auxiliary forces are abdicating their duty?  

THE SPEKER: Are you in position to substantiate your statement?

MR AWORI: Yes, Mr Speaker. I can conclude from the following facts. There are certain people abdicating their responsibility. We have a force. I cannot give the exact figure, but not less than 30, well armed –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER:  When you say some people, is that the UPDF? You are talking about an institution and individuals, does that mean the same thing?

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I do agree with you. I tend to have fused the two, the persons and institution. Since I have got statistics to show –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You are confusing the two. Don’t you think you have to amend your statement so that you pull out the institution and talk about the individual?

MR AWORI: You are absolutely right, Mr speaker. I would like to follow your ruling and your advice that I be more specific. The commanders or main officers of the UDPF, we have no less than 40,000 such persons. From time to time we have been fed with information from the same organization, the UPDF, most of the time they have given us a number of the enemy troops at less than 2,000. In no given period in the last 18 months have they told us that the number of the people we are dealing with in the forests is 5,000 or more. Now, why do you have to go to civilians to get help when you have got 40,000 fighting 2000 people or less? Somebody is not doing his work or her work.

Last week we gave them Shs 33 billion. If we are to go by the per capita basis, we are literally spending Shs 1,000 per day per soldier. What in the world is going on? Why do I have to give you a job? Mr Speaker, there is no way we can pay you as a Speaker to preside over this august House and then you keep sending us the Sergeant-at–Arms to come and preside over the august House. No! There is no way we are going to go outside and start recruiting civilians who will train for one week and then we unleash them onto well trained and season guerrillas. 

There is what we call the post war fall out.

MR ETONU: Thank you very much for giving way. I would like to give information to the honourable member holding the Floor that the people he is calling civilians managed to chase Kony’s group, which had entered Teso. Those civilians you are talking about are former soldiers. So, they were not just civilians otherwise they would not have done that.

CAPT. BABU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Sorry to have disturbed hon. Aggrey Awori but having been a guerrilla fighter himself, he knows very well that the strategies to fight guerrillas differ from place to place. Guerrilla combat and the engagement rules are slightly different. In fact they are not the normal military rules and he knows very well that strategies differ from place to place. The best way to fight guerrillas in particular areas is to use the local people to do so, and militia has not been invented in Uganda.  

In the history of the United States the first army was a militia army and that is the militia that actually conquered the British who were invading the main land of United States. Today they have assumed the name of the National Guard in the United States. These are normal citizens who at times are asked to come and take up arms. For your local militia who have got combat experience to engage guerrilla warfare in an area where languages are used and the local people are used to them and they can easily melt away, is the best strategy. Hon. Aggrey Awori knows this very well. He did it in Eastern Uganda and he used to melt away in the population. Mr Speaker, therefore, strategies of how to engage guerrillas differ from place to place. Thank you.

MR AWORI: I thank my honourable colleague on the Front Bench. I also thank my honourable colleague on the Back Bench. However, in passing let me make the following comments on the information. 

Number one, hon. Ben Etonu you have said indeed these were former soldiers so you better be grateful to Obote and Amin because without those people who were trained by Obote and Amin, you would have had no Arrow boys. So please, look back and say, “Well, they saved us and as far as –(Interruption)

DR WANDIRA-KAZIBWE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable member for giving way. While he is giving credit to Obote for training those militia, I would like to remind members of this august House that people in Busoga who were not trained by Obote or Amin chased away the grandmother of the Kony war, with all these people. So, we should not underrate the capacity and the resilience of our people to fight insurgency or to fight rebellion because if they are to come to Busoga we shall catch them up again. Thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you, honourable colleague. Again you would be surprised if you were to analyze the people who chased away Lakwena leadership; they were ex-Obote and ex-Amin soldiers. Anyway, Mr Speaker, let us not make this a contentious issue. We cannot go to a referendum on this particular matter. My main concern here is that the continued use of militia is what I referred to as post war fall out. These militias can become a problem to us later and for that matter the UPDF should take up its proper position in society. The trouble with the UPDF is that the more money you give them the more IDPs we get. They seem to go in the same proportion and yet I assume the purpose of increasing the budget is to decrease the number of IDPs so that they can go back home in peace. But the more money we give you, the more IDPs we get. So, I do not know. Why do we not just round up these people and put them in a camp? It will cost us much less than spending Shs 133 billion.

Again His Excellency the President’s speech was totally lacking in foreign policy. He said very little on Uganda’s foreign policy, our relationship with our neighbours, our relations at international level, our relations with super powers and our position regarding international security crises of all kinds. He said nothing about the East African Community, whether it is going to move towards the East African Federation and if so what steps Uganda Government is taking to move in the direction of Political Federation. There was very little said about that.

Mr Speaker, one of the biggest problems right now internationally is the matter of the Middle East. Again he was very silent on the matter of the Middle East and Iraq. I recall at one time he did not stick to the original arrangements with his colleagues, African leaders, on the matter of the US invading Iraq. Later on he back peddled, although he had said we could not support the US to invade Iraq unless the US sanctions it. But later on he went round and we even offered troops to go to Iraq to support American invaders. We need to know whether the President is still sticking to the policy of supporting Americans in the Middle Eastern invention or not. He was silent on that.

Mr Speaker, we are prominent members of the Commonwealth, we plan to host a conference of heads of state in two years’ time in this country. Again he did not even say that his application to host a conference had been accepted by his colleagues. These are issues we need to be kept abreast of.  

Mr Speaker, there is also the matter of observance of the rule of law. The rule of law in this country is cardinal. This thing of the third term, he has managed to evade it. He never talks about whether he is prepared to push this Parliament to come up with a proposal that we indeed lift the term limit. He uses various, devious methods. What we want is a categorical statement from the President to say, “For me I have served my term in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution but a few people want to lift that particular constitutional limitation. It is your business; do not count on me. I have had my share; I have had my time of running this country.” It is very simple. Somebody who has been in power for 18 years can stand up and tell people, “Look, I have done enough. From now on the Constitution says somebody else should take up the job. If you want to lift that particular limitation, do not count on me. You come for me in Rwakitura two years later.” It is so simple –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, did you say the President is pushing Parliament? To do what?

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, even if I had been in his shoes, there are ways I would use to push Parliament, not using the normal methods of coming to say, “Mr Speaker, I want this law in place”.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I have stood up to raise a point that I need to be clarified on before hon. Aggrey Awori sits down. In the budget background, which we have –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The honourable member is concluding. If you re-open –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, I want to draw the attention of Members of Parliament to how the honourable member has overstated the balance of payments by this Government. We need to know how our Government is moving –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you wanted to intervene you should have come at the time when he was dealing with that issue. But as of now he is winding up and he was talking about how Parliament can deal with that issue. You are right, but you should have raised it some 30 minutes ago.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for saving me because definitely I want to go by your ruling. I must wind up. I do not want to go back to the economics, but I am winding up. As I said there are ways and means of helping Parliament to reach a certain consensus in a direction favourable to one’s political position or vision for that matter. So, as I said, if I were in his shoes there would be ways and means of persuading Members of Parliament, if need be, call them to State House, coach them on certain issues so that when they come here I can now see how they can help me.  

But, Mr Speaker, the most important aspect of it is that the public should never perceive that a head of state is trying to manipulate the Constitution in his favour. That is casting bad faith.

THE SPEAKER: The President has no role to play here in Parliament to be able to manipulate us. Is it not going to be done by you, the 304 members, less the Ex-officios?

MR AWORI: That is why I was saying, Mr Speaker, that indeed for him he does not have to come here, constitutionally it is even bad. But if I were in his shoes I would try to influence events in the House by talking individually to members so that when they come to the august House they see things my way.  

I would like to end by saying that I hope His Excellency the President paid heed to what Kofi Annan, the Secretary General of the United Nations, said at the opening of the African Union yesterday. He cautioned leaders of African Governments that, “Please, do not try to manipulate your Constitutions so that you can stay in power longer than provided for.” Thank you, Mr Speaker, and long live the august House.

5.01
MR MURULI MUKASA (Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my other colleagues in thanking hon. Hyuha for presenting this motion. In the address it is clear that there has been positive progress reported in all fields. We, therefore, extend thanks to Government, Parliament and the people of Uganda and our development partners for this positive progress, which was clearly stated in the address of His Excellency the President.

Mr Speaker, on page 3, His Excellency reiterated the vision that he has always talked about, that is, we are going to grow through exports or we shall have export-led growth. This is a great vision and it is a vision, which must be pursued with all vigour, because it ensures that we shall not only get incorporated into the world economy as equal partners, but it also means that there will be noticeable improvement in our incomes and, therefore, consequent development.

However, Mr Speaker, for this vision to be realized in as short a period as possible, a number of setbacks must be looked at and definitely removed. There is need to domesticate and uphold this vision so that all stakeholders can exploit it satisfactorily to cause that kind of desired effect. I think Government must make serious interventions, of course with all the other stakeholders so that this vision is really achieved.  

One of the setbacks against this vision, particularly in the field of agriculture, is our inability to meet the international standards that are required of us by our colleagues where we hope to trade these agricultural products. For instance in Europe you have the Euro-gap measures, you have the vital sanitary protocols, which have been put in place in various areas, especially where we hope to do trade in these agricultural products. However, we are still falling short of these standards and this becomes a very serious setback, which must be tackled, not only by Government but also by all of us who are involved in this so that we achieve the desired vision.  

It is true that PMA is in place and it is a good policy. It is true that a lot of zoning has been done in the country. This was done way back I think in the days of hon. Sekitoleko; this country was zoned to show which crops could be produced. It is true a number of measures have been put in place, but all these have not been literally translated to the ground so that they are brought into actual reality to such an extent that what we produce is of the right standard and can therefore compete in the international market. We should be able to earn the dollars that we need to cause this export-led growth. I think it is time now to domesticate all these things so that we concentrate on the actual producer.  

It is true, Mr Speaker, there are DFIs in the districts but again they have not gone down to the person going to produce, the key stakeholder. I would like to propose that perhaps using all this knowledge, which is in place, using all these strategies that have been put in place, we could isolate or get one or two farmers from each district, and do some real work with that particular farmer. That farmer can then act as an example to the other farmers and we get down to mobilizing these other farmers, to sensitise them so that they produce to the desired quality. They should produce the right amounts of produce, which we need so that we can now achieve this export-led growth. 

Mr Speaker, I am talking not just as a theoretician. I from time to time do practice some agriculture but there are these problems and I cannot say now with this knowledge if I can produce for export. Why? Because there is still this setback about sensitisation over a few things, which are needed to make sure that this is actually a reality. There are other things, for instance I have mentioned sensitisation, I have mentioned establishment of demonstration farms with serious particular farmers or progressive farmers in various areas, which are lacking. There are also things like provision of cheap traction equipment; we need to have this equipment handy not only for clearing the bush but also for breaking the tract.  

There is also the problem of laying infrastructure particularly infrastructure for water for production. I know, Mr Speaker, a lot has been done in line with water for cattle but what about water for agriculture and water for irrigation? Obviously a small farmer or even a progressive farmer cannot be expected to lay infrastructure for water for crop production. That is why I am saying that Government ought to come in and perhaps start in a small way somewhere so that production can be seen and it continues throughout the year. It is possible for us in this country to actually have three crops and we now need the standards that are required so that we –(Interruption)

MRS MARY MUGYENYI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank my colleague for giving way. First of all I appreciate the issues that the honourable member is raising. I also appreciate the fact that he acknowledges that Government is putting in place measures to meet the Euro standards and to reach the farmers. But the honourable member seems to think that Government is not doing enough. 

I want to bring it to the attention of this august House that in the past we used to produce to meet the domestic demand and to ensure that we are not importing anything. It is only recently that this country started producing for export and you cannot start by doing everything right. Measures are being put in place to meet the standards of the export market that are needed, for example meeting the Euro Gap standards; there is a process that is on-going. I am sure the honourable member knows that. We might not have perfected it yet but the process is underway and we are able to export to the international markets. We are exporting flowers, exporting fish, we are exporting vegetables and we are exporting all sorts of things that we have been able to add to the traditional export crops.  

Mr speaker, in terms of reaching the farmers, the Government has put in place the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS). This is a real attempt by Government to reach the producers on the farms. Although it has not reached all the farmers in all the sub-counties, there is an attempt and the results are clear; they are there and we hope that at the rate that we are going we will be able to achieve real results in terms of reaching the farmers and advising them accordingly. 

Mr speaker, my voice is not that clear, I apologize. However, I hope I have been able to answer some of the issues that are brought to the attention of the House, including mechanization of agriculture. There is a concept paper already in place looking at ways in which we can mechanize agriculture and make it large scale, as well as issues of irrigation. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR NYANZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the honourable member for giving way. According to what I experienced when I went out of Uganda, I happened to attend a number of agriculture shows in London and in some Arab countries. What I found out is that Nigerian and Ghanaians are having some of their products on the market, which are not far different from ours here, in Uganda. In some markets I found that there are even some of our products here, which are far better than those from Nigeria. The only problem here is that Government has not come in to assist our farmers. The middlemen we are using are cheating farmers and at times farmers have rejected selling some of our products to them. So, if at all Government came in to assist farmers get a chance of reaching this market, our farmers would benefit a great deal.

The fact is that whatever we have on our farms, all our products can reach the international standards. So I do not believe you when you say we are getting very little because we cannot reach the international standards. Although some of our agricultural officers are not reaching some of our farmers, at least some of us have taken interest to educate some of our farmers on what is required on the international market. I thank you.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, the honourable minister and the colleague for the information that you have provided us. Yes, it is true a start has been made in that direction but we may need to expedite it. We need to know, for instance, how many districts are under NAADS, not all the districts are under NAADS. If it is possible, have all the districts covered by NAADS, and all these NAADS fellows actually interacting on a daily basis with the farmers. That would be okay.

Mr Speaker, I was talking of some other setbacks for instance soft credit and training labour, which we need so that we can produce aggressively. Market information is available but again limited to certain people. Not all the stakeholders, particularly the producers, have the export facilitation and infrastructure. Yes, some prototype something is down on the ground but it is not yet - and we would want not to move so slowly, we want to move fast, we should walk, take strides and if necessary run.

Mr Speaker, four years ago Government encouraged for instance the importation of foot pumps called moneymakers, in the line of appropriate technology for our farmers. These pumps I think used to cost Shs 120,000 a piece with the hosepipes and so forth. Last year a heavy tax was clamped on these foot pumps and the people who were importing them obviously could not bring them cheaply for the farmer to afford and eventually they stopped bringing them in. Yet these are some pieces of infrastructure or equipment, which were very useful. In fact those who took advantage of them were able to for instance produce –(Interruption)

MRS MUGYENYI: Mr Speaker, from my recollection of last year’s taxation regime there was not supposed to be taxation on agricultural inputs. As far as I know there should not have been any taxation on agricultural inputs, including the foot pumps that you are talking about. So, unless you can really prove it in terms of figures of tax that were put on these pumps; it is very difficult for me to understand. That is how I get it from the Ministry of Finance, and the records. I thank you.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Mr Speaker, that is precisely the puzzle. I think the company that was dealing in them, called KANDI Enterprises, is not very far from here. I was dealing with them. They cannot now bring in those foot pumps on account of heavy taxation. One piece now goes for Shs 450,000, which is slightly beyond the reach of an ordinary farmer. When these pumps were brought in people who took advantage of them were able to produce for instance tomatoes and vegetables, almost on a seasonal basis. So, this may be an area, which could be looked into to make sure that what we decide here in Parliament that what policy the ministry has put in place is actually adhered to. 

If there is a tax exemption on agricultural equipment then that should be observed. It should not just remain here on paper. As far as we know there is nothing but then in practice there is everything and that affects our performance. 

Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Thank you for giving way, hon. Muruli, but the point you are raising is very important and the response too. However, the problem is with the harmonized tax code. The tax code, to the best of my recollection, does not give an omnibus exemption. It does not say that all agricultural inputs are exempt from tax. The exemption is in categories of inputs and you may find that there may be inputs, which are not in a specified category within the harmonized code. 

When I used to work at the UIA, we had a problem with irrigation inputs because sprinklers were not in the category of exemptible inputs, so we had a problem. The amendment of a harmonized code is rigid. For instance, if the amendment were flexible that if there is some item that was not foreseen at the time of making it, it could be included either by a committee or by Cabinet or by the minister. Maybe that would help, but the amendment has got to eventually come to Parliament. 

We may actually have to revisit amendment of the harmonized commodity code. I understand it is an international document. It is based on international standards but its amendment is very rigid. The points being raised are very pertinent, and the responsible ministers should take them up very seriously.

MR NYANZI: Mr Speaker, I have been listening very attentively to hon. Muruli Mukasa, the minister’s response and now hon. Ruhindi. I am also a farmer and just last week I went to a certain shop to buy chemicals but their price had increased. When I asked the importer about it he told me, “I am selling you such and such at an increased price because of the taxes.” 

The minister is saying all agriculture inputs are exempted of taxes; our shopkeepers are exploiting us because of increased taxes. How can we assist farmers? I only represent farmers in my constituency. So, I am seeking guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You have got the information that there is no tax. If you go to a shop to buy something and the shopkeeper tells you that the prices have gone up because of the taxes, you say, “I am the legislator and as far as I know this is the position.” You cannot get guidance from anyone other than yourself. Since you have the information, pass it on to others.

MR NYANZI: Mr Speaker, you heard what our Member of Parliament for Mukono was saying yesterday here, the people are being told that the price of vanilla has fallen. But when you go to the computers, the price is still up. Can we do the same thing to our farmers as you have advised the hon. Member of Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: I do not see any problem. If the fact is that there is no tax, tell people that there is no tax, which indicates the price. They will be ashamed and they will not use that excuse to over-charge you. But I think we should end this debate because as I see it this tax matter is going to be handled again when we are handling the Budget. So, hon. Muluri, you will follow it up later in the relevant committee so that when we are approving the budget we take it into account. This is a matter for the Ministry of Finance to explain.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I want to give to my colleague is that when Government removes tax on some of these agricultural inputs, it is not automatic that the reduction, removal of tax or waiver will be reflected on the prices. We all know that we deal with the private sector. Government is not in business. If Government were in business you could expect the prices to be down but with the traders we have, prices are determined by the forces of demand and supply. So the moment they remove the tax it means that very many farmers will be willing to come and buy and the supply is always limited because of the dollars. 

We do not have very many importers. So, it is a chance for the traders to make profits. There is a very good example of the life jackets. Mr Speaker, I raised it when the taxes were waived and the fishermen were being caned and the prices doubled. When I raised it I was told to join business and assist my people. So, there is a need for Government, if they want to assist the farmers, to do business in some few areas. If not then we shall keep lamenting here but the forces of demand will determine the prices and supply, and we shall pay.  Thank you very much.

MR OKUPA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am forced to interject here on this issue of taxation. I still agree with my colleague because we worked together in the tax body. The information I want to give here is about exemption of the import tax on the agro-imported machinery. The imported machinery that was exempted from import tax is the machinery that is solely used for agricultural purposes; but for machines that have a dual purpose, they were not exempted. So, we must make that clarification clear.  

Two, what tax are you talking about? We may be talking about income tax. If you are a commercial farmer you do not have to pay income tax. They do not exempt farmers from income tax. It is only on import tax. So, we must be very clear.  

Then talking about the increment in the prices of agricultural inputs, there are variables that determine the price. It is not only tax. If the other variables have a high positive effect on that variable, definitely the explanatory variable with the highest explanatory power will have increase in the price of the commodity you are selling. So, these are some of the things that we must acquaint ourselves with before we talk of tax being exempted and how the prices are going up. Thank you.  

MR MULURI MUKASA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and members who have given this information. This is a matter, which we shall follow up with the relevant committee to make sure that we come up with a solution to this problem with the aim of helping our farmers so that we can achieve that vision that His Excellency mentioned on page 3.

Mr Speaker, the question of tenure of land is also important particularly in areas where evictions have become very common. Like in Nakasongola people are being evicted left, right and center. This again will impact negatively on production and on that vision. So, something has to be done immediately. Of course measures have been put in place; let them be implemented so that the producers enjoy their tenure.

Mr Speaker, on page 6 His Excellency mentioned that Ugandans abroad have remitted over US $700,000,000 into the economy. That is very good indeed and this is a highly commendable thing for those Ugandans who are there. This is a very important source of money in our economy and because it is important as you can see, it has even surpassed the traditional cash crops like coffee and cotton. It has, therefore, to be nursed, nurtured and helped to grow. I would like to propose that Government should assist Ugandans to go abroad. The process of these Ugandans going abroad and obtaining these jobs wherever they go is at times very painful. It is left to the individuals to fight for themselves and they go through all incredible means to either get visas or to go and get jobs out there yet what they are doing is of significant benefit to us. 

Other countries have taken this up seriously. There is always a government hand either through the Ministry of Labour and Foreign Affairs, which really goes out and make these arrangements outside and facilitates these people going out so that they can now bring in more and more remittances. I do not think there will be any harm given the fact that our universities and technical institutions are producing so many people, and given the fact that the jobs that are being produced by our economy at the moment are not as many as the people the institutions are producing. So, this is something, which could be looked into so that these people go –(Interruption)

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I thank you honourable member for giving way. I would like to thank you for the issue you have raised about getting the jobs abroad. Mr Speaker, yesterday I heard an announcement over the radio to that effect. The State House was announcing a programme of taking nurses or medical staff to Britain that there is that arrangement. Personally I have received so many calls from unemployed nurses inquiring as to how they can join that scheme. In that vein, can I seek clarification as to how that one is arranged so that we can see how we could organise people to also join that stream? It is actually important that our people know and then we see how we can guide them to join. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Thank you very much indeed for that piece of information. It is a step in the right direction. Mr Speaker, when these people are out that way we could have a follow-up. Some of them obviously may not remit money here, but they may help us to break into the host markets wherever they are, so that the process of exporting from here becomes easier. We do not just rely on the other protocols like AGOA and EPA. We can use these people to break into the market quite aggressively. This will make this vision realized; it becomes quite vibrant, to our own advantage. Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I beg to support.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether we should continue but I recognize hon. Madada and hon. Minister Babu. Tomorrow when we resume they will take the Floor. I think it is a convenient time, seeing you as you are, to adjourn. But before we do, I have been informed that because of fluctuation of voltage capacity here in Parliament for a number of days, UEDCL will be here tomorrow for two hours to increase our voltage. This will be between 9.00 a.m. to about midday. We shall have a blackout because they will be working on improving the capacity. I thought you should go with this information so that you know tomorrow the computers will not be able to function for about two hours.  But this is intended to improve the situation from what it is prevailing.  

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, with your permission, I hope it will be possible to also adjust the Chamber temperature; make it a little bit warmer.

THE SPEAKER: There has been a complaint that the system should be adjusted. I thought that problem had been solved. We have the means to deal with it. With this we come to the end of today’s proceedings. I thank you. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.35 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 8 July 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)



