Thursday, 8 July 2010

Parliament met at 2.50 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I want you to join me in welcoming the following who are in the public gallery: they are our development partners from the United Nations Fund on Population Activities (UNFPA); German Services on Population Activities (DSW); and officials from the Population Secretariat. I would like to introduce Ms Janet Jackson of UNFPA; Dr Jonathan Musinguzi, whom you are familiar with; Dr Charles Zirarema of the Population Secretariat, Mr James Kotch and Polycap Mugisha. They have come to witness the presentation of the statement of our Parliamentarians’ Forum on Food Security, Population and Development. You are most welcome. (Applause)

Secondly, hon. Members, our colleague, hon. Rebecca Otengo, the MP for Lira, has lost her grandfather, Mr Itany Solomon. He died on Tuesday, 06 July 2010. The funeral service and burial will take place on Saturday, 10 July 2010 in Akia Adekwok village, Erute South constituency in Lira District. It is five kilometres from Lira Town. Please, comfort her during this difficult time. 

STATEMENT BY THE UGANDA PARLIAMENTARIANS’ FORUM ON FOOD SECURITY, POPULATION AND DEVELOPMENT IN RELATION TO THE WORLD POPULATION DAY

2.55
PROF. WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity to make this statement from the Forum on Food Security, Population and Development of the Parliament of Uganda. 

Hon. Members, this is to inform you that on Sunday, 11 July 2010, Uganda will join the rest of the world to mark the World Population Day. Celebrations in Uganda shall be held in Nebbi District under the theme, “Plan for a quality population because everyone counts.” 

As we are marking this day, the Forum on Food Security, Population and Development, wishes to draw the attention of honourable members and the august House to the following concerns:
1.	The country is experiencing a population growth rate of 3.2 percent, which is one of the highest in the world. In every year, 1,500,000 people are added to the country’s population. It is feared that the country’s population is likely to double in the next 15 years. It is also worth noting that the majority of this population is below 18 years, indicating a higher dependency ratio.
2.	Following the trend of social service improvement and the food crisis, it is clear that the country is already finding it hard to cater for its population. This is manifested in the alarming food insecurity situation in the country, which has claimed many lives in different parts of the country.
3.	It is the duty for the Government to provide adequate care for the people by ensuring quality life, meaning that the increase in services should match with the growing population. A lot of awareness is required for our communities to appreciate that having children should be, “by choice not by chance”.  
4.	There is need for participation and commitment of all stakeholders, mainly political leaders, in ensuring improved services for the people, mainly in funding, monitoring and putting in place mechanisms of tracking feedback for better service delivery.
5.	Uganda needs to take an immediate step in addressing issues related to unrealistic population growth and the deterioration of services delivered. Therefore, we call upon all legislators to continue advocating for better services and increased funding for the social services sector. 

Since parliamentarians are legislators and overseers of Government programmes, we strongly believe that this is the only tool we can use to have the lives of the people of Uganda improved. Please take action now because the longer we wait, the more difficult the situation may become

We call upon the Government to:

1.	Continue focusing on and giving adequate priority to reducing the high child and maternal mortality rates, and improving reproductive health interventions in the country.
2.	Empower communities with better schools, health units, safe water and easy access to income sources. This will go a long way to help communities overcome the challenges of poverty. The issues of reproductive health should be given the special face it deserves, like it has been done in the case of HIV/AIDS, in our move to promote reproductive health issues.
3.	Increase staffing and improve staff remuneration and working conditions with special focus on those working in hard-to-reach areas to ensure that all people have adequate access to services.
4.	There is need for parliamentarians to roll out community sensitisation and advocacy in passing on population messages mainly on issues of improved reproductive health services and active male involvement in population issues, among other things.

As Members of Parliament and leaders of this country, we need to work together and handle this population explosion that is already eminent. We need to sanction advocacy for quality population.  Rt Hon. Speaker and hon. Members, I thank you for listening. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Anokbonggo.  Maybe what I would add is that we should support the programmes for rural electrification so that people can have electricity and watch the World Cup up to morning; then they will not sleep at 7 O’clock in the night. (Laughter) 

3.02
MRS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Rt Hon. Speaker and hon. Members, I wish to thank hon. Anokbonggo for this statement. I have one concern in as far as reproductive health is concerned. I have always wondered: I think we are facing a problem of mixed messages in this country! Whereas it is true that Uganda has one of the highest rates of population growth, the messages that come out of the Executive seem to indicate that it is okay for the population growth to be this high - that population is not a problem for Uganda. (Interjections) Yes, I have heard messages to the effect that we are not yet that many. 

But my concern is that the attendant services that ought to go with this high population growth are not matching at all. Madam Speaker, I have just come back from my constituency, I have taken it upon myself to try and find ways of mitigating the hardships women face as they go to deliver. I found in one Health Centre III called Agurolude, pregnant women who had gone to deliver sharing a bed; they had put two mattresses together in a room and it was being shared by three people. 

So, whereas it is good that they are delivering, surely the provision of what they need to be able to deliver comfortably and effectively is lacking. Therefore, I think it is important that we address the question of population growth in this country. 

Secondly, we have to bring the men on board. As women Parliamentarians, we at one time went throughout the Eastern and Northern regions but wherever we went, the women pointed out that their husbands do not support family planning. The services are available but they fear to go for the services and even when they go they sneak in there quietly and then get out as fast as possible. 

They have to hide the pills that they take because when their husbands discover them, they are in real trouble. So, how are we going to be able to control this population when the women cannot freely take their pills or they cannot openly go for help in as far as family planning is concerned?  

And because of that sort of hiding, yesterday I buried a woman in my constituency whose husband did not want more children and she went for a local way of getting rid of the pregnancy; she died! So, I think the issue of population growth and services available for women really needs to be concentrated upon so that we can have safe delivery and safe family control. I thank you. 

3.06
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Youth Representative, National): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Prof. Anokbonggo for the statement; and I join everybody to congratulate Uganda and the rest of the world upon the World Population Day. 

As the statement reads, the majority of the people in Uganda are below 18 years and the population between 18 and 35 is also very big. The theme for this World Population Day is: “Planning for a quality population.” A quality population to me means a population that is educated, that is healthy and that is economically empowered.    
   
With our increasing population growth in this country, I see a variation between the services and the population that is growing. And, therefore, as a country we need to have a population that is equally planned for. Many people do not want to hear of birth control or planning for the family. Because when you talk about family planning, people mistake it to mean not having children. But I think the message should be clear as it is in the statement of Prof. Anokbonggo that, “Do not have a child by chance but have a child by choice.” This means planning or having something that you are expecting to have. What happens in this country is that people just have children anyhow and at any time. They do not know how they are going to live; they do not know how they will go to school but for as long as they have children, they think that they have their own methods of bringing up the children. 

There are many challenges that come with this increasing population growth because as you see the scarcity of services, even us now we compete for them and you can see what is forecasted that the population will grow twice as big as it is now; and yet the services are not growing at that very rate, which means that we are going to fight for those services.

A UPE school, which is planned to take 50 pupils in that village, will by next year have twice as many pupils, which means that the desks will not be enough; the teachers and the materials will not be enough. We Ugandans and the Government should, therefore, be very vigilant to plan for our communities. 

The increasing rates of poverty and unemployment; the question is: how are we prepared to make jobs for this population? Are we prepared to have finances that are going to help our people to start up their own programmes that are economically empowering? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before we proceed, join me in welcoming students of St Kizito SSS in Bugolobi; they are up here with their teachers.  They are represented by hon. Ruhindi, the Deputy Attorney-General. You are welcome.

3.10
MS SYLIVIA SSINABULYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to thank Prof. Anokbonggo for this statement and also to join him and the rest of the people to express our alarming concern at the high fertility and growth rate, which Uganda is currently experiencing.    

Although there are people who believe that a big population is an asset to a country but to a country like Uganda I believe that the high growth rate and the big population is currently a liability because our population is growing at a rate faster than the economic growth of the country. And because of this, the population growth is undermining all attempts at developing this country. For example, because our resources are limited and the population is growing highly, you find that we cannot provide quality education in primary, secondary and even university institutions. 

We have gaps in service delivery; there are always constant drugs stock outs despite the fact that Government continues to invest in health and education and other services. So, the only way we can ensure that we provide quality services to the population is by ensuring that we control the population growth, which Uganda is currently experiencing.

Population growth has a direct link with high fertility rates and high maternal and infant mortality rates and Uganda is well known for having a very high maternal mortality rate. We have been talking about this now and again in Parliament and outside and there is no way we can reduce maternal mortality unless we look at issues of women’s fertility and high population growth.

So if we are committed to reducing maternal mortality in this country then we must invest in programmes for family planning such that women and men can plan for their families and thereby ensure a reduction of maternal and infant mortality.

Finally, I want to urge fellow community leaders when addressing our communities to try and advise the population positively, because when political leaders make political statements which say, “Have as many children as you can”, the people take us very seriously! You find that many of the people we represent are poor and cannot afford to have large families and give them quality life.

So it is upon us, as political leaders, to advise people positively such that they can have the number of children that they can afford to have and to whom they can give quality life and who can benefit from the kind of quality services, which we would wish every Ugandan child or person to have. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Speaker, this is a very important statement from the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children. This is information from our own Members and we seem to be talking to ourselves. I don’t see the line minister here; the Minister in charge of Agriculture. I am raising a matter of procedure because I think we would have the substantive minister here so that we debate effectively. Members are expressing concerns; they are giving figures and we would need a position from Government. I think -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I see the Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development is here; the Minister of Health is here; the Minister of ICT is here; the Leader of Government Business is here. Proceed.

3.16
MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is well known that our country Uganda is one of the countries with the fastest population growth rates, which is at 3.4 per annum.

The same country has the highest population growth rate in Sub-Saharan Africa. It is actually higher than that of Sub-Saharan Africa. What is annoying is that Government has no plan for this increasing population.

The population that is growing in this country does not match the services that we have. Many people are dying of hunger; we have food shortages, many are starving; there is no good plan for this increasing population, especially in rural areas in this country. Uganda as a country needs a healthy, productive and quality population. In the past, that was in the 1980s, the Obote regime, we had so many industries. Now where are the industries and the services to absorb the excess population in this country? Do we have effective measures to curb unemployment rates in this country? This is a very serious problem in this country. 

In the context of environmental resource management, high population growth has exerted so much pressure on our environmental resources. Look at Kampala City, the city we call a modern city in this country and on top of that, it is the capital city of Uganda! Look at the poor solid waste management, the urban pollution, the sewerage everywhere; even the urban dwellers have no facilities for the sewerage - (Member timed out­_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, join me in welcoming the students of Greenfield Senior Secondary School, Masindi. They are on this side; you are welcome. They are represented by hon. Jalia Bintu.

On a sad note, I have to announce the death of a senior citizen, the Members of the legal profession know him, Mr Pius Kawere, former chairman of Mukono District and former CA delegate. He has died and will be buried tomorrow at Namwezi, Seeta, Guuma sub-county at 4.00 p.m.

3.19
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think this is the time that all of us must prioritise and support girl child education, and girl child education has to go with allocation of resources. When our girls remain in school, the time they start to produce is actually delayed. But when our girls go out of school then they get to produce at an early age; sometimes even at 13, 14, 15 years already our girls are producing. We have a high rate of drop outs in our primary schools. I do not know how family planning services can be extended to schools and we make schools an avenue for dissemination of information to our people in the communities to delay and plan?

Everywhere I go in Gulu District, we have child mothers’ groups. I have time and again told them that these child mother groups are entertained only because we have been in war but now that we are out of war, these child mother groups must stop. We must try to keep our daughters in school so that we also check on the population. 

But sometimes, some of us politicians, for example, His Excellency the President one time said people must produce. I think he should reverse his words. They must produce but they should plan. He has to reverse his statement because then people will just go on rampage and produce without planning. We need to plan so that the children we bring out are also catered for. We don’t need to just start producing too early. 

Sometimes you ask people and then they say, “But His Excellency the President said we must produce. We need a bigger population.” Yes, sometimes we say our economic growth rate is very high but it does not match the population growth rate. It means that we should also check on that economic growth – it is not economic development. If it is economic development, then we should also see how the spread of the product that comes in the economy is spread out in the community. We can call it growth but it shows very clearly that the population growth rate is high but the economic growth rate is not as high as we always claim. 

My appeal is that maybe Gender together with Education and even Health - because we cannot leave it to Education or Gender – we should also have Health. Some time back we had the Family Planning Association of Uganda but it was very poorly supported ­-(Member timed out_)     

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Three minutes.

3.23
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Allow me to also thank hon. Prof Anokbonggo for this statement, which is quite informative and challenging. I want to make comments arising from paragraphs two and three on page 1.

Paragraph two clearly states that there is a trend of social service improvement and food security remains a challenge. It is true that we have had an improvement in the establishment of infrastructure especially in the area of health and roads. But these health facilities are literally empty. There are no drugs, health personnel are demoralised – they are really helpless. Those who have offered themselves to serve in these health units are demoralised because they do not have facilities and drugs. 

I came from my constituency just a week ago and we had a complaint that one health unit has not received drugs, even this mere Coartem, for the last six months. A doctor has had to abandon his work place because he is not facilitated to do his job; there are no drugs; he is not well paid and the working environment is very bad. We cannot see an improvement in one of the sub-components in the health sector and deny people the availability of services by denying the doctors and health workers what they should be equipped with to provide services to the population.  

I, therefore, believe that Government still has a lot of challenges in providing adequate health services for our people. In totality we know that Parliament has made a pronouncement that supply of drugs should go to the lower health units right from the National Medical Stores. We have not seen any report that services are now going down to health centre IV or III units which are nearer to the population. What exactly is the Ministry of Health doing? Do they have any capacity to monitor the delivery of drugs to the lower health units, or they still rely on the requisition from the local governments, which are really not functioning at all? The local governments spend a lot of time doing politics other than providing services to our population in our lower health units.

My number two is again on the provision of food and in line with this - I think yesterday we learnt of two scenarios: in one area, the local community has over produced maize and the people are failing to sell their products and yet they are starving. What exactly is happening with Government? Is it the problem of market, distribution, capacity to access adequate food or the right quantity of food? What exactly is happening, because on the one hand we are learning that the country is starving and they are malnourished ­-(Member timed out_)

3.27
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Three minutes. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Let me also thank the hon. Prof Anokbonggo for the statement. I was in the library and I was looking at the Hansards for the Sixth Parliament without knowing that this statement would come today. I came across a debate about the high population growth rate in Uganda – in the Sixth Parliament. Now 12 or 15 years later, we are still talking about the same thing without anything being done. Does it make sense? It does not. 

It would appear to me that the Government has no population policy. We do not have –(Interjections)- which library? We do not have! You see, Madam Speaker, there are some people in Government – yesterday the East African Affairs Minister was here on the Floor advocating for the merger of East African countries to create a big population. At the same time we are complaining that our population is growing too fast. What do we want? (Laughter) 

There was the Family Planning Association here and it is now called Reproductive Health Uganda. It is being run by Government to teach families birth control but the same Government is advocating for a bigger population. Where are we going? I think the problem is with the Government. We may not feel it now but in 10 to 15 years to come, it will be right on us here. It is a very serious matter and the Government should wake up and start planning for the population. 

One of the factors is the ignorance. There is rampant ignorance among our people because if you go deep into the rural areas and start talking about birth control, nobody would understand; even the facilities do not exist. How do you go about it? We have been talking about the need to address this issue. Yes, there is need but who should do it? Who should start? How should we do it? Should we come up with a law regulating the number of children per family or what? Let us not talk and do nothing. Let us start now and do something about this dangerous population growth. I thank you.

3.31
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): I thank you. I also want to add my voice in thanking Prof. Anokbonggo for his statement but at times I get surprised when the Government calls on the population of Uganda to get more children. The population of this country as we speak today – the Government is not even able to take care of the population we have. 

I am glad that Members on the other side now understand that the social services cannot even measure up. We are not even able to take care of the population we have today. Look at those students up there. Are we giving them the social services they want in this country? Look at the children from Karamoja for whom Government is doing nothing at all, and yet we are asking for a bigger population. Has the land expanded? Isn’t it still the same land? For us in Bugisu, the population is already big. We actually do not encourage people to produce more children because social services are not there. Look at the vehicles on the Kampala streets these days. What is Government doing about all this? 

My colleagues have talked about the services that KCC is rendering. What plans do we have, that we should be asking for more population in this country? We do not have a plan at all. We cannot deliver social services. The other time, I was in Kacumbala and I found children studying under a tree. And you are asking people to produce more children? How about women who are giving birth on the stairs of Mulago Hospital because of lack of what they are supposed to be using? You must work on the social services sector before you start encouraging a bigger population. 

People talk about China having the largest population in the world; but China is able to take care of their population because they have enough food. They also have more than 500 multinational companies based there to provide employment to their people. What does our Government have in plan for the population of Uganda? Poverty is written all over the faces of the people in Uganda. What is Government doing about it, before they start asking them to produce more children? 

I would like to say Government must address the problems we have today before they ask people to get more children. I thank you.

3.33
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Anokbonggo for presenting a very good statement. I would also like to thank the brains behind the theme for the World Population Day. The theme, “Plan for quality population because everyone counts”, is very good because many people have mistaken what family planning is. Unless we sensitise people, the way the statement suggests, especially the rural population, we will keep on singing family planning and they will just understand it to mean producing few children, which is not the case. It is about planning for the number of children one wants to produce no matter whether that person wants to have only two – how you are going to plan depends on the resources –(Interjections)– no, it does not matter by the way.

The statement goes on to say that children should be produced by choice and not by chance, so that if one wanted, he could plan to have all of his five children in one year –(Interjections)- it is allowed –(Laughter)– yes, it is allowed. (Interruption)

MS BAKO: Thank you my colleague for giving way. I thank you for saying that, but as a matter of fact, I would like to say that I have had three children in 39 months by choice because I have planned for them. And as a result –(Interjections)– my partner and I are not complaining, but it seems the honourable members over there are complaining. 

The information I would like to give is that the misconception that having many children is not family planning is inadequate. It is incumbent upon the leadership of this country that has been giving contradicting statements from having many children or having as many as you want, to not having many because the resources are not enough. I would like to inform my friends that I have had three children in 39 months and I did that by choice. (Laughter)

MR WACHA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank my colleague and a neighbour, hon. Franca Akello for giving way. I have two pieces of information. One is that you have to be a genius to plan to have five children in one year. Secondly, I would like to inform hon. Franca Akello that Uganda is renown not for family planning, but for lack of family planning.

MS AKELLO: I would like to thank the two colleagues for giving me that very fruitful information. I am saying this because Ugandans have to really know what is going on. The idea behind family planning is not only to plan at family but also at national levels. And as Members of Parliament we know that there is need to plan for Uganda’s population, but have we made the services available? For example, this year in January, when children for UPE were being registered, most of the schools were overwhelmed by the big numbers because they never had enough space to accommodate them. They have few classrooms. As a result, some of the children in my district had to miss out on school services because the schools -(Member timed out.)

3.38
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will concentrate on the other side of the coin; about the advantages of a bigger population.

In as much as we talk about population growth, what should be ringing in our minds? The issue is not about Uganda having a big population growth and not being in position to look after this growing population.

Allow me to extend my inner most gratitude to all Women Members of Parliament, who have been going for maternity leave every year since we joined this Parliament. (Laughter) And Madam Speaker, if you can recall, they, at one moment, requested for a breastfeeding room within this building. I do not know whether that has now been budgeted for.

Anyway, when it comes to men, if we are sincere about what we are talking about, we should bear in mind that although we are Members of Parliament, some of us are fathers who have produced three children in a year, but we are here talking about population growth. We should not deceive ourselves. Population growth is very important and there is no way we can keep talking about other countries like China and the United Kingdom, for having high population growth, but at the same time tell Ugandans to reduce on our population growth.

I believe what Uganda should do, as the theme suggests, is to plan for a quality population. Let us just plan for a quality population; but how are we going to plan? For example, are we in position to curb corruption? Because if that is done, then money that is meant for health centres will not be swindled, the way it was with the GAVI funds. If we are talking about planning for a quality population, we should strive to ensure our country is corrupt free. (Member timed out.)

3.41
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Anokbonggo for the statement. The problem is not population growth, but the issue is with addressing challenges that come with an increasing population.

Having many people could even be a blessing in disguise. If we have a bigger population and we are able to address the fundamentals such as education and health, there is nothing wrong with that. We would even be exporting this skilled population to other countries. There is nothing wrong with having many children; even the Bible says we should produce and fill the earth, and that is a command from God. Some of you pretend to be Christians but you oppose the Bible.
 
MR WACHA: I want to inform the House that hon. Katuntu is a very good friend of mine and I go to his house; he has three children. He has not filled his House. (Laughter)

MR SEBULIBA: Thank you, hon. Katuntu for giving way. I support hon. Katuntu because 320 children are dying of malaria in Uganda every day. Women are producing 20 or 30 children such that if 10 die, they may remain with some. 

MR KATUNTU: Hon. Wacha is right, but my inability to produce five is not that I do not want to produce more. In fact, I am still working hard to add on the three. Let us look at agriculture. As long as this country is dependant on subsistence agriculture, you will have a problem with food security.

When we were growing up, we used to have granaries and there was no problem of food. Households had granaries that could feed their entire family for say three years. There is no single granary today in the villages and you can see this when you walk around. Whenever you have a problem, it is a challenge to sort out that problem. The issue is how we should improve agriculture such that people produce for the market and we will not have a crisis arising out of a big population.

3.47
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD, CENTRAL REGION): This is an interesting debate; I have one point to rise in relation to this debate. Before that, I need to mention one development that has skipped my eyes for the last three days, this regards the sitting arrangement of our Speaker; you now have a better working table. 

About population growth, I would like to think in terms of cause and effect analysis. High population growth is a symptom and not a disease. Therefore, our focus should be on the underlying factors.

Many of us have visited doctors and noticed that they always start with a diagnosis, by checking your heart beat, temperature, blood, etc. Once it is discovered that your temperature is low or high, the doctor takes that as a symptom of a disease. The doctor does not concentrate on the high temperature but rather, on its cause.

The point is that if we could focus on the underlying causes of a high population growth, I think with time this business of birth control would take care of itself. The underlying factors are many, such as religion which may be the reason behind hon. Katuntu’s submission. Some people believe that God has sent them to produce as many children as they can. The other is poverty. People produce many children because they are poor. Ignorance and unemployment are also contributing factors. 

I appeal to honourable members of this august House -(Member timed out.)

3.50
MS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this very important statement, and I would also like to thank Prof. Anokbonggo for this very timely statement to Parliament.

I would like to agree with the previous speaker that if we are to curb the high population growth in this country, we should look at the underlying factors. In my view, poverty, illiteracy and ignorance are the three major factors that have led to high population growth in this country and, therefore, as hon. Betty Aol has mentioned, we need to support girl-child education as a long-term strategy to curb high population growth, because of the reasons she has mentioned. 

If you are to overcome these serious challenges in this country, we should sensitise the men beginning with the men in this Parliament. I can see some of our development partners in the visitors’ galley. I would like to request them and Government to target the men, especially honourable members like Katuntu and Sebaggala. 

I was very disheartened by the arguments advanced by my friend Hajji Katuntu. How can he argue that people should produce and fill the world? That is very unrealistic. And when you look at the Members who are advancing that argument –(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Thank you, hon. Member. I have just passed a note to my colleague, hon. Katuntu, to the effect that St. Paul never married and he encouraged those whose bodies were weak to marry. For him, he was strong enough and had no need to marry and God never condemned him for failing to contribute to the population of the world. 

So, it is risky to quote a small text in the Bible unless you have read the whole Bible.  

MS RWAKIMARI: Thank you, hon. Member, for that information. I think he has heard and this should be the last time you misquote the Bible. (Laughter)

Apart from the men in this House, Government and all of us should target the men in our communities. It is the men who culturally determine when to have the babies, how to have them and how many they should have. As you know, women are not empowered to make decisions about their reproductive health.

Much as we are talking about limiting the number of children using family planning methods, if the men are not brought on board, our efforts will be in vain. Therefore, I would like to encourage our colleagues, the male Members of Parliament, to take this issue seriously. Look at the communities you come from; look at the poor women with twelve children; naked with nothing to eat, no house, no money; would you like your communities, the people who vote for you, to remain in that state of affairs? Let us be realistic. And those advocating for having many children, how many do you have? (Member timed out.)

3.56
MRS FARIDAH KASASA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker for this opportunity. I would also like to thank Prof. Anokbonggo for his statement to Parliament, and the architects of the theme for this year’s World Population Day, “Plan for quality population because everyone counts”. The gist in that theme is quality, and I pray that all agencies concerned with quality in this country take this opportunity to beef up support. 
When you talk about population, what type of population do we want? For the next twelve months, let us go down to our people and give them this message. 

Madam Speaker, if you went to our communities and talked about population growth, you would be amazed. People think that it is just a matter of producing a baby and that is all, but what about quality? The issue of producing children is between two people; it is high time we told these people that when they are in that process of producing, they should first consider what they want. 

People have taken everything for granted; they think one should just go to a hospital and produce. I can see the ministers are here and other stakeholders; let us use this chance to tell our people the type of population that we want.

My second point is on the messages to our people. It is high time we harmonised the messages we send to our people. Sometimes, I pity the people we lead because we give them contradicting messages. A Member of Parliament may go to them and tell them to plan for their families. After that, someone else comes in and tells them something contradicting that, “Why don’t we hold a national dialogue and bring this population debate to a close?” We keep talking about population, but we are not making headway; why don’t we hold a national dialogue? We have researchers, consultants, and professors. 

We should agree on the messages to give to our people. We should bring all the stakeholders on board; the cultural leaders and religious leaders, and know what their take on this is. Are we hurting them when we tell people to plan their families? If indeed we are hurting them, how best do they want us to bring out this message? Otherwise, if we just continue like this, we shall just be moving in circles; some will be advocating for quality population while others are driving in the opposite direction. We should hold a national dialogue and bring on board those who are advocating a big population and those for few numbers. This will help us to know in what direction to move and what messages to give to our people.

3.58
MR OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Lira): Madam Speaker, the subject matter today is very important to me. Therefore, we need to talk from an informed point of view. I had the opportunity of studying population as a subject, and I have done a lot of reading and research on that subject. The way people relate a big population to economic growth is lacking.

In 1920, the population of Uganda was 2.2 million; in 1949 when they did census, it was 4.9; in 1969, it was 6 million; and in 1980, it was 12 million. In 1920, Uganda had a small population, but was still poor. In 1949, we had only 4.9 million people, and we were still poor. And now with a bigger population, we are still poor. The issue is not a big population, but rather, we the leaders. What are we doing for our people? What plans do we have for our people?

When you go to the rural areas, people are talking about health services; but is it because of a big population that people are stealing drugs? It is not. We lack drugs not because we cannot afford to buy drugs for our people, but because we have failed to plan for the services.

So, the matter right now is not about the big population; the matter is our inability to plan for the resources we have. When I went to England, I studied population in detail and traced their population growth. It has remained static at 70 million people for close to 100 years. But when you look at the structure of that population, you find there is a very big problem with it; 70 percent are above 65 years old and many of them are now depending on Government –(Interruption)

MR LOOTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Okot Ogong for giving way. The information I want to give is that although you have articulated that rightly, I think in some of these developed countries, two things happen. One, there is homosexuality. Men marry men and women marry women. Two, I think there is a behavioural change in their lives in addition to planning.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much my colleague for giving way. I want to give information to the effect that in economics, if a country like Uganda has population growth at 3.4 percent, the GDP growth should be four times if we are to provide the matching services. It means in Uganda, we are inherently depleting and reducing the services. Whereas we have good economic growth, which is towards 9 percent, it is not enough to match our population growth.

Two; in demography, our biggest problem is not just the number, but rather it is the age structure. Most of our population is of school-going dependants relying on a very small population of workers. That is a very bad structure of the population, and that is why we must take very serious action against our current population explosion. I thank you.

MRS SAUDA MUGERWA: Madam Speaker, I think hon. Ndeezi brought an important argument as far as discussing this issue is concerned. Actually, we should look at it scientifically. I think as introduced to us, officials from the Population Secretariat should take this message directly from the House. We need a scientific solution because the world has a population problem. They have talked about China and Pakistan – recently, I saw a documentary – there is a problem of men not getting married because they have very few women. You find that a whole room is occupied by men just lamenting about where to get women to marry. I think our scientists should look at how we can solve this problem.

Normally, the number of girls and boys being produced is not equal. You find that many girls are hanging on the streets because they do not have men to get married to. So, when we are looking at population -(Interjections)- yes, this is true. The people who are helping us with population planning should also look at this. How can we solve this problem? Issues like age difference matter a lot. 

Countries that have controlled their population growth are now suffering. That is why they are importing young people to go and work for them because they have an aged population, which cannot help the economy. What do we do? Let us come out scientifically and help this nation, but we should not concentrate on the rate all the time. I thank you.

MR LOOTE: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank Members for their information. But generally, what I am saying is that as we talk about population, we need to make a very extensive study about the subject matter. Let us not just make statements and talk about population, and tell our people that we are hit with famine because of high population growth.

If you went to Dokolo right now, you would find that people there have nowhere to put food. I think everywhere in Lango, right now, they have a lot of maize and we have nowhere to put it, and we are urging Government to go and buy the maize, the food that we have. (Member timed out.)

4.06
MS LOI KIRYAPAWO (NRM, Budaka County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank Prof. Anokbonggo for this statement.

I have listened to my colleagues’ contributions, but what I want to add is that here, the theme concerns quality population and I am sure most of us here have quality families. If we have quality families, I am sure we should also sensitise. 

We should avoid apportioning blame. I heard some Members saying Government is failing, but we are all part of the Government which is failing. We are a part of the three arms of Government. If you blame one arm, blame yourself. What I am saying is that we have to sensitise our people.

You have a quality family and you have a duty to see that  that woman or that man who brings you here to Parliament, also has a quality family. If we have quality families, definitely the population will be a quality population.

My colleague talked about school drop-outs, but those who are going for UPE and USE are not being fed? Why are they dropping out of school? Most of these school children move out of the school at lunch time and very few of them attend afternoon classes. Where are the rest? They are in trading centres, with sweet mummies and sweet daddies who are giving them lunch. Are we looking at that? If we are saying let every child should go to school, is he sustained in the school? Is he getting what he should get so that he remains in school and completes primary and secondary school? 

These are issues we have to look at. We have to sensitise our people. People should know that every parent who brings a child in this world has to feed that child. After all, Government is paying school fees. What are you doing as a responsible parent? Why aren’t you feeding your child who is going to school?

These are issues we have to share as Government – that is especially Parliament and the Executive. So, we should find ways of ensuring that we have a quality population in this country.

4.10
MS BEATRICE MAGOOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the professor for this paper. It has come at a time when we really need it. We are talking about a big population without quality. This is how I enumerate my ideas.

One, we have children who are producing babies. Why? There is some inefficiency somewhere in our homes, in our schools and in our planning.

Two, there is food insecurity.  Producers are less than the consumers. Go to town, for example. Young boys are loitering in town. No work, no production. That is the problem, which we must address.

If we want to overcome this problem, we need to do serious planning both in our homes and in our schools, and as Government. Do we have enough food? If we do not have it, how can we have it? Do we have enough food? Where do we store it? If you have no storage, then you are uselessly growing your food. It is not going to help you.

Another thing is about education. Our children have not remained in school long enough to be able to look after themselves. That is why they are producing too early to look after themselves and the children they bear. I would like to see a situation where our girls stay in school until they are old enough to look after themselves and the children that they are going to bear. 

The other point is on health. Our health is not well looked after. But who looks after us? It is Government, of course; but I want to remind everybody that it is our task to look after our families first before we can blame Government.

Madam Speaker, I would like to end by saying that a quality population is the one we want. Even if someone was to give birth to many, there must be a policy. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, 17 Members have contributed to this debate and fortunately we had the benefit of our partners from the Population Secretariat, Germany, and UN Services on Population Activities. They have also heard the views from both sides of the House and I think they have heard different positions. Now, let me ask the Minister of Health to make concluding remarks on this matter.

4.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. A number of issues were raised concerning my sector and I feel obliged to respond. 

There were issues raised on inadequacies in our facilities, especially to do with beds in hospitals and health centres. I am happy to report that we are doing something in this direction. We have started receiving or procuring equipment which we are supplying to health facilities. We also have some money now which is going to enable us buy some equipment, mainly beds and mattresses, because colleagues alluded to lack of beds and mattresses in our hospitals. 

On the issue of lack of medicines, I think we are improving. I am dismayed to hear hon. Odit say that some of his health facilities have not seen Coartem for the last six months. I think I will look into this personally because I was under the impression that there is some improvement.

What we have planned and started doing, is not for National Medical Stores to sit and wait for orders from the health facilities, because this is not working well. We have now come up with a basic kit for medicines and other health supplies, which we must send every month to Health Centre IIIs and Health Centre IIs. This level of facilities has a problem in terms of capacity to make timely orders, and having realised this, we decided that we work out a basic kit. We know what is required at Health Centre II and Health Centre III; this is mainly Coartem - the anti-malarials - Panadol and the other painkillers; antibiotics; IV fluids for Health Centre IIIs; Mama Kits; and a number of items that we are now putting in a basic kit and must make sure that these are sent, whether the centres or the districts have ordered or not. A number of districts were not making timely orders and this is why we are going that way.

There is a colleague who is proposing that we introduce family planning in schools. I do not think we should go that way. Rather, what we should emphasise maybe is sex education in our schools so that at an early age our children should know what to do and when.  

Of course, Government’s introduction of UPE and later USE was to make sure that children stay at school for as long as possible. If we have children dropping out of school after Primary Seven, then we need to know why. Hon. Kiryapawo was talking of lack of food and yet we are hearing from some quarters that we now have a bumper harvest; but children continue to drop out of school. So, could the reason be lack of food or is it something else? 

We have a duty, as Members of Parliament, as we go out to meet our people in our constituencies, to sensitise the masses on the need to have their children at school as long as possible; to take advantage of the USE and of the UPE although the quality, of course, is still wanting.  

Lastly, there is the issue of the mixed messages that was coming up from every Member that got up to speak. Everybody is quoting His Excellency the President, but I think the context in which he has been making those statements about the need for a big population is to do with the market. Certainly, when it comes to services, we fall short and, therefore, we must do something to curb this high population growth. 

And I would not want to propose at this stage that we adopt the one child policy like in China. Hon. Wamanga-Wamai I know was our ambassador there and he definitely quoted China; but I think China has succeeded in a way because of the one child policy and it has worked very well for them. However, I do understand that they also have problems with the policy and are now thinking of how best to improve on it. So, if we have examples of countries that we are looking to, maybe we could design a better policy than elsewhere. 

Madam Speaker, I think that is all I had. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE REGULATION OF INTERCEPTION OF COMMUNICATION BILL, 2007
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday 10 Members had contributed. I do not know whether there are still Members who wish to contribute on this matter.

4.19
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATION, ICT AND TECHNOLOGY (Mr Louis Opange): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to raise issues pertaining to this Bill. The committee considered and interacted with most of the stakeholders, but during our interaction -(Interjections) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is he a member of the committee?

MR OPANGE: Madam Speaker, I am a shadow minister and I have the entitlement to respond in respect to our side. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are the shadow minister? (Laughter) 

MR OPANGE: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, shadow minister.

MR OPANGE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The original motive of the Bill was actually purely in favour of the person of hon. Amama Mbabazi, but after interaction with the committee, we managed to put this Bill in the interest of Ugandans, and I urge the Members of Parliament to address the following:

If you looked at the Acts already existing, they are inconsistencies to this Bill. Section 66 of the Communication Act provides that, “Any operator of a communication service or a system, or employee, or an operator of the communication service or a system who unlawfully intercepts any communication between other persons sent by means of that system or service, or discloses any information, commits an offence.”

Whereas in this Bill we are encouraging the interception of those parcels or any communication, when you look at the Anti-Terrorism Act it also okays and includes almost all the contents of this Bill in the Act, which is existing. 

This Bill should be analysed carefully because the effects are not only going to affect the Opposition or Government but everybody. When we looked at the contents of the Bill, we agreed that the interception centre must be known publicly and the secretariat should be manned by the relevant ministries or people seconded by the relevant ministries, not necessarily the Minister of Security. We also urge the Members to know that the content of the request or application form to request for a warrant of interception must be part of the Schedule of the Bill so that when somebody applies to cause interception, the contents and the details of the application must be known in order to avoid other people using the information for personal reasons. 

When you look at the original Bill, it empowers the minister to be a witness, to be a judge and also the appeal to be addressed to the minister. Hon. Members, we agreed that we empower the courts of law and identify a relevant judge who will be responsible for issuing a warrant. Also, in case of appeal, the Supreme Court or Court of Appeal should be the one responsible for appeal and not the honourable minister.

You may see that in the event of intercepting the phones or any communication, there is some information that can be got, which is outside the application form request for warrant. Such information, when got by people, can be misused. That is why we are saying the content objective of interception must be known very clearly to the Members.

There is a minority report here written by two of our Members. They are mainly talking about infringing on the human rights et cetera. I was privileged to have gone to South Africa for the purpose of the Bill. When the RICA Act in South Africa came into force, some members went to court challenging the infringement on human rights. When you look at the judgement, this thing was thrown out of court saying that government had a right to enter into any of the things that affect human rights. We participated carefully in analysing this Bill. I urge the Members to reconsider harmonising - that is the most interesting part - the inconsistencies in these existing laws, and this Bill. 

Earlier on when I started I said this Bill will not only affect the Opposition; this Bill will also affect Government. If you want to create a problem against Opange, for example, you will obviously use communication systems and when the communication systems are used, that information will be intercepted and exhibited in court and Opange will obviously be acquitted of any offences.

What we request Members to adapt is that there should a compulsory registration of SIM cards so that everybody, be it intelligence systems, have to register the SIM cards so that follow-up of communication systems becomes very easy. We also have to give a time period, say 60 days or 90 days, to have all the SIM cards registered. After registration, anything affecting the communication system can be followed easily.

The other thing is that the main objective of this Bill is to suppress terrorist acts in Uganda. This one is fully catered for in the Anti-Terrorism Act, which is in force. We should really see how we can harmonise this Bill and the existing laws. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, just to augment what hon. Opange is saying; last year I went to Cuba with some Members of this House. When we arrived there, of course my roaming service could not work. When we tried to get a telephone, we were told to surrender our passports. So I instructed hon. Kubeketerya to surrender his passport and that is what we used to get one SIM card, which hon. Sebaggala, him and I used. So, there are so many things we take for granted. I just wanted to share that with Members. I am saying that we take many things for granted but other things are more serious.

4.29
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand up to support the motion. I start off by thanking the committee for work well done and also thank the shadow minister for the constructive comments he has made.

True, whichever country you go to, especially developed countries, you cannot get a SIM card without giving them details about you. For that matter, I think for this Bill to be effective, we need national IDs so that whoever sells a SIM card or anything of that nature should know the proper details about that person. Otherwise, people have got a lot of fake identities. People can change their names or even their qualifications at will because they do not have a national identity card.

The committee went to great lengths to visit countries, which have this law in place. I would like to suggest that our Parliament should not only depend on that convectional method of research where MPs travel to those places. They should be assisted by a strong research department in the Parliament here. You find that most of these MPs who come here from developed countries come with full information of whatever law you have in place or who they are going to meet so that they are not discovering things for the first time; they are just trying to ascertain. 

You can get access to the interception of communication law from South Africa on the internet, for example, and even that one of Britain. Once you have got that, we should get a lot of information so that by the time we go there we solve a specific problem in a simple and not a complicated way. For sure, criminals have started using technology to their advantage. We need a law in place to intercept them. This law would be very worrying to criminal minds but for the law abiding citizens, I am sure they would welcome this law.

For those who might not know, in some countries you are not even warned that they are going to intercept your communication. If you sent an e-mail, for example, which contained some dangerous names or words, there are systems that can divert your email to a certain centre without you noticing, so that they study you. So, it is good that we are formalising it here. 

We should not worry our population that they are going to be spied on especially since we know that there is even physical monitoring. Let us assume you visited a city like London; there are very many cameras all over the place, including in the toilets. So, your privacy is really limited. If you have no criminal mind, you do not worry; you go about your business well whether in your hotel room or when communicating through the internet. 

To combat terrorism, we definitely need this law. I only think that we do not have enough gadgets to monitor all the communication. We do not have gadgets that can translate all the languages that we have here, for example. Some of the words we use are adopted from other languages. You might find that the word “prison” in one language is also “prison” in another language; those can be easily detected. However, there is a challenge in monitoring criminal communication. Otherwise, we needed the law yesterday especially now that we are passing the law on computer misuse. Someone could use your computer for criminal communication, which means that criminals should be identified without putting you into problems. 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, just for the record, I do not want the public to think that Parliament does not have researchers. We have a very good team of researchers; we have engineer researchers, lawyer researchers, economists, teachers; we have a very big team. I would ask Members to use them. [HON. MEMBER: “They do not travel with us.”] You have not asked me to give them to you. If you make a request, I will attach them to your team.

4.35
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Yesterday the hon. Member for Kyadondo County North said something, which made me keep pondering within my heart whether we can say that since the Constitution came in place in 1995, anything which comes after the Constitution can also contravene the Constitution. He said that the Constitution came earlier so this Bill is after the Constitution. This means that we can say anything against the Constitution now. In case this Bill that we are debating is not going to be in line with the Constitution, don’t you think that we should have an amendment to the Constitution especially when we see Article 27(2)? When we look at this Article, it looks like we are really in trouble with this Bill. 

I also kept on thinking and saying that during the time of P. O. Box and not dot com, we also had ways of communication. Did we invade people’s privacy? When people sent letters, did we open these letters to make sure that we are secured?

Also in this Bill, where it says –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is information from the Attorney-General. By the way, Deputy Attorney-General, your young people are here from St Kizito in Bugolobi. 

MR RUHINDI: Can you clap for me? (Laughter and Applause) You are most welcome!

Madam Speaker, I think this issue is recurring and it is good that we clarify. I followed the debate yesterday and hon. Latigo, the Leader of the Opposition, and hon. Abdu Katuntu made very good submissions on the issue of fundamental human rights, the Bill of Rights in our Constitution and to what extent we can depart from those human rights. I am also happy that hon. Opange has also further clarified using some experiences elsewhere outside this country. 

The honourable colleague is citing Article 27(2): “No person shall be subjected to interference with the privacy of that person’s home, correspondence, communication or other property.” However, the only rights that we cannot derogate from are clearly spelt out under Article 44. Honourable colleague, you may wish to look at Article 44. It says, “Prohibition of derogation from particular human rights and freedoms. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, there shall be no derogation from the enjoyment of the following rights and freedoms —
(a) Freedom from torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
(b) Freedom from slavery or servitude;
(c) The right to a fair hearing;
(d)The right to an order of habeas corpus.” 

These, you cannot derogate from them. The other rights given, of course other than constitutional parameters, you can derogate from them, as hon. Katuntu, I think, aptly put it, striking a compromise between individual liberty and of course public good. We need to understand that, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

MS AOL: I hope my time will be compensated. I wish to say that looking at Article 27 I still think that we need to do a little more. Also when we say, “certain communication” this again leaves some doubt in my mind. How do you determine “certain communication” from any other communication because communication is communication? Do you have to target only some category or when we talk about maybe trying to bring down problems? Somebody talked about the unfortunate problem that we had here of the murder of the child. How would one determine the communication of those people and be able to tell that this is the right communication? I really need to be helped in this. 

It is not that I am really against it but we should also be mindful that when we quote those developed countries, we should remember that we are still a developing country. Even their democracy seems to be much better than ours. If we want to be at their level in terms of security, we need to look at our level of democracy. We must make sure that the law we want to come out with is for the good of all Ugandans and not just a category of them. 

Why do I say this? It is because what I see happening here in Uganda sometimes leaves a lot to be desired. At times when we think that we are doing this for those very people so that we get hold of them, but at one time I almost became a victim where people asked: “How do we get hold of this woman because she has a very big mouth?” [HON. MEMBER: “Which one?”] This very one talking! This was by people of Kalangala Action Plan in Gulu. (Laughter) When you speak for people, you are at times targeted. 

I hope that this is a law, which is not going to target people in the Opposition but is going to be useful to all Ugandans in order to decrease the problems of insecurity which we experienced in Uganda. So, we need an explanation on how certain communications can be differentiated. How do we tell that that communication is the right one to be tapped or intercepted? The Minister of Security needs to help us. 

There are a lot of things that people raised yesterday, sometimes with a lot of mixed feelings. Maybe the Minister of Security is a super minister because other relevant ministers should work hand in hand with the Minister of Security. So, we also need to be helped in those areas. If they are relevant then they should say the Minister of Internal Affairs, Minister of Information; sometimes that it is about security. We really need to be helped.

Minister of Security, some of us have a lot of fear concerning this Bill, yet to become law, because your security has not reached that level where all of us feel comfortable -(Member timed out_)

4.45
MR MATHIUS B. NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As we debate this motion, we should remember the history which this country has gone through. We have had different political systems and different governments. Those of you who are old enough remember, and I am sure the Minister for Security was around, when this country had the Detention Act where a minister for security had the right even to find you on the street and he would sign a detention for you. Hon. Minister, I am sure you are aware of that period.

This Bill seeks to give the Minister for Security powers to issue the warrant; I think we are debating as if we do not know the history of this country. Hon. Aggrey Awori, you will bear me witness that in that regime, which you served very well, not this one [MR ODIT: “Which one? You were also a citizen during that regime.”] I was a citizen. We do not want to commit the same mistakes that were made during that time. We are debating for Ugandans and even those who are not yet born - for posterity. I, therefore, wish to appeal to you, comrades in this House, on the sweeping powers that we are giving to the Minister today. Some of us are in the Opposition but one day, just like at one time you were in Government, you will be on the Opposition.

I am sure, hon. Minister for Security you know very well when we were bringing this Bill that one day - because we are debating as if we think that the democracy we are enjoying in this country is at par with other democracies all over the world. You know very well that the democracies in some countries are not like the democracy we are trying to nurture in this country. For us to run fast and copy what we have seen even when we have not managed to put in place what our Constitution is telling us to do, I think is not sincere.

The object of this Bill, as you all know, is to make provision for lawful interception and monitoring of certain communications. With this politics that we are playing, the present government sometimes sees those of us who are in the Opposition as enemies. You have heard statements being made that, “Those are enemies of the state [HON. MEMBER: “Rivals.”] Well, if you use the word “rivals” at least I would accept that. 

If you give these powers to the Minister for Security, he has all his security apparatuses. Today if I challenge the Minister for Security, can you tell this nation in this House how many security organisations you have? Can you tell them? If you cannot tell how many security agencies you have in this country, how can we in this House give you the sweeping powers as an individual to intercept? 

You are going to misuse these very powers we are giving you today. In fact we are going for elections and we are competing for power and when we do so, you know what it means. Minister, how sure am I that you are not going to use the powers we are giving you today to curtail the Opposition from canvassing for support? How sure am I that the Minister for Security, who we are giving these powers, and the agencies he cannot reveal in this House will not misuse the powers we are giving you in this House? -(Member timed out_)

4.51
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This Bill may be good but it is ill timed. I think the time is not right for us to be talking about intercepting communication and probably in some instances prosecuting certain persons who may have certain information. The time is not right. 

Why am I saying so? One, because it is very clear that the security organisations in the country at the moment are not non partisan. They are working in the interest of the Government. It is also very clear that the Government has so far failed to identify who owns, trains, and orders the Black Mambas. The Government has failed to identify who owns, recruits, and orders the Kiboko Squad. We still do not know. So, as far as we are concerned, until the Government is in control of the situation on the ground and until the Government has trained its security personnel to operate in the interest of the citizenry of Uganda and not in the interest of state agencies, all of us are victims.

I must say that this is not new. For me, a good Opposition would be happy if he or she is monitored. In fact, my brother Aggrey Awori who is seated on the other side asked me to try and take the President to court for having intercepted communication between me and Kony. He was very proud that he listened to my conversation but one thing which saved me was that I was rebuking Kony. I told him that for 20 years, he had not reached Karuma. By the time he reaches Kisoro, maybe all of us would be dead. He was very happy about that and was able to make it public, but it could have been worse. So, we have been monitored all along. Now what they want is a legal instrument to begin to arrest people for no reason at all. So, I would rather that we put this to rest, wait for elections to pass and then we can bring a Bill which we can debate with sober minds.

My second concern is that the minister who is in charge of this also happens to be the Minister of Security and also a secretary-general. I have run the office of a secretary-general and I know what a secretary-general is supposed to do. If Amama Mbabazi is actually doing the right work of a secretary-general, we are all finished if he is the one who is going to run this. (Laughter) This is not a laughing matter. 

We might think this is targeting the Opposition. I also know, and I have confessed publicly, that maybe I did not dream properly to have struggled for the return of multi-partyism. Now that it is a reality, it hurts me to see a Movementist on the throat of another Movementist, a UPC on the throat of another UPC, so is a DP and so on. I feel repentant. So, this Bill is targeting not only the Opposition but even the Movement people. So, I think we have to be sober. 

I feel hurt that sometimes when you sit on the other side, you forget what you should do when you are on this side. I told you what Ojok Mulonzi told us; when the RDCs were harassing the Opposition, he told Patrick Mwondha, Ben Wacha and I that, “You know, I feel sorry for you, Ben Wacha and Patrick Mwondha because you are experiencing this for the first time but we in the DP are used to it now.” (Laughter) (Member timed out_)

4.56
DR BRIAN ASIIMWE (NRM, Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to air my views regarding this Bill. I stand here to support the motion. This is a very good Bill. 

If you look at the objectives of this Bill, it is clearly spelt out that it is intended for national security, national economic interest and for public safety. I am so surprised when I hear my colleagues saying that it is intended to take away their privacy or it is intended for the Opposition or even for members of the ruling party. I totally disagree with them. This Bill is intended to tap or intercept communication by criminal minded persons in this country. It is not intended for law abiding citizens. So I get very surprised when I hear people talking with a lot of authority as if they had something in plan against the security interests of this country.

Another thing I would like to say is that recently we had a lot of fire outbreaks in primary and secondary schools. Members in this House stood up to blame our security in this country without bearing in mind that if some of these measures had been put in place, perhaps some of these arsonists would have been got. If anything bad happened to this country like terrorism activities, the same people opposing this Bill would be the first people to blame Government for not intercepting information regarding terrorist activities in this country.

This Bill is intended to enhance that law. It is not going to work in isolation. The only thing I must add is that Government should stick to the intentions of this Bill and not intercept communication on other matters other than those spelt out in this Bill. If anything, we should be on the lookout. If anybody is victimised or if anybody’s communication is intercepted and it is not related to the insecurity or safety of the nation or people and economic interests of this country then that person who had been given this authority to tap or intercept communication should be taken to book. Otherwise, the Bill is very good. It is intended to strengthen security and I support it. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.00
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I want to build my point from where hon. Cecilia Ogwal stopped. First and foremost, if hon. Amama Mbabazi was not the one going to be in charge, maybe there would be some leverage. Hon. Amama Mbabazi, the first target I want to report will be hon. Kiyonga, hon. Otafiire, hon. Bukenya and so on. (Laughter) We want to make a law, which is not going to be used for personal benefit -(Interjections)- hon. Sekikuubo of course. As we are talking -(Interruption)

MRS MUGYENYI: I would like to know whether the office of the security minister is permanently attached to hon. Mbabazi because we are making a law that is supposed to surpass the occupancy of this ministry by an individual in the name of hon. Amama Mbabazi. From what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying, are you implying that he is going to be the Minister of Security forever as long as this law exists?  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, if you are aware, hon. Amama Mbabazi is a super minister.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Is it in order for hon. Nandala-Mafabi, my brother -(Laughter)- my own brother, to impute that hon. Kiyonga, His Excellency Gilbert Bukenya and the others he mentioned whom I do not remember -(Laughter) Is it in order for him to suggest that these noble and respected gentlemen, leaders of Uganda today, are either committing a felony or are about to commit a felony -(Laughter)- or plan to commit a felony since those that will be targeted are only those that fall in that category? Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think it is really wrong to impute that motive on those gentlemen who have been named. (Laughter) You are out of order.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank you so much for your wise ruling. Hon. Amama Mbabazi is the Minister of Security and he is the secretary-general of a party. A felony can be committed or somebody can allege that you have committed a felony. Hon. Amama Mbabazi, you are very good at it. You recall that during the time of the bush, you were the ones signing on passports which you were giving to people, and all these are felonies.

MRS OGWAL: This is very good information. Yes, it is true that hon. Amama Mbabazi would probably be a permanent person on the security desk because some years ago, the same hon. Amama Mbabazi even before he became honourable or Minister of Security, was the one who arrested my dear son, Sam Engola. He subdued the boy until he had to succumb and become Movement. Up to now, he is a Movement person. The one on record as having arrested my son, and I believe responsible for subduing him to remain in the Movement, is hon. Amama Mbabazi as far as the family is concerned. I thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Is it in order for the hon. Cecilia Ogwal to equate my powers of persuasion –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, can I appeal to you to concentrate on the substance of the Bill and leave the personality of the mover out of it? No, no hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

MR WACHA: I thank you very much and I will be very brief giving information to my brother. I want to draw my brother’s attention to clause 9 of the Bill which talks about duties of a telecommunication service provider in relation to a customer. It says, “Before a telecommunications service provider enters into a contract with any person for the provision of a telecommunication service to that person, it shall obtain:
(a)	The person’s full name, address, business address, postal address ….”

I want to tell you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, that during Amin’s time, before anybody could receive his or her letter from the Post Office it would first be sent to the President’s Office and be stamped with a postal stamp indicating, “Checked by the President’s Office.” So anybody who is trying to argue like my brother, the doctor, was arguing that it is only targeting certain individuals is not looking at the Bill in totality because the Bill will deal with everybody and everybody’s information can be tapped.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank you very much, hon. Wacha my brother and hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Sometimes we can smile but this is a serious matter. If all of us took it seriously, this law should be stayed for now. I hear somebody talking about terrorism. By the way, before you came to Parliament we had made a law in 2002 and I would advise you to read it. It is well provided for there to deal with issues of terrorism. The problem is that some of you do not read and understand. 

We have laws in place to deal with this. We have all the laws. I do not see any reason as to why we need an additional law. If you believe that these laws we have in place are not enough like the terrorism law, then let us amend the Terrorism Act and deal with the problem. (Applause) This business of trying to bring a law because the mover is a super minister and he wants his own law so that he can now be in charge of everything on earth, including the air that God has given us, is very unfair. 

You may think that this law is targeting hon. Nandala-Mafabi but tomorrow it will be you. I always remind people here especially the old – there was Ibingira across there, Magezi and Balaki Kirya – when they were making a law, they said, “We needed this law yesterday.” I see hon. Aggrey Awori happy about it and laughing. When they passed it, seven days down the road it was on them and hon. Aggrey Awori is the one who organised their arrest and he knows it. (Laughter) These are the laws we are talking about today. 

I want to call upon my colleagues across there that let us think together and let it not be aiming at this side but aiming for all of us. Some time back, I was reading the newspaper and hon. Amama Mbabazi was saying that the others are inconsequential. He was talking about people who are trying to stand with him for NRM Secretary-General. I can assure you, if you give him this role, he can apply it to those people and they will be in prison. He will be the only one to stand on that day -(Interjections)- Absolutely, I know my brother. You are a very intelligent man and I know you can do anything under the sun. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, I would plead, we are about to go for an election, let us finish the election. If we urgently need this law, let us look at the Terrorism Act and amend it to suit his interest for terrorists now. This other main law which he wants, we can look at it in future.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Byandala and then the Minister.

5.12
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support this Bill. I also thank the committee for producing this good report. When you read the objectives of this report, you realise that it is talking about lawful interception and monitoring. The interpretation may be that something was being done illegally. But how can somebody be against something becoming legal for you even have a basis to challenge it in court. We are moving from illegal to legal. I think that in itself is an improvement. 

We have also been told this law is specifically for the suppression of terrorism, which breeds instability, chaos and disorder in the country. And you know that without order and security, nothing can go on well. Without order, you would not be sitting here; you would be running into forests. We must take security and stability very seriously.

I know that people have been arguing that by intercepting, Government is going to interfere with people’s rights. But how can you cry about rights when somebody is planning something bad for the country? Somebody is planning to terrorise the country and you start saying we should leave him because what is being done interferes with that person’s rights? We are not concerned –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I have been listening to the hon. Member on the Floor consistently referring to terrorism as if he is not a Member of Parliament. This hon. Member knows that this House debated at length, researched and enacted the Anti-Terrorism Act, which is now in effect. So, is this honourable member a real honourable member or has he failed to read the documents he is supposed to read? And is he in order to continue making all of us look as if we do not read our documents, when we spend time here debating before passing laws? Is he in order to insist on the issue of terrorism when the law to deal with terrorism is in place? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, maybe his view is that the forms of terrorism have become more sophisticated and that is why he has continued to address it. Please proceed.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for that judgment. At times you wonder; there are some things that look simple; for example, if you are suffering from malaria, you should know that there is no single type of medicine that is prescribed for you; it is usually a combination of drugs. So, if there is that Act, and I know it by the way, this is another one.

Somebody said that there will be a conflict of interest for the minister to issue - but we have to weigh two things: Conflict of interest; how about doing this thing timely? I am saying this because this is the man on the steering wheel of security, and it is a priority for him. I do not know why people are so scared of this law, yet the issues of warrant are well spelt out in here. Why don’t we read and debate to agree on what we think is okay and what is not? Why should we create imaginations? The issues of warrant have been spelt out on page 3. I would like to implore honourable members to read through all these and agree or disagree and leave out the imaginary ones.

I would like to appeal to my colleagues, for the good of Uganda –(Interjections)- I am an engineer and a Member of Parliament, a citizen of Uganda – for the security of this country – and you know everything revolves around the security and stability – to support this Bill. I thank you.

5.17
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity. I would also like to thank my colleagues who contributed to this Bill. There were only two colleagues that I counted that opposed the Bill –(Interjections)– yes, because the authors of the minority report are two; that is hon. Erias Lukwago and hon. Balikuddembe. The others may have had a problem with a provision here or there. 

For example, hon. Cecilia Ogwal and my brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi think we should not pass it today; we should pass it tomorrow. Well, I thank all of you for that great support.

In 2007, I presented this Bill for first reading. I later appeared before the committee many times in 2009 and later on. I have looked at both reports – the main and the minority report and came to a conclusion that since both reports do not cover the essence of my presentation to them, I should use this time to speak to the Bill. I am doing this because I had responded to many of the issues that have been raised here.

I have noted with concern, the misrepresentation contained in the minority report and repeated in the House by many Members, that I had told either the committee or the media that the Bill seeks to regulate what, we in security, were already illegally doing. This is what my dear sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, from whom I would like to learn how to work as a Secretary-General in order to instill fear in the political class, not to do it, but in order to avoid it.

I would like to say it clearly that I have never made such a statement because it is obviously false. What I told the committee and the media has been consistent, and is in consonance with my presentation of today.

As honourable members of this august House are in no doubt aware, international terrorism and organised crime are increasingly being coordinated by advanced telecommunication all over the world. Lawful interception is the legally – and I want to lay emphasis on this – sanctioned official access to private communication and is a well known and tested method of fighting crime worldwide. It has played an important role in fighting serious offences and conduct prejudicial to the community, and in breach of the law.

It is regulated by law and the law sets safeguards for the balancing of national interests, the protection of national security and respect of human rights. I was very pleased with yesterday’s presentation by the Leader of Opposition as he normally does. This was in line with what hon. Katuntu and Opange said today. It is to regulate by law, which law sets safeguards for the balancing of the national interests, the protection of national interests and the respect of human rights. 

The minority report on page 3 states that “the Bill does not pass the Oakes test” and my learned brother Erias Lukwago repeated this yesterday. What they call the Oaks test is a Canadian Supreme Court ruling in which the court analysed the limitation clause of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. I wish to politely inform the authors of that report that in Uganda. we submit to the test of the Uganda Constitution and not the Canadian Charter of Rights.
 
MR LUKWAGO: Madam Speaker, yes it is true the Oaks test was initiated by the Supreme Court in Canada, but the minister who is a lawyer is fully aware that this principle was adopted by the Supreme Court of Uganda in the case of Obbo and Mwenda. He knows the principal of precedent here in Uganda. The moment it was adopted, it became part and parcel of our jurisprudence here. Is the minister, therefore, in order to mislead this House that the Oakes principle is not part and parcel of our laws in Uganda?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not had the opportunity to read the judgement in the Obbo case, so I am not in position to make a ruling.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you for that ruling. This is my main point in response to their reference to the Oakes test. The Canadian Supreme Court in that Oakes case determined that the Canadian Charter Rights are not absolute and it is necessary to limit them in order to achieve what they called collective goals of fundamental importance. It answers the point he is making, that is the Oakes test. I do not want to act as if I was in court, especially to my brother there because it does not help. 

So, whereas the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda in Article 27(2) as hon. Aol was saying, prohibits the interference with privacy of a person’s home, correspondence, communication or any other property as the Deputy Attorney-General ably explained, I want to add that Article 43 provides for the general limitation on fundamental and other human rights. In Article 43(1), it provides that in the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms prescribed in chapter four, no person shall prejudice the fundamental or other human rights and freedoms of others or the public interest. 

The limitations in this Bill are related to concerns which are pressing and substantial to our society. They are clearly and demonstrably justified as I will show in this presentation. Therefore, even if you are to use the Oakes test, it fully meets it.
 
Lawful interception helps to protect information rights rather than help to infringe them. The fear is that by having lawful interception the rights of people are going to be infringed. I want to assure you that the opposite is the case, because lawful interception targets individuals; officials can access specific communications rather than examining all the traffic that passes a particular router.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you my brother. I just want to know how this will affect business transactions. Supposing the information you are intercepting may not necessarily be related to security, but because you want to block a competitor, you use it in a manner that would block the competitor. How will you deal with that issue?

MR MBABAZI: That question was raised yesterday and I will respond to it in my presentation. This targeted efficiency means that it will be easier to monitor a greater number of individuals under suspicion. It is those under suspicion that are targeted while the information on non-targeted individuals remains private -(Interjections)- Nandala-Mafabi is my brother and that is the only resemblance there is between me and him. Most of the times he speaks, he is presenting a mirror image of himself. I cannot target my colleagues in the political class, even you in the Opposition, unless you are engaged in crime. When you are engaged in crime, it does not matter on which side of the political divide you are. It is the duty of the state to secure Uganda against all criminals of whatever political colour. I want him to grow to learn that we have that basic difference, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. 

The United States of America, the United Kingdom, South Africa and other countries, as the report ably points out, all have laws regulating the interception of communications. Uganda was one of the few countries in the world that remained behind in this era of international terrorism in spite of the threats it faces more than any other country –(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal sought clarification from you on the protection of those who are innocent. I would like to give this information; at the last presidential elections, the leader of Forum for Democratic Change, Rtd Col. Kizza Besigye, was arraigned before court on a charge of rape and on the charge of treason. Many people including the director of CID uttered false documents and false information in respect to those cases. This is the concern; we want to see in the law that something like that does not re-occur. If you can assure us within the provisions of the law that something like that will not occur, we will be very happy. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us not renew this debate. Let the minister finish, when we reach the committee stage, you can reintroduce the areas where you want changes; otherwise we will never stop.

MR MBABAZI: With the development in technology, and given the wide coverage of GSM in Uganda, armed terrorist groups have continued to mount attacks on unarmed members of the public. When the Lord’s Resistance Army last attacked areas of Teso and Lango, they established their command and control using the GSM. Likewise, the Allied Democratic Front uses the GSM to coordinate its activity. 

Whereas the Anti-terrorism Act which many Members had referred to in section 19 provides for an authorised officer to intercept communication of a person and otherwise conduct surveillance of a person, the Act is limited to terrorism activities and falls short of covering activities like money laundering, the proceeds of which may be used to fund and run terrorism activities and many other areas. 

Drug trafficking

Uganda has become a centre for drug trafficking and this is largely coordinated by telecommunication services. 

Trafficking small arms and light weapons is a major problem within the East African Region and within Africa at large, and we have had many conferences to talk about this; and Uganda had played a key role in attempting to establish a regional response to this menace. All this is conducted largely through telecommunication. Armed robbery, kidnap, murder and related crime are organised and largely coordinated via telecommunication and radio. 

The most recent and painful case in point is that of baby Kakama which was referred to yesterday –(Interjections)– I know hon. Nandala does not feel sympathy and pity, that is why he is reacting like that. Yesterday, someone said, “Do not mention this”. But this is a fact - this baby was kidnapped and we all know it. I can give you a whole –(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Amama Mbabazi is imputing that I am a person who does not have any feelings, who has never lost anybody, and that I do not have kids – that when baby Kakama died, I had no sympathy. 

Incidentally, we have lost many babies like this one in Bugisu, where I come from. But because they were not from the high class, they were never published; but we also feel pain. Is the minister in order to insinuate that baby Kakama is the only baby we have lost and that we should get angry and forget about all the other babies we have lost? 

And is he in order to impute that I do not have feelings as a human being?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not know why Members do not want the mention of baby Kakama, but I think that all of you in the public domain are aware that his kidnap, his disappearance and murder were coordinated through telephones. Why don’t you want the minister to talk about it? But I know that hon. Nandala has feelings and I am sure that the minister also knows that. 

MR MBABAZI: Any way, all of you are familiar with that case. The Uganda Police Force, under our Constitution, is commanded to prevent and detect crime. And in order to execute this function, the state needs to develop its capacity to detect and prevent and, therefore, combat terrorism and organised crime. 

Whereas there is no law specifically prohibiting interception, there is need to regulate interception. This is a point I made earlier to the committee and to the public; I have said this many times. As of today, if the Government of Uganda wanted to intercept communication, there is no law that would stop them. And this creates greater danger for the possible violation of the rights of privacy than what is being proposed. What is being proposed is that we pass a law that regulates when that should be done. This will limit Government activities; it will limit Government action and that is the fact. So, this Bill sets out to do that.

There is need to have a law to regulate the obligations of the parties involved in the process, including the requirement for service providers to assist the Police and other security agencies in the interest of national security and fighting crime.

There is also a need to protect the service providers from liability when they provide assistance to the Police and other security agencies in the fight against crime, in the interest of national security.

In the USA, Congress in October 1994 put action to protect public safety and national security by enacting what they call the Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act, 1994. This Act defines the existing statutory obligations of telecommunications carriers to assist law enforcement in executing electronic surveillance pursuant to court order or other lawful authorisation. 

The Communication Assistance for Law Enforcement Act requires telecommunications carriers to modify their facilities and other services to ensure that they are able to comply with authorised electronic surveillance. 

As a response to the terrorist events of September 11th, the US Congress incorporated various provisions related to enhance electronic surveillance in uniting and strengthening America by providing appropriate tools required to intercept and obstruct terrorism acts. It is called the USA Patriotic Act.

In the United Kingdom, the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act, 2000 Chapter 23, was enacted to make provision for and about the interception of communication. Lawful public interception is by a warrant issued by the Secretary of State, and must be both necessary and proportionate. 

In South Africa, the Regulation of Interception of Communication and Provision of Communication Related Communication Act, 2002 was enacted to provide for lawful interception of communication. The product obtained from an interception is admissible in criminal proceedings. 

Whereas there are diverse approaches for authorisation, we propose in this Bill that the United Kingdom approach of the minister issuing the authorisation is the most practical, and many jurisdictions are moving in that direction. When we come to discussing that specific provision, I will give reasons why, but I had made it clear in the committee and I said so here that I did not intend to make this the succeed or fail provision of this Bill.

So, the principles for the law on interception of communications are the following:
(a)	To regulate the authorised interception and monitoring of certain communications of people suspected to be involved in criminal activities.

The question is – hon. Aol raised this point and I want to say certain communication is used in the - what do you call it? In the main object of the Bill, but actually when you go into the Bill itself, that is defined because it is those communications of people who are suspected either as having committed crime or about to commit crime. So, that defines those people and not beyond.

(b)	To prescribe for authorisation by competent authority. 

And here, I would like to answer the point raised by hon. Katuntu yesterday and to add to that point, “To make it an offence for anyone to intercept or attempt to intercept other than in accordance with this law.” I think it is in clause 3 where that offence is created and the punishment is five years imprisonment. Anyone who intercepts hon. Cecilia Ogwal’s communication after the law; the law does not apply retrospectively -(Interjections)- so, the answer to hon. Katuntu is in that provision. There is an offence created that “Anyone who attempts or intercepts other than in accordance with the law, commits an offence and if found guilty would be punished.” The sentence is a stiff one - five years.

(c)	To provide for the requirement of a telecommunication service provider to provide telecommunication service which has the capability to be intercepted and store call-related information.

(d) 	To provide for the establishment of a monitoring centre for the interception of all kinds of communication, equipping, operation and maintenance of the monitoring centre, acquiring, installing and maintenance of connections between telecommunication systems and the monitoring centre and for the administering of the monitoring centre. 

I took cognisance of the good presentation by the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Ogenga-Latigo, yesterday, about the need to have regulations on how the centre should be managed, and I talked to him earlier. I think it is not a bad idea. In this Bill, we should provide powers to the Minister to make regulations, including regulations on how to administer this monitoring centre.

(e)	To provide for the registration of all mobile and other users of telecommunication services and bring to an end the anonymous usage of these services. 

And this answers –(Interjections)- just a second. This answers the point hon. Felix Ogong, who for the first time - no, not the first time really, but many times he has not been supporting me. I was very delighted that he supported me yesterday. I may reconsider his invitation to me to run as his running-mate when he stands for president in Dokolo. (Laughter) 

So, Clause 9 - I think it was the one, which hon. Ben Wacha read - is supposed to cover this and I agree that it needs redrafting. We need to reformulate it to present this point better, but that was the intention. (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, those questions will come during the committee stage. Please.

MR MBABAZI: (f) to provide for the admissibility of evidence of the intercepted product.

Again when we come to discussing the Bill, when we go to the committee, I will explain what was meant to be covered in clause 7, because the report seems to have made a different interpretation of what it is. We may need to reformulate it as well, but this is what was intended to provide for the admissibility of evidence of what we call the intercept product.

(f)	To provide for offences for persons who disclose information in contravention of the law.	 

(g)	To provide for the making of regulations providing for all matters which are required or permitted to be prescribed or are necessary or convenient for carrying out or giving effect to the law.

(i)	To provide for any other matters connected with or incidental to all those principles.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, with the advancement of technology and given that the laws in place are not compatible with an efficient fight against the new terrorist threat, exceptional laws and procedures are absolutely necessary for the protection of our society. I, therefore, urge you colleagues and Members of Parliament to support this Bill, either in its form, or amended to strengthen it, but not to weaken it. I thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, thank you. I put the question that this Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE REGULATION OF INTERCEPTION OF COMMUNICATION BILL, 2007

Clause 1

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, procedurally as I see the House, we do not form quorum. Is it procedurally right to proceed to committee stage with this important Bill without quorum? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is the quorum required? We have a working quorum. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, under Article 88 of our Constitution, “The quorum of Parliament shall be prescribed by the Rules of Procedure of Parliament made under Article 94 of this Constitution.” The Rules of Procedure, Madam Speaker, you have them and they say -(Laughter)- that it should be a third. [HON. MEMBERS: “Read them.”] Yes you have the rules. The rules are there and the quorum of this House must be a third.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Read the rules. You have the Rules of Procedure.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you have the rules. You can get the rules.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You have the Rules of Procedure. Read them.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, it says -(Interjections)- Rule 169, and yes, we are at the committee stage. “Unless the House otherwise directs or these Rules otherwise provide, the quorum of the Committee of the House shall be one third of its Members and shall only be required for purposes of voting.” And we are going to vote. (Laughter) I do not know which school you went to. We are about to vote. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Minister, can you move for the House to resume.

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.55
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, I wish to report to the House that the committee of the whole House attempted -(Laughter)- and could not proceed on account of quorum.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, move for adoption. 

5.55
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, I wish to move that the report be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question -(Laughter)- that the report of the committee be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, there is a report. Now, hon. Members, we agreed in the Business Committee that we should try as much as possible to complete our work, including the Budget, before the end of August. That means, all the laws that have to be made; the State of the Nation Address; the general debate on the Budget; and your other work on the Budget. But if Members are not willing, I do not know what we shall do, because we really intended to release you early so that you can go and attend to issues which I do not want to mention in the Hansard, which you know are happening somewhere. 

So, hon. Members, I urge the whips on both sides to whip their Members. My office will whip the Independents so that they come and we complete this Bill on Tuesday in the afternoon.

The House is adjourned to 2.00 O’clock on Tuesday.

(The House rose at 5.58 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 13 July, 2010 at 2.00 p.m.) 


