Tuesday, 1 July 2008 

Parliament met at 2.33 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting and I would like to remind the chairpersons of the former sessional committees and the incoming chairpersons and the Members that there is a formal hand over session after this House in the Parliamentary Gardens. So, the former chairpersons will hand over to the incoming officially in the gardens at 5.30 p.m. Everybody is invited.

Secondly, I just wanted to remind you about the operations of these microphones. When you want to catch my eye, you press a button and the green light will come on and until the red light comes, you cannot do anything. So, please if you want to talk, press the button a green light will come. When I see you, a red one will come on then you can speak. Last week we had about five microphones on at the same time; so I just wanted you to remember that one. [Members: “how about the front benchers?”] The front benchers can also get up and touch the button and then press. There are two microphones at the dispatch box and two others on the other side. So, you are catered for as well.

2.37
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. As you are aware, three months ago, we had a problem in Buddo Junior School where fire broke out and killed 20 of our pupils. Since that time, we have had about 26 fires breaking out in schools, destroying property and just yesterday, two more schools were burnt down. 

Madam Speaker, this has threatened all of us. It has caused a lot of anxiety and everybody is worried because we do not know what to do. However, despite the rampant occurrences of these fire outbreaks in all these schools, we are still wondering and not very sure what is actually going on and what is prepared to be done. 

For that matter, I intend to move a motion on the Floor of Parliament but well aware of our Rules of Procedure. I am aware about our Rule 43 but I am seeking your indulgence, Madam Speaker, how to proceed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does the Leader of Government Business have anything to say about these fires? I think there must have been 25 fires now since Buddo.

2.39
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members of Parliament, there are significant security implications of these fires so I have requested the Minister of Internal Affairs to make a statement to Members of Parliament next Tuesday and then -(Interjections)– no, when you are handling security matters you do not rush. He is interfacing with the Minister of Education and Sports. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, I do appreciate the concerns of the government and I do appreciate that government is doing something. But we should not forget that the issue is becoming so intense and so serious that it needs our action. Even the public is wondering whether Members of Parliament are serious or we are really waiting for our own children to burn in these schools so that we can come and raise something. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, allow me to point out this as an example. I remember in the past, people used to complain that the Police were harassing them and we probably could not put an open ear not until it happened to us as Members of Parliament. That is why I am begging that I am given the opportunity to move a motion so that we raise our contributions as Members of Parliament. If government is coming up with something, or is coming out with a report or that kind of something, let it come but we want our input as Members of Parliament, because we appear not to be minding about what is happening.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are aware about Rule 43; you are required to give me three days’ notice but I think having listened to you and listened to the concerns of the public I am satisfied that this is a matter that deserves our attention. So, I will place it on the Order Paper for tomorrow. You can prepare yourself.

2.42
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for granting me this opportunity to raise an issue of urgent public and national importance. Members of Parliament and the entire public is aware that in 2006, Government of Uganda recruited the Anti Stock Theft Unit, commonly called ASTU, to take charge of the border security of the sub regions in Northern Uganda and also to preserve law and order as our people return from the infamous IDP camps to their respective home villages.

Madam Speaker, we are further aware that this falls under one of the objectives of the PRDP which is under Police enhancement. But one fundamental challenge that is currently facing these young people serving in the anti-stock theft unit is the fact that for the last two months, May and June, they have not been paid their salaries and yet a salary is a fundamental right.

And as a result of that, many of these young people recruited and others integrated from Amuka, Arrow Boys, the frontier guards are deserting the force and in extreme cases, they are deserting the force with guns and uniforms and this again poses a big security threat to the region. 

I want to use this opportunity to seek an explanation from the responsible sector why these young people serving in the anti-stock theft unit in the Police have not been paid their salaries and they are ending up deserting with guns, posing a serious security threat to the region. I thank you. 

2.44
MS BEATRICE ATIM (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity you have given me. I rise on a point of national importance. Last week, once again the issue of Mabira forest was reported in The Daily Monitor newspaper. As you are aware, the public is very anxious as far as the issue of Mabira forest is concerned and therefore it has prompted me once more to come on this Floor of Parliament and make this passionate appeal to the government to once and for all come up and give this august House and the public at large an explanation why the issue of Mabira forest up to date has not been solved.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I stand here because I am the shadow minister for water and environment and therefore a mouthpiece for the population of Uganda who are not able to stand here and question the government why it is taking a radical step against the wishes of the Ugandans to give away Mabira. Therefore, I should not be understood to have any personal interest in this matter.

I passionately appeal to you colleagues to take the issue of Mabira very seriously because – (Interruption)

MR TANNA: Thank you, honourable member, for accepting my information. To the best of my knowledge, late last year when the so-called Mabira saga did take place, I vividly remember that the Minister in charge of Water did come out and made a statement saying that because Mabira forest is one of the catchment areas for River Nile, on which Bujagali was supposed to have been built, it shall not be touched or tampered with in any manner.  Thereafter, the next day, the Minister in charge of Energy, hon. Migereko did come out and quoted an agreement that the Government of Uganda signed with the World Bank and explicitly quoted that Mabira forest, which is a catchment area and is referred to as Kalugu Valley shall not be touched and therefore the World Bank should go ahead to provide finances for the said project, which has now eventually taken off.  

Immediately thereafter, the Minister of Finance did come out and raised the same sentiments. I really wonder why this issue is being discussed again and again by the Cabinet and by the various sectors. I think it should be put to rest.

MS ATIM: Thank you, honourable colleague, for that information. It is so pertinent and because of the same reasons, Ugandans are wondering why the government should keep them waiting in silence.  Why can’t we be given a total position as far as Mabira forest is concerned? This august House needs to be informed so that we do not live in speculation. 

There are so many attempts to have the government say - and I do remember vividly well that the Prime Minister at one time directed the minister to come out and make a statement over this issue and to date, two years down the road, we have not been given any information. Even the civil society made a petition to this House over the same. I therefore request the government to come up with an immediate final explanation and position over Mabira forest. I thank you.

2. 49
MR RICHARD MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Almost in a similar line, there is a matter of national importance which I want to bring before the House regarding one of our plants which is being endangered. It is one of those endangered species in this country and in the whole world.  This is the plant, which the Queen took the opportunity also to plant in front of the Parliamentary Building. It is what is called, the Sycad tree. 

The people who are developing a dam in Kamwenge District on the gorge called Mpanga have cut down all these plants which are known to be endemic in the whole world in that region and which are a tourist attraction. They are covering an area of one square kilometre only. Now they are being run down in a manner where it is even suspected that the environment impact assessment that was carried was not enough. It was brought to the attention of Uganda Wild Life Authority; it was brought to the attention I understand of the Minister of Water and the rest, but to date nothing has been done to save the trees.

If this is our icon and we already know that in South Africa, the species which was there is already vanishing and they are only keeping one plant, guarding it jealously and we are here to promote tourism and we cannot protect this tree which we even gave to the Queen during CHOGM as one of the symbols she remembers - you can even ask why they chose that very plant. I understand it is one of the endangered species in the whole world. Therefore, I appeal to the minister concerned and the shadow minister, each of whom I have given a copy, to carry out an investigation to see the extent of the damage that has been done on this plant because we are losing out. 

I implore the government to take immediate steps because I have got photos in this pamphlet to show the magnitude of destruction, which is taking place. I also ask that such developments be halted immediately because much as we are looking for hydro electric power to add to our grid, we are doing so at the peril of our country. What will the future of our children be like? What will they inherit? If we can get money - and it is near Queen Elizabeth National Park. 

Furthermore, we have been informed that certain white people are going to Kamwenge District to buy seedlings of this plant and they are taking it outside such that when we damage this, our children will have to board planes to go and get samples. Therefore, the plant is not even protected. As such, if we signed the two conventions, the Site Convention and the CBD Convention, and these are some of the agreements that we signed to protect, then I think that as we are fighting for Mabira, these are some of the plants which are - it will be an embarrassment when the Queen comes or hears that the plant she planted here has been endangered. This very one was got from Kamwenge. They looked all around and finally got it from Kamwenge. 

Therefore, I appeal that the ministry comes out strongly and puts a moratorium around that area and that that part is included as part of the protected areas of Queen Elizabeth National Park to protect this plant. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the answer ready for the salaries of the Anti Stock Theft Unit? Two months salaries are not paid.

2.54
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that there have been some delays in payment of salaries for ASTU and some members of the Police force. Fortunately, just before the last budget and the current budget, that anomaly of inadequate salaries has been sorted out by the Ministry of Finance and the budget and the salary arrears that have not been paid will be paid now that money is available in the budget. As to the date, I will need to get specific information before I can inform the House authoritatively.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR SULEIMAN KIGGUNDU

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we start, I would like to appeal to you to stick to the attributes of the person to whom we are paying tribute. I don’t want you to discuss what happened during the funeral either at the mosque or in Butambala. Stick to the attributes of the person, please. The members of the family are here. I am really appealing to you.

2.55
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay glowing tribute to the late Dr Suleiman Kiggundu. I would like to amend the date, for those of you who had already picked the motion. It was dated the 26 June 2008. We can date it 1 July 2008. The motion reads:

WHEREAS Parliament of Uganda notes with deep sorrow the untimely death of Dr Suleiman Kiggundu, which occurred in South Africa on Friday, 20 June 2008; 

AND WHEREAS Dr Suleiman Kiggundu was a well accomplished scholar, industrious businessman, distinguished public servant and illustrious politician;

NOTING with appreciation that he served Uganda as Governor of the Bank of Uganda from 1986 to 1990; 

AND AWARE of his invaluable contribution to the liberation struggle between 1981 to 1986;

COGNISANT of his intellectualism as exemplified by his appointment as a lecturer in various universities: Makerere University in 1972 to 1974, Boston University in 1977 to 1979 and the United States International University in Nairobi 1981 to 1986;

NOTING his invaluable contribution to the banking industry as founder member and managing director of Greenland Bank;

APPRECIATING his selfless efforts to serve the Muslim community, the Kingdom of Buganda, his political party - Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) - and Uganda as a whole;

SATISFIED that the late Suleiman Kiggundu indeed dedicated most of his life to serve his fellow countrymen and women and, therefore, deserves the recognition of this Parliament;

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by the Parliament of Uganda as follows: 

1) That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives and friends, the Muslim community, the Kingdom of Buganda and the people of Uganda at large for the irreplaceable loss of a distinguished Ugandan, Dr Suleiman Kiggundu.

2) 	That it takes cognisance of the dedicated services and contribution that the late Dr Suleiman Kiggundu rendered to the people of Uganda.

3) 	That the Almighty God rests his soul in eternal peace and sustains the bereaved. 

I beg to move.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, it is an honour for me to move this motion to pay glowing tribute to a person who was an accomplished scholar, industrious businessman and a distinguished civil servant.

Personally, I came to know Dr Suleiman Kiggundu in 1990. At that time, he had just left the Bank of Uganda where he had served as governor. I was then employed as a legal assistant in a law firm on Kitgum House. (Laughter) 

That law firm was housed together with a small bank that was starting; the Greenland Bank. It started with a small skeleton staff of around 30 people. Within months, they moved from the ground floor to the upper floor. Within one year, what was a small bank grew into a formidable almost number one people’s bank in this country.

Dr Suleiman Kiggundu, together with his other colleagues and dedicated staff, managed to revolutionarise the banking industry in this country. Among other things as you may realize, working hours was also a problem for the banking industry. By midday, all banks would be closed. For the first time in the banking industry, Dr Suleiman Kiggundu together with colleagues introduced a system where even after closing the bank, customers would be able to access the services of the bank. (Applause) It had not been heard of in the banking industry before.

Madam Speaker, even the issue of getting loans was a problem. You would apply for a loan and go through an orthodox system where it would take you months to get it but because of the revolution that had been introduced to the banking industry by Dr Suleiman Kiggundu and his colleagues, and the personal service, banks started looking for customers to avail them loans. These are contributions that the Greenland Bank Group made to the economy of this country and what started as a small bank - it was the first private bank within Uganda to transcend the borders of Uganda. Within less than three years, they had moved to their own home on Kampala road. Even today as you drive just opposite Bank of Uganda, you can see what used to be the home of Greenland Bank. 

Dr Suleiman Kiggundu and his colleagues managed to export their expertise and personal service to other countries. They established branches in Tanzania and Zanzibar and established forex business in Nairobi. There isn’t any bank in the history of this country that had established such tentacles. So, as a country, we greatly owe Dr Suleiman Kiggundu and his group for this. 

Madam Speaker, Dr Suleiman Kiggundu was an accomplished academician. Born in 1947, at 23 he was graduating at Makerere University with a Bachelor of Arts degree in Economics in 1970. I do not know how many members were born then, but I know that 20 percent of us were not born by the time Dr Suleiman Kiggundu was graduating. Consumed with his affinity to look for education in the next three-four years, Dr Suleiman Kiggundu was a post graduate with two maters degrees. In 1979, Dr Suleiman Kiggundu obtained his PhD from Boston University; a PhD with distinction. The highest any scholar can get in any particular discipline. To us amongst the Muslim community, there were not many at that time that were as qualified as Dr Suleiman Kiggundu. This is the man we laid to rest on the 24th at Butambala! 

Madam Speaker, Dr Suleiman Kiggundu had an illustrious teaching career at the top. As said in my motion, in 1972 he was a lecturer at Makerere University. He also lectured at Boston University and at the International States University of Nairobi, but with visiting lectures in many universities including San Diego, Mexico campuses and London campuses. When he had an opportunity to come back here after the war in 1986, he was appointed Governor of Bank of Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, when Dr Kiggundu left public service, he joined politics. I was lucky and honoured to have worked with him as a politician. I have since come to learn that he had been a great mobiliser right from his school days. In the 60s, when Uganda had problems with the Kingdom of Buganda, he mobilised students of King’s College Buddo to demonstrate against that decision. I think that led to the abolition of the kingdoms and for that, he paid heavily. He was expelled from King’s College Buddo and did his final examinations from outside. Between 1981 and 1986, I understand he participated in the struggle at that time. Those who are well-versed with that struggle, I am sure, will talk about it. 

Madam Speaker, as Chairman for Forum for Democratic Change, Dr Suleiman Kiggundu will always be remembered for establishing a branch in each and every district in this country. He has been our unsung hero. Many people did not realise that when this party was founded, the president of the party was not in the country. Dr Suleiman Kiggundu led us to all the corners of this country to establish our party and I would like to agree with you, Madam Speaker, that when great men pass away, there is a lot of controversy. I pray and request honourable colleagues not to drag this dead illustrious gallant son of Uganda into any controversy. Let his soul rest in peace! I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.07
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Madam Speaker and honourable members, more specifically my colleague, hon. Abdu Katuntu who has moved this motion. It is a great honour this afternoon for me to stand here and pay glowing tribute to Dr Suleiman Kiggundu, whom I associated with as a brother and as a parent. I knew Dr Suleiman Kiggundu vividly well when this government had just come to power and Dr Suleiman Kiggundu was the Governor of Bank of Uganda. 

The first time I met him was at a party and I was at a distance simply eavesdropping the talk of big men and his first word I heard was that if there was any service, it must be a service with a personal touch and when Greenland Bank was formulated, the slogan “Service with a personal touch” accompanied the mind of Dr Suleiman Kiggundu at that time.  

I want to describe Dr Suleiman Kiggundu as follows: He was a Muganda who loved his nation Buganda, but who deliberately included others. Dr Suleiman Kiggundu would make a survey during the time Greenland Bank was in existence and say, “We need representatives from this area” and I remember at one time, I had visited the bank and found a middle aged gentleman. I was told that this was a gentleman whom Dr Kiggundu wanted to employ.  He was from the Kingdom of Toro and was called Olimi. It was deliberate policy to have the bank have a face of the nation. 

Dr Kiggundu was a Moslem who loved his religion but who also had great respect for other faiths. He used to say, “What we disagree upon is not ours; we as persons do not disagree but the philosophies of religion are different and the judge is none other than the Almighty Himself.” So, he would encourage you to work with everybody and wait for the Day of Judgment when everything would be sorted out.

Madam Speaker, I want to give an example of the respect Dr Kiggundu gave to other faiths. There was an arrangement in the bank that whenever the clergy, whether the Archbishop at Namirembe or Rubaga or the Mufti wanted to access their accounts, Dr Kiggundu would say, “The clergy do not come to the market. A bank is a money store; the clergy are supposed to be respectable people,” and the window was that they make a call and arrangements are made and money delivered to their offices. That was Dr Kiggundu with other religions.  

Dr Kiggundu was an economist and a broad-minded businessman of extensive gifts. You have heard the testimony of my dear brother Katuntu as to the extent of the expansion of the bank.  It was never known as a Ugandan bank; it was from the start an East African bank. Dr Kiggundu did not have work for tomorrow; all work for Dr Kiggundu was work for today and he would tell you, “Work for tomorrow is for others; yours is for today please do it” and he emphasised that all work had a deadline. Everything that you did beyond the deadline was supplementary; the principle must be fulfilled within the confines of the deadline. And he fulfilled all this. If it was a deadline to open a bank in Dar es Salaam, that was it no matter what happened. He would call you and say, “Kyanjo we have to open this bank. Present the necessary documents, printed and ready to be on top of the desks that day” no other explanation.  

Dr Kiggundu was a rich man who always thought that even the poor are human and matter in as equal a measure as the affluent. He would make deliberate moves to ensure that they have been served in a special form.  

Dr Kiggundu was also an opposition politician who never allowed the side he opposes to be unfairly treated. He used to say and I quote, “We are opposed to the fact of their wrong policy; we are not opposed to their existence and due share”.  Dr Kiggundu was an FDC member as you have heard, but he always said all parties need oxygen and he was cautious of this every time, all the time.  

Suleiman was a whip outside Parliament. He would give you a call- and was an ardent follower of the debates here- and he would tell you, “Do not follow that line of argument; you are going to remain alone. On that one government is right find a way of wrapping it differently.” He never allowed you to unfairly treat the opposite side. If you were absent consistently for what he thought were important debates, he would give you a call and say, “Kyanjo, where is Lukwago? Where is this other young man who always puts points clearly? Why don’t you attend Parliament?” So, Madam Speaker, you had a whip away from these chambers who was doing work of not only FDC, but all other parties including the parties across this desk.

I want to thank the Almighty God for the life and gifts he gave to Dr Kiggundu, and the space and time he gave him to exercise these gifts. I want to thank those who allowed him chance to develop into an industrious man and allow me to specifically mention the family of the late Al-hajji Badru Kakungulu in Kibuli, the family of the late Abubakar Kakyama Mayanja and all those with whom he worked through the different areas of competence as have, and will be enumerated by my colleagues. I want specifically and most honestly to thank the Bank of Uganda for fulfilling their promised commitment to former governors. The Bank of Uganda made a great contribution especially at the hour of great need. 

It is also important for this House to note the following: One, that there are unanswered questions especially from the general public. Up-to-today members of the public, and especially those who formed the conglomerate of what used to be called Greenland Group of Companies, have never received sufficient explanation from the government on the circumstances that surrounded the closure of this arrangement-the Greenland Bank and all other companies.  

Two, there was an unexplained relationship between Greenland Bank and the former Uganda Commercial Bank.  Information available indicates that these were clear deals with an arrangement assented to by senior officers in this government. This explanation has never been ironed out appropriately and members of the public are eager to know what exactly happened especially when they remember very well that the brother of the President, hon. Salim Saleh Akandwanaho, was involved in this arrangement and he was many times represented by proxy by Gen. Muhoozi in meetings that were not one, not two. So, these explanations are not empty if one wanted to wait for them and they would help harmonise the relationship between the dead and the living. 
 
Madam Speaker, there is a problem these days that members of the former Greenland Group are still witch-hunted, both those who worked as directors and workers. As we talk today, the gentlemen by the names of Hajji Kangave and Majid Bagalaliwo are having their property forcefully taken away in the name of selling it for the sake of the defunct Greenland Bank and questions have not been answered. These voices are in the public clamouring for assistance. Many young men who worked in Greenland had arrangements and a number of them have been forced into exile because they have been cracked down as criminals when they have no explanation that is sufficient to satisfy their minds. 

Fortunately, many of the people who have this information are still living; it is going to be helpful to consult them for us to sort out this matter once and for all. I recommend that those who would like to get that information should visit one of the senior lawyers with the former Greenland Bank, Mr Yusuf Nsibambi, for extreme details.

Lastly and this is an appeal. It is not true that a person can go through all these ladders without committing mistakes or wrongs that hurt others. It is my passionate appeal to whoever was hurt by the acts of Dr Kiggundu, those that were deliberate and inadvertent, to pardon him, now that he is dead! 

I also appeal to the Almighty God to forgive Dr Sulaiman Kiggundu for those things that did not go well with the scriptures. And as we say in my religion Islam,
يا إلهي ، والعفو له علاج له الرحمه ورفع له الى يانا” (الجنة). اذا فعل حسن ، تتضاعف افعاله واذا كان للمظلومين ، يرجى
 وتغفر له ، يا إلهي ، لتوفير اقصى قدر من الرحمه ، امين” sympathise
(Oh Lord, pardon him and treat him with mercy and raise him into Jana (Paradise). If he did good, multiply his acts and if he wronged, please sympathise and forgive him, Oh Lord, the utmost provider of mercy, Amen.) I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will give Prof. Kamuntu the opportunity and then the Prime Minister will follow. But before that I would like to ask the family of the late Dr Kiggundu to formerly stand up; they are up there but there are so many people. Please stand up for recognition. There they are. (Applause) You are welcome! Okay, let us have Prof. Kamuntu.

3.20
PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (NRM, Sheema County South, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute to the motion for paying tribute to our late brother, Sulaiman Kiggundu. I was at Makerere University with the late Sulaiman Kiggundu and I can confirm to you that, as a student, Kiggundu was very outstanding. We were at Makerere at a time when Africa was divided between ideologies; Kiggundu was very articulate in student politics and was extremely very active. I remember he stood as president of the student guild, but his campaign with John Butime left a mark of very principled competition in student politics at Makerere –(Interjections)– John Butime, not Tom Butime. He lost by 11 votes, but clearly you could never mistake Kiggundu for his level of intellect in the debates at school. We miss him!

We taught together. When I was at the University of Nairobi, he was at the United States International University in Nairobi. I used to give lectures at the international university and I can attest that Kiggundu’s commitment to the academic world was very profound.

We also worked together in the banking sector and I can tell you that there is no question about revolutionarising banking to serve the demands of clients - Greenland Bank, as an indigenous bank made a mark in the banking industry under his leadership.

It is really tragic that Kiggundu died at a time he did. It is equally tragic that – I know hon. Katuntu has made reference to controversy of big people who die. In the motion, hon. Katuntu talks about untimely death, which is in itself controversial because what death is timely? I do not know which death - (Laughter) 

It is therefore, very unfortunate and very controversial because Makerere University – Prof. Apolo Nsibambi had a distinguished career to the extent of becoming its first chancellor. Therefore, in my own judgment, if there were any persons fit to speak for all those associated with both Makerere and the late Kiggundu, it was Apolo Nsibambi. So, for him to have been heckled – I know you have rules [Members: “No.”] We therefore pray to God – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order. Yes, hon. Alaso.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I am following the submission of hon. Ephraim Kamuntu very closely, but I also followed your guidance very closely. You did instruct this House not to go into any matters of controversy especially the events that took place at the Mosque and hon. Ephraim Kamuntu was seated right here. Therefore, is he in order to disregard you guidance to the House and further, is this House prepared for the alternative versions for the same situation if he proceeds like that? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are out of order. (Applause) My instructions were very clear from the beginning that we should deal with the attribute of the person, not the incidents, please.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I was only praying to God to forgive those –but I would like to thank you for the wise ruling. Anyway, all I was saying is that God should forgive them because in death there should be unity and we should be united in paying tribute to the late Sulaiman Kiggundu. In death there is sadness. That is why I was saying that God should forgive those who attributed the death of a distinguished son of this land to other causes, other than what was in the post mortem report – (Interjections) – God forgive those who heckled me. (Laughter) Thank very much, indeed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before the Prime Minister speaks, I would like to ask you to join me in welcoming Members of Parliament from the Kwazulu Natal Province of South Africa. They are up there in the Strangers’ Gallery; they are from the Committee of Agriculture and Environment. They are led by the hon. Nahara, then we have hon. Mackay, hon. Bhamjee, hon. Keys, hon. Tambo, hon. Ludidi, hon. Mthembu, hon. Mthuli and hon. Ntsele. You are welcome. (Applause) 

3.29
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker, honourable Members of Parliament, I discovered Dr Kiggundu at Makerere University. I was Dean of the Faculty of Social Sciences and he was Head of Department of Economics. As dean of the faculty, it was incumbent upon me to monitor his administrative and academic performance. I am delighted to point out that he was a decisive head of department and a very strong academic. He used to animate his students with his excellent delivery of very complicated issues, which he would simplify to their satisfaction. 

He went to some of the best institutions in the whole world; these include Kings College Buddo and Boston University. No wonder he was very confident. May the Almighty sustain the bereaved. 

3.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I stand here to support this motion. I began to know Suleiman Kiggundu very deeply in 1982 when we were together in exile in Nairobi. We dutifully recruited him into the struggle and he came in full force. He contributed intellectually in working out the strategies of how we would win the war and he also contributed materially in support of our gallant soldiers until we won the war in 1986. (Applause)

One attribute that I liked very much about Kiggundu was that he detested injustice. As you know, after we took over power, he was appointed Governor Bank of Uganda. During that time, there was extreme shortage of that man called “foreign currency”. You know how difficult it is to deal with shortages. One of the most challenging things that would happen to any manager is to deal with and manage shortages. I must probably say that Suleiman Kiggundu performed extremely well. He set up criteria on how anybody wishing to access foreign exchange in Uganda would do it without fear or favour. So I salute him for that. 

Suleiman, as many of us popularly called him, was very tolerant, I must say. I will not go into the details of his formation of the Greenland Bank and companies because I think hon. Katuntu has dealt with that very adequately. He was tolerant, in that, even when you disagreed with him, he never turned you into an enemy. (Applause) By the time Kiggundu passed away, he was in FDC and I am still strongly NRM but we remained on talking terms until he passed away; maybe because I happened to have married from his clan. Indeed when my wife arrived yesterday from Europe, she asked me, “Did you go to bury my brother?” But I was not around either. 

It is a pity that by the time he passed away, he was unable to continue living in the house that he had fought so strongly to construct - that is the NRM. The big lesson that I think we should learn from the life of Suleiman, apart from the other virtues that have been mentioned, is that as politicians and leaders of this country we should know that having different views or disagreeing does not mean hatred. We can disagree but as long as the disagreement is on principle, we should continue to work together on those things that we agree on. May the Almighty God rest the soul of our fallen friend and colleague in eternal peace.

3.37
MR MATTHIAS BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Dr Suleiman Kiggundu.

Madam Speaker, I knew the late Dr Suleiman Kiggundu from 1980 when the late Prof. Lule was coming back to Uganda and when DP was going to hold a delegate’s conference. Dr Suleiman Kiggundu was on the organising committee for the return of Prof. Lule. Unfortunately, he did not come. 

We had elections in 1980 and in that year, Dr Suleiman Kiggundu did not join the Democratic Party but he was for UPM. Given the way the elections went, he went to exile in 1981 in April. In June 1981, I arrived in Nairobi, and I would like to correct my brother and namesake, hon. Matia Kasaija, who said that he recruited Dr Kiggundu in 1982. In June 1981 when President Museveni came to Nairobi, I think hon. Kiyonga and hon. Rugunda can bear me witness, Dr Kiggundu was already in Nairobi. 

It was not easy, Madam Speaker. By then, President Museveni was leading a fighting force called the Popular Resistance Army and Prof. Lule was the leader of Uganda Freedom Fighters (UFF). It was not easy to convince Prof. Lule to join President Museveni to form a coalition. I think you can bear me witness, Madam Speaker, because the NCC to which President Museveni belonged had removed Lule in 1979. So they were suspicious of each other. It was Prof. Kanyerezi and the late Dr Suleiman Kiggundu, having came from Butambala where Prof. Lule also came from, who convinced him and then NRM/NRA was formed in Nairobi in 1981. From then, the late Dr Kiggundu played a great role in the liberation of this country.

I remember very well - I will not mention names, but if I am challenged I can mention them - people who trained in Libya went through his hands. Those who came from training also came back to the bush through his hands. I remember the many times we met in Lovington to hold meetings to promote the NRA struggle.  

Madam Speaker, when you are in the bush fighting, sometimes it is not easy to have logistics like medicines, shoes or uniforms. The late Dr Suleiman Kiggundu was one of the contributors to the struggle in liberating this country. I remember very well - I am glad that his family is here – at that time some of those who are there were young boys and girls, but the wives know very well the people who used to frequent their house in a foreign country. Dr Kiggundu, with all his humility and simplicity, would welcome each and everybody. I remember he could even go to the kitchen himself to prepare a meal or tea for anybody who came to his house. That is the man to whom we are paying tribute to today. (Applause)

A very vivid example was in 1985; at the demise of Prof. Lule, we had to send a delegation to represent us in London for the burial of Prof. Lule.  We all congregated in Shem Bageine’s office, who was our treasury external missions then, and we were looking for money to send people. Dr Kiseka and two others represented the external mission. I remember very well that Dr Kiggundu contributed the money that transported the delegation that represented us for the burial of Prof. Lule in London.

Madam Speaker, in 1986 after the liberation war, the late Dr Kiggundu approached me and I drove him to the airport. He had made an appointment with His Excellency the President. When he got there, he had breakfast with the President in Entebbe. During their discussions, the first thing he discussed with the President was the return of the body of the late Prof. Lule from London where it was to Kampala. It is the late Dr Suleiman Kiggundu who convinced the President to do it, and the President appointed the late Dr Samson Kiseka to head the committee that returned the body of the late Prof. Lule, who is lying as a hero in Kololo. This is the man we are remembering today. 

During the course of their discussion, that is when the President appointed him Governor Bank of Uganda. I will not elaborate more on the economics part of it because most speakers have talked about it, but I wanted to talk about his contribution to the liberation of this country.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg you to support this motion because as a man who knew him very well, I had even wanted his body to be brought here so that the nation and the whole country can pay tribute while he is lying in state. However, it was not possible. When we were at Kololo, I met hon. Bidandi Ssali and I brought up this idea. I remember that we contacted the Speaker of this Parliament, who referred us to the Prime Minister. I am sure honourable Prime Minister, you are aware that we called you. We also called Ndugu Rugunda and hon. Sezi Mbaguta, who is in charge of Public Service. In the end, it was in vain. Therefore, it is fitting that, honourable members, we pass this motion to pay tribute to this gallant son of Uganda. (Applause)

I would like to ask the Almighty God to comfort the family, comfort Ugandans, the Muslim community and the entire Buganda Kingdom. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know many people would like speak but I am going to give you two minutes each.

3.48
MS OLERU HUDA (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to support this motion. 

I knew the late Suleiman Kiggundu when I was a student at the Islamic University in Uganda. When Ugandan students who had studied in Arab countries would come back to Uganda, their papers would not be considered. Suleiman was one of those who really struggled to harmonise the papers these students got from Arab countries with those of Makerere University so that they could also be considered to get jobs in Uganda. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, Dr Suleiman Kiggundu was really a leader. This is a man who would not leave any function early. He would sit there until the function has ended and even give other people opportunity to come and talk to him. He knew that it is very difficult for other people to come to his office to express their views because of the bureaucracies we have in our offices. So, this man would use these functions to give opportunity for other people who could not access his office with ease. 

Suleiman Kiggundu was a God fearing man. That is why in his ancestral home you cannot even find a well structured house for himself but you will find a very big mosque. That reflected how faithful he was to his God.

In a similar way, he was also a community worker. That is why he sacrificed to build such a big mosque; to help other people who are poor, who cannot contribute in building such a big house of God. He did it as a community worker so that he could help the community around him.

Madam Speaker, Suleiman Kiggundu was a nationalist. After getting a green card in the diaspora, if he had no love for Uganda in his heart, if he was not a nationalist, he would not have come back to work in Uganda. Very few Ugandans do that. We have many of our people who are educated but because of the green cards that they got outside the country, they do not even bother to come and work for their country. Therefore, Dr Kiggundu was really a nationalist; he had Uganda at heart and he wanted to see Uganda prosper.

In our faith, we strongly believe that you sign a contract to stay on this earth and when the contract comes to an end, you have to go. Dr Suleiman Kiggundu signed a contract with God to stay on this earth for the period he stayed. After the contract was over, he had to go. As human beings, we had no option but to let him go. That is why, as human beings, we had struggled to take him to South Africa because to us he was still very important; we wanted him to continue living, but his contract was over. There was no way to re-sign it; he had to leave us. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

3.52
MR SAMUEL BYANAGWA (NRM, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to pay homage to Dr Kiggundu because we were together at Kings College Buddo from 1965 to 1966. Therefore, I knew him. I would have covered Makerere University where we joined in 1971, but I think others have covered that period quite handsomely.

Dr Kiggundu as a person had an angelic face; he had a permanent unique smile and whenever you met him, you could not resist coming nearer to him. He was a real gentleman in practice. He was an all-round student. We met in history and economics. He used the aristocratic method of finding out how, why and whatever. Indeed when you trace his history up to the time God called him, you could see how he was practicing what he believed in. Like it or not, Dr Kiggundu has left an indelible mark on the history of Uganda and particularly on the young generation. (Applause) I have heard people saying that he was a Muganda, a Muslim; but Kiggundu was a Pan-Africanist. (Applause) Being a Pan-Africanist does not mean that you do not belong somewhere; you must have roots. At Buddo he blended in well. He was a Muslim but he was in the group of the Wapakhabulos and Lukwago - another gentleman who used to work in the bank. He was beyond tribalism but he had roots –(Applause)– and I think that is an entitlement. 

Kiggundu and his friend, Abubaker Kakyama Mayanja, were great debaters, like it or not.  They organised so many debates on Pan Africanism, on liberation of Africa and the world at large. So, while he was a Muganda and a Muslim, he transcended all those. Even his friends were not from one place; they were from all over the place. He remained with that character in Nairobi or anywhere he went until he left. The employment in his bank did not discriminate; everybody got a job there. (Applause)  

While at Makerere, there is one point we should have mentioned. There is what they call the Economic Policy Research Centre (EPRC). If there is anybody to take credit for its initiation and consolidation – and it has moulded many young people here for their masters degrees - it is the late Dr Kiggundu. (Applause) We could say a lot and go on and on. May he rest in peace. Thank you. (Applause)

3.56
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In thanking you, Madam Speaker, I would also like to thank hon. Katuntu for moving this important motion. I say so, honourable members, because like people who are have spoken before me, I do also agree that the late Dr Kiggundu did make some significant achievements in our population. 

Secondly, and perhaps on a more selfish note, when Dr Kiggundu passed away, I was thousands of miles away from here and I did not have the opportunity to say bye to him. Therefore, I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this brief opportunity to say something about Dr Kiggundu.

I worked with Dr Kiggundu when he was the Governor of Bank of Uganda. At that time, I was Minister of Finance and therefore I do know some of the specific contributions that Dr Kiggundu made. At that time we really had a very difficult economic situation, as all of you know. We had, for example, problems of finding money to buy peasants crops - crop finance. We also had the problem of a currency that had become literally useless. During the times that Cabinet handled these issues, Dr Kiggundu, as a governor and someone who was highly trusted, attended Cabinet meetings. I watched Dr Kiggundu sometimes making contributions which a traditional economist would not make, but making them bravely in order for us to make a forward movement.

On crop finance, for example, he used to order the banks to make sure that they do not be too detailed in asking many questions when marketing boards went to ask for money. At times we carried money from Kampala in sacks to go and pay the peasants in the countryside, but it required the person of Dr Kiggundu for us to be able to do that because in some respects we were breaking the rules of normal banking. 

When it came to the currency reform, this was a very frightening situation. After long debates, we decided to do two things: first to remove the two zeros from the money as you recall and secondly, to take tax of 30 percent on the balance of the money. We required a brave person like Dr Kiggundu, who was an economist, to say that this is right and we should proceed. So, Dr Kiggundu made really some significant contribution to the running of the economy during the time that he was Governor of the Central Bank.

Madam Speaker, we used to go with Dr Kiggundu abroad to seek assistance - loans and grants. My contribution would be mainly political, but between meetings he would coach me on some aspects of the economy. After the meeting, he would tell me, “Now the whole story has become yours. I do not have to speak when we go to the next door. You can tell the whole story.” So, Dr Kiggundu made contributions. We will miss him and we definitely expect that the Almighty God will reward him appropriately. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with hon. Kyanjo. In his contribution, he has been realistic to say that in this world we have achievements but also in this world, we can make mistakes. That is what life is all about. So, we have to be realistic even at a difficult time like now when we are talking about a brother who has just left us. I pray to the Almighty God to sustain the family of Dr Kiggundu during this difficult time. As I said, I hope we shall find him in the right place when we also go. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.01
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the privilege of catching your eye. The family of Dr Kiggundu, ladies and gentlemen, it is with deep sorrow that I stand here to pay tribute to Dr Kiggundu and yet with a lot of pride. 

Many wonderful things have been said of Dr Kiggundu since he passed away and continue to be said of him, but what I would like to pay tribute to is his choice. Dr Kiggundu is being celebrated today by the lovers of democracy, good governance and constitutionalism because of the choices that he made. There are very many people who were great scholars, who were wonderful people, who were very intelligent, who were all the things that they have said of Dr Kiggundu, but I wish to celebrate the choices that Dr Kiggundu made. 

Normally, God gives gifts to all of us and for those we thank God. However, for man or woman we condemn or glorify them because of the choices that that person makes, and Dr Kiggundu made wonderful choices. He made choices that define the difference between evil and good and right and wrong. People make choices that create widows and orphans, that create disease and disaster, but Dr Kiggundu made the right choices. He made choices that were patriotic, nationalistic and intended to make the lives of other people better. Because of those choices, he started Greenland Bank, which started making the lives of many people better than they would have been. Unfortunately, Greenland Bank was not allowed to live, again because of other people’s choices. Some people made a choice that Greenland Bank would not be allowed to live.

Madam Speaker, a few months before Dr Kiggundu died, he wrote a letter to the Governor of Bank of Uganda, a copy of which I am going to lay on Table. In the letter, he demanded that the retirement benefits of the long suffering Greenland Bank staff be paid, especially since under the liquidation laws, when paying creditors employees come second after taxes. He raised the issue of the US$ 14 million and the Shs 2.5 billion that was loaned to Westmont by Greenland Bank for purchase of UCB but it was never recovered. 

These are the people that took over Greenland Bank after Dr Kiggundu had filed a case, but the case was frustrated in Uganda and arbitration made in London. He says: “It is understood that more than US$ 11 million was released for Westmont in return for the 49 percent shares, but this money did not reach the liquidators although the share certificates were released to the Government of Uganda. It is understood that this money was shared by the lawyers of Westmont and high ranking individuals who arranged the deal.”

Madam Speaker, I am almost finishing. Dr Kiggundu in his letter complained about the underselling of Greenland Bank assets like Entebbe Resort Beach, Uganda Grain Milling, Kampala University and Plot 1 Kampala Rd. Instead of selling these assets by public auction, the liquidators went into private dealings with buyers, grossly underselling them for obvious reasons. He finally demanded that the Governor takes a critical analysis at the liquidators’ final statement of accounts. Dr Kiggundu said, “I assure you that to the extent that my assertions are proved to be correct, the collection sum should enable Greenland Bank staff to get their due benefits and the shareholders to get a return on their investment.”

Madam Speaker, as we pay tribute to Dr Kiggundu, this House has the onus to assume the responsibility of correcting these wrongs to play fair to his family, shareholders and Greenland Bank employees.

A few days before Dr Kiggundu was buried, hon. Omara Atubo came to pay his respects as did hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, hon. Eriya Kategaya, NRM Vice Chairman Moses Kigongo and many others. Some of them brought written messages of condolence and were allowed to read them, and they were read at FDC offices where we paid our final tribute to Dr Kiggundu. The Minister of Lands, hon. Omara Atubo, was welcomed and his letter read. So, Madam Speaker, I am sorry I will have to say this for people to understand; it was not about the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Many dignitaries were allowed to read their messages and pay tribute to Dr Kiggundu. (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kamya, I have already outlawed those matters. Please, focus on the person who died.

MS KAMYA: Madam Speaker, I am concluding but the point that needed to be made is that there was a reason that for that. It was not because of  –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, hon. Kamya.

MS KAMYA: Madam Speaker, the family of Dr Kiggundu, we grieve with you and for you. However, as you grieve, be very proud, be very thankful that you shared the most important part of his life and that you continue to be a part of his glory. Rest in peace, Dr Kiggundu.

4.08
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity and indeed take this moment to convey my deepest condolences to the Kiggundu family. I would like them to know that we wish them well and we pray that God takes them through this very difficult time. 

I am grateful for this opportunity because while Dr Kiggundu has been my national party chair, I have had the privilege to be the first Secretary General of the FDC and therefore worked very closely with Dr Suleiman Kiggundu. I want, as part of my tribute tonight, to recognise the incredible abilities of Dr Kiggundu, particularly in the business of party building. 

It has been said already that Dr Kiggundu was a great mobiliser. He not only opened the party offices but he actually helped set up and start up the FDC as a political party. Once we had the branches going, we went into the first presidential campaign. Unfortunately, we were campaigning for a presidential candidate who was locked up in Luzira. Again, Dr Kiggundu took up to himself a task of running that campaign. He went everywhere in this country. The tremendous achievement made  by the FDC in the one year of its existence in terms of getting party branches running, getting Members of Parliament to this House is a great attribute to the work of the FDC National Party Chairman, Dr Suleiman Kiggundu. 

I would like to commend him for helping us start up a political party which is not a briefcase party. We have a party in operation; you can go anywhere in this country and you will find members and a mark of the FDC. There are so many parties registered in this country that cannot even submit their assets and liabilities declarations as required by the law. You cannot even find an office where they operate, but they exist. Dr Kiggundu helped us and we cannot, as FDC, be said to be a briefcase party. You go to the Electoral Commission and you will get our returns in place. 

He helped us start up a membership recruitment drive and you find members registered in the FDC. We will always be proud of the contribution of our national party chairman. 

I would like to ask Government to create an atmosphere in which we build credible political parties in this country, an atmosphere that will nurture accountable leadership. As long as political parties stay out there without membership and submitting themselves to the laws of the land, even when they are in power, they will do exactly the same. Dr Suleiman Kiggundu wanted us to be transparent, he wanted us to be strong and he also wanted us to be very accountable to all the members. He always asked me, “Have you communicated to the branches? Are they aware? When is the national council meeting? I would like to call it. Where are the papers for the national council meeting?” He wanted us to be that transparent to our members, and I am confident the legacy left behind will help us when we finally run this country to be accountable to the population of Uganda. (Applause)

Dr Suleiman Kiggundu believed in the rules of engagement. He wanted you to bring your idea to the floor and let it be challenged, let it be discussed to exhaustion, and you had to convince him. That is my party chairman, the one I was proud to work with. 

I still believe that for this country to move forward, we need to engage one another. As stakeholders in the business of running political parties, I am disappointed that Dr Kiggundu leaves the scene when there is no consultative national forum for the political parties where we would table issues. Now we are left with the odd business of trying to talk in the streets, on radio stations and be attacked with teargas. There is supposed to be a consultative national forum in this country under the Political Parties and Organisations Act, which unfortunately is not operational. So we cannot play by the rules of constructive engagement. We have to devise a way of surviving. Perhaps somebody will hear us some day. 

Finally, if we want people the type of Dr Suleiman Kiggundu - men of calibre, people who are very tolerant and astute politicians - we need to create an environment that allows that. Every species can only produce one of its kind. I have been on earth long enough and I have not seen a dog produce a sheep. A dog will produce a dog. If the environment is for producing dogs, you will have dogs. If the environment is for producing sheep, you will have sheep. Once you produce dogs, do not expect them to behave like sheep. I thank you.
4.16
MR IBRAHIM KADDUNABBI (NRM, Butambala County, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Dr Suleiman Kiggundu. I happen to have known Dr Kiggundu in the early 1970s when he was a student at Makerere University. My dad, the late Hajji Suleiman Lubega Kaddunabbi, who was the chairman of Gombe Secondary School, used to bring him to teach at Gombe Secondary School. The late Dr Kiggundu was my relative; we hailed from the same sub-county. I also happen to have worked below him in Greenland Group of Companies. 

The late Kiggundu has proved to this world that he was not a classroom economist but he was a field man who established Greenland Group of Companies. He was not the kind of boss who sat in the office; we were always with him in the field. In any activity we undertook in Greenland Group of companies, he was with us. 

Though Dr Kiggundu was a Muslim, he was not sectarian. I remember vividly when we were in Greenland, he instructed one of the officials of Greenland to go to Mapera and work on the grave of the late Cardinal Nsubuga. (Applause) The late Kiggundu built a library in Buddo, which was his former school, and another one in Gombe Secondary School. He built and renovated classrooms in Kabasanda Technical Institute and Kabasanda Primary School and even contributed to Nkumba where he built a lecture room. 

Dr Kiggundu always told us, his employees, that we always travel first class. Whatever he did, he wanted to go for the best. He would travel quite a lot and he could come from USA, straight to office with his notes in an envelope or any piece of paper and right away convene meetings and we start to move. As former workers of Greenland Group of Companies, we have benefited tremendously from the experiences of Dr Kiggundu. It can also be shown that where we have gone, we have excelled and in whatever we do, we always travel first class.  

Dr Kiggundu happens to come from Butambala and we, the people of Butambala, have lost very many gallant sons this past year alone. It could be remembered that my father, the former Speaker of Buganda, Al Hajji Suleiman Lubega Kaddunabbi, died last September when Dr Kiggundu was in South Africa also being operated. We also lost the late Sheikh Abdallah Zaake Matovu, the former Mufti of Uganda. These are very great losses to the people of Butambala and the entire nation.

Dr Kiggundu died of cancer, like my father. I would like to know from government when we should give the Cancer Institute enough facilitation to give treatment to people befitting the ranks of Dr Kiggundu. I would like to request honourable members to pass this motion and also pray to Allah subhanahu wa ta’ala to pardon the wrongs which Dr Kiggundu did when he was still alive and rest his soul in janna. Salamu aleikum.

4.22
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to eulogise and pay tribute to a gallant son of this country. A lot has been said about Dr Kiggundu. Personally, he was a close friend, mentor and a father; I have been in his hands. 

I will say a word or two because of time to emphasise the observation made by hon. Matiya Kasaija that Dr Kiggundu detested injustice. He was a freedom fighter. He championed the revolution in the banking industry but unfortunately like all revolutionaries, he had to face challenges. 

As I have said, Dr Kiggundu was a freedom fighter and he fought his battles resolutely. He faced challenges, trials and tribulations. It is on record that he was arrested, taken to Luzira and prosecuted; that was on the first day of April 1999, but he stood his trial up to the last day resolutely. He faced all those challenges with a lot of charisma as a freedom fighter. I never saw him getting devastated throughout those trials and tribulations that he went through. It was only once, and it was really touching, that I saw him getting devastated when he was in Luzira in 2002. It was when his youngest son, Yusuf, who is a toddler and up there went to visit him with his mother in Luzira. By then he was three and a half years, I think. He told his father, “Daddy, let us go home. What are you doing here? Why are you not home? Let us go home”. That is when I saw emotions overwhelming Dr Kiggundu and tears rolling down his cheeks. Apart from that and throughout his trial, Dr Kiggundu was a resolute person. 

Another thing I want to say is that as lawyers, Madam Speaker you are aware of this, we always say that justice delayed is justice denied. Dr Kiggundu was prosecuted and taken to court in 1999. It is unfortunate that up to now, the case - criminal case No. 718 of 1999 - has never been disposed of. It is still pending in the Chief Magistrates’ Court at Buganda Road. It was about several counts of running down his own bank - Greenland Bank. It teaches us a lot of lessons about our criminal justice system. Justice delayed is justice denied. 

Dr Kiggundu had hope that the truth would come out at the end of the trial, but he has not lived to see justice prevail for him, and to get to know exactly why the bank was closed as well as get justice whether convicted or acquitted. As I wind up, I urge government, posthumously, to proclaim him innocent, much as the charges are still pending in court, because I know that the case has abated with his death. 

As I said, he made his own defence in court, of which I have a copy here. He made one statement, which I want to read to all of us here. He quoted one of the great philosophers and freedom fighters, Martin Luther King Jr, who fought for civil liberties in America. He believed in this up to the last day. This is what Martin Luther King Jr said: “The ultimate measure of a man is not where he stands in moments of comfort and convenience but where he stands at times of challenges and controversy”. Dr Kiggundu stood on his feet to defend truth and justice, and that is how he lived his life. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.27
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Dr Ogenga Latigo): Madam Speaker, I rise to thank the House on behalf of the Opposition, and I believe on behalf of the country. Before I do so, although I attended most of the functions related to the burial of Dr Kiggundu I did not say anything. So allow me to say one or two things very briefly and then I move to my thanks. 

I was on the side of Dr Kiggundu in the struggle to establish FDC throughout the country. With him on very many occasions, at least one member of his family would be there. We started from Rukungiri and moved to the rest of the country. I took a little bit of time to understand Dr Kiggundu because he was always the same. Whether there was a crisis or people were excited, he remained very calm. As such, it was very difficult to read his full character. It took me time to realise that that was his full character and I was looking for what was not there. He was just a calm man who was very certain of the things he was doing. The biggest tests have been the two occasions where we had to face riot police actions. You know, while many people change their pace of walking on the face of teargas and beatings and even gunshots, Dr Kiggundu never changed his. He would just walk the same way - whether the teargas canister had fallen next to him or whether somebody had aimed a shot at him - and that gave us the courage to face things that ordinarily we should never have thought about. 

We had a crisis in our party when the party president was arrested. In that crisis, we were like very young children who suddenly have lost their loved one; a mother or father - because it was like a major crisis in the family, and there would be those who were very angry and want to do something, and there were those who were very scared and become very uncertain but in the middle of that group would be Dr Suleiman Kiggundu to calm things down and to allow all sides to play their fears or anxieties until we resolved matters and moved forward. 

Therefore, I would like to pay tribute to him for the time we worked together. I would like to pay tribute to him for the great things he did for this country. In my state of the nation address, I called him a “reformer” Governor of Bank of Uganda. I think the detail of that statement came out today in many of the initiatives that he made as Governor of Bank of Uganda to ensure that our economy took off from the challenging position that we found ourselves and indeed it did take off; and for the many innovations that underpin the vibrancy of the banking sector in Uganda even up to now. 

Madam Speaker, I said that I rose to express my thanks. I would like to start by expressing my deep gratitude to you, Madam Speaker. We drafted a motion and we wanted this motion moved last week and when our representative went to the Deputy Speaker, she told us that “a motion such as this requires that family members are there and therefore, I will give you opportunity next week, when the family is there.” Thank you very much –(Applause)- for understanding and reminding us of the fact that this motion is not for us; it is to recognise those who stood besides Dr Suleiman Kiggundu in his life and allowed him to do the things that he did for the good of our country. 

There are three members and the rest of the family who are here and their names were not mentioned. But it would not be right for our Hansard not to record their names for posterity. We have Madam Remmy Kiggundu, Madam Mai Kiggundu and on the head of the siblings is Suleiman Kiggundu Junior. The rest of the family are with them. We thank you very much - each one of you and all of you together - for the support you gave our brother in his times of difficulty and for giving him a very dignified send off. 

Thirdly, I would like to thank this House. Considering some of the things that were associated with the burial of Dr Suleiman Kiggundu, we would all have been tempted to do our thing; that is politicking. But today, the House has shown that on matters of national importance, we can be nationalist and leaders in the things we say and how we say them. So, I would like to thank the House very much for all the contributions that came. 

Lastly, I would like to thank the whole country, the Muslim community in particular, for the messages of support they gave to the family of Dr Suleiman Kiggundu. As mentioned, many leaders on the government side, the NRM Deputy Chairman, Minister Omara Atubo and many members of Parliament, went and supported the family in their hours of need. On behalf of the entire opposition, we thank the country for this support. 

I would like to end by asking the good Lord to support the family in this very difficult time and to once again give them prosperity in the rest of the lives that they will have to enjoy and to wish that God grants Dr Kiggundu eternal life. Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the motion has been unanimously supported. I now wish to put the question that this House do pay tribute to the late Dr Suleiman Kiggundu in the terms proposed by hon. Abdu Katuntu and seconded by hon. Kyanjo.

(Question put and agreed to.)


MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESOLVE INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO APPROVE THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NO.2 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2007/2008

4.36
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Ezra Suruma): Madam Speaker, I wish to move that the House approves supplementary expenditure under Schedule No. 2 for fiscal year 2007/2008 amounting to Shs104,018,760,527 plus amounts in the addendum. I beg to move

4.37
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I wish to read the report of the Budget Committee on the supplementary expenditures for financial year 2007/2008 Schedule No. 2, the report was circulated today and I am sure everybody has got a copy. The schedule was also circulated last week and an addendum was circulated later. I am also sure that everybody has got a copy. 

In accordance with Article 156 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Section 12 of the Budget Act 2001 and Section 13 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act of 2003, on 17 June 2008, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented to Parliament supplementary expenditures (Schedule No.2), for the fiscal year 2007/2008 for its consideration and approval.  

Again on 27th June an addendum to Schedule No.2 was presented to Parliament by Government. On both occasions the Speaker referred the papers to the Budget Committee for scrutiny.  The Budget Committee would like to report its observations and recommendations as below. 

The nature, scope and the legality of the supplementary Schedule No.2 for financial year 2007/2008 

The law enjoins Government to lay before Parliament, the proposed supplementary expenditure estimates for identified activities upon which the amount appropriated were insufficient or when a need arise for a purpose for which no amount was appropriated. The Budget Act 2001 requires that such resource supplementary expenditures should not exceed 3 percent of the total approved budget in a given year without prior approval of Parliament. 

Parliament approved the budget of Shs 5,471,188,913,000 for financial year 2007/2008 of which Shs 4,610,015,220,000 was the appropriated budget and Shs 861,173,693,000 was statutory. In March 2008, Parliament approved supplementary expenditure of Shs 142.4 billion to enable Government fund critical expenditure pressures that were experienced during the first seven months of the financial year 2007/2008. Now, a total of Shs 107.486 billion is being applied for as supplementary expenditure under Schedule No. 2 for financial year 2007/2008, of which additional resource supplementary amounts Shs 60.498 billion; non resource tax expenditure amounts to Shs 12.588 billion; non tax collection (spent at source) amounts to Shs 0.139 billion and the intra votes reallocation amounts to Shs 34.260 billion referred to in Table 1.  Of the required additional resources, Shs 60.109 billion has already been spent. It is in Table 1. This is a good summary which I think can be read.

Supplementary expenditure by type

Wages

In the recurrent supplementary expenditure the wage recurrent expenditure is attracting the highest proportion of Shs 42.953 billion (40 percent) of the total supplementary which translates into 3.9 percent of the total annual appropriated wage bill. The committee was informed that this was mainly due to shortfalls in salaries and allowances transferred to local governments in favour of primary teachers (Shs 8.946 billion) and secondary teachers (Shs 2.055 billion); wage shortfall for the Uganda Police was 16.968 billion; wage arrear shortfall for the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development was Shs 3.859 billion; wage shortfalls for Makerere University was Shs 7.047 billion.

The committee noted that the problem of wage shortfalls was mainly caused by the following factors:

1.	Increased recruitment under Uganda Police mainly during CHOGM yet it had not been budgeted for.
2.	Delayed transfer of staff under the Building Department from Ministry of Works to Ministry of Lands
3.	The budgets for conditional grant salaries were based on staff in-post as of May 2007 yet some local governments were in the process of recruiting or accessing staff on the payroll. 

The committee noted that the slow pace of recruitment was mainly due to:

a)	Absence of service commissions and inadequate facilitation to District Service Commission
b)	For secondary school teachers, there was a change in the recruitment strategy to focus on the hard-to- reach areas. 

Non-wage

Non-wage supplementary expenditure amounts to Shs 38.957 billion (36.2 percent), mainly due to shortfalls in operational expenses for provision of instructional materials for Universal Secondary Education and business Technical and Vocational Education training; operational expenses to facilitate Kyambogo university; additional funding to facilitate various missions abroad; operational funds required to settle the newly appointed judges; additional funding to cater for shortfalls in the operational budget of the State House and additional funding to cater for urgent settlement of court awards. 

Development

The development supplementary expenditure amounts to Shs 25.575 billion (23.8 percent) mainly due to additional funding for the promotion of tea value chain and procurement of upland rice seeds for the next planting season under NAADS; funds to manage post-emergency recovery phase activities for the North, Eastern and Western under the Office of the Prime Minister and funds to settle outstanding VAT obligations to URA on donor constructions activities.

Supplementary expenditure by sector

Table 2 shows the distribution of supplementary expenditure by sector. According to the table, the education sector takes the largest share of Shs 33. 939 billion (31.58 percent) followed by Justice, Law and Order, Shs 27.087 billion (23.34 percent) and public administration, which was 20036 billion (18.64 percent).

Table 2 shows total supplementary for FY 2007/2008 Schedule No.2 by sector which is quite elaborately displayed and can be read.

Table 3 indicates the distribution of supplementary expenditure by activity or item. The table further confirms that employees’ costs in form of wages, salaries allowances and medical expenses are responsible for the largest share of the supplementary expenditure. Grants to other organisations- international and local- constitute the second biggest share of the supplementary request. Table 3 is displayed on that page.

Compliance with the 3 percent threshold as required by law

The Budget Act demands that if the supplementary expenditure to be incurred constitutes more than 3 percent of the total approved budget for that financial year, parliamentary approval must be sought before that supplementary expenditure is incurred. The resource supplementary expenditure Schedule No.2 of the FY 2007/2008 which amounts to Shs 73.226 billion constitutes 1.64 percent of the total approved budget excluding arrears, non VAT taxes and statutory payments as indicated in Table 4. This percentage is below the limit of 3 percent as required by the Budget Act 2001. However, it will be recalled that the additional supplementary budget request under Schedule No.1 of the FY 2007/2008, which was passed in March 2008, amounted to Shs 183.776 billion. Now, when you add them up, the two constituted 4.16 percent of the total approved budget for the FY 2007/2008.

The committee observes that over the years, the Ministry of Finance has been presenting to Parliament supplementary schedules and addenda at different intervals in the same financial year for approval. In most cases, the Ministry of Finance has always presented the schedules after expenditure has been incurred, which is legal, when supplementary expenditures do not exceed 3 percent of the approved budget. However, various schedules and addenda as presented to Parliament at different intervals have always cumulatively overshot the ceiling of 3 percent. In effect this practice denies Parliament an opportunity to vet the proposed expenditures before money is released. Parliament in future should desist from approving more than one schedule of supplementary expenditure in one financial year. 

Financing of the resource supplementary expenditure

The committee was informed that the total resource supplementary expenditures which amount to Shs 73.226 billion would be financed by the following sources:

•	Utilisation of non-tax revenue collected at source especially for missions abroad which total 0.139 billion
•	Tax expenditure for Government procurements which do not attract additional resources, that is non-resource, which was Shs 12.588 billion
•	And then tax revenue improvements. These are efficiency gains by URA which total Shs 60.498. 

The committee was further informed that there were savings within the total wage bill amounting to Shs 34.260 billion, which was reallocated in favour of wages across votes.

Specific observations on sectors

Contributions to autonomous institutions

The committee observed that Shs 517, 208,000 was incurred as urgent payments under the contributions to autonomous institutions under the Office of the President. The committee observed that this expenditure would have been captured through the normal budgeting process. 

Under the same vote, the committee observed that Shs 0.258 billion was required to cater for the wage shortfalls in favour of staff of the Media Centre. The committee has previously recommended that the legal status of the Media Centre needs to be regularised and staff requirements ascertained. The committee recommends that the regularisation of the Media Centre as a public institution be handled expeditiously to alley fears that the centre is a partisan outfit.

Contributions to international organisations

The committee noted that international organisations to which Uganda was subscribing were on the increase, the latest being the East African Standby Brigade to which Uganda’s assessed annual contribution stood at US $ 1.1 million as by January 2008. 

The committee further noted that a supplementary expenditure of Shs 0.857 billion required was meant to offset part of the outstanding arrears. The committee was unable to ascertain the dividends of our contribution to the brigade on the fiscal front. 

However, the committee would like to make a general recommendation of the policy of Uganda’s affiliation to international organisations.  For a long time the Budget Committee has recommended that Uganda’s membership to numerous international organisations for which it cannot pay the requisite contributions needs to be reviewed. A study needs to be carried out to establish those organisations for which Uganda cannot afford to be a non-member and for which subscriptions would be prioritised.

Court awards 

The committee noted that Shs 2,950,002,000 was required under Vote 007, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, to settle urgent court awards. The committee was not able to establish the current amount of court awards including those awarded by quasi-judicial bodies like Uganda Human Rights Commission. 

The committee was also not able to ascertain which court awards were urgent and which ones were not. The committee recommends that the government should clear all court awards starting with the oldest ones. Categorising some as urgent and others as not may disadvantage the weak and the poor like the torture victims who were awarded costs by the costs.   

Vote 131: Office of the Auditor-General

The committee observed that under the supplementary Schedule No.1 of financial year 2007/2008, the total sum of Shs 148.2 million was approved to provide for retainer fees for the Auditor-General and the same amount was reflected again in the supplementary Schedule No.2. 

The committee was informed that the provision for the retainer allowance for the Auditor-General was erroneously provided for under Vote 131, item 211104 – statutory salaries instead of the recurrent item, which is under 211103 - allowances. Therefore, the provision under Schedule No.2 was meant to formally correct the initial error under Schedule No.1 and that no additional funds would be provided since it was a non-resource supplementary.

Vote 152 – National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS)

Madam Speaker, the committee observed that Shs 4.002 billion was incurred as supplementary expenditure of which Shs 3 billion was required to promote strategic enterprises such as tea, coffee, cotton, citrus, sunflower and mangoes using the value-chain approach. This expenditure was provided for by way of a re-allocation from the sub-county model funds. The rest, Shs 1.002 billion was for the procurement of upland rice seeds needed for the next planting season.

The committee noted that the idea of the promotion of strategic crops using a value-chain approach could not have come in the middle of the financial year, and hence it should have been captured in the strategic work plan of NAADS. NAADS leadership needs to be pre-active and strategic in its work. 

In respect to procurement of the upland rice, the committee believes that Uganda as a country has not exploited the initiatives of His Excellency, the Vice President, Prof. Bukenya to fight poverty and ensure food security through upland rice. In the view of the committee, therefore, upland rice has proved to be a strategic crop that Government should promote massively than is the case today. 

As Parliament scrutinizes the budget estimates very shortly, the committee recommends that in the next Budget more resources should be availed towards the promotion of upland rice. His Excellency, the Vice President should be highly commended for providing exemplary leadership in the promotion of upland rice, which rice has become a household name. (Applause)

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the resource supplementary expenditure request under Schedule No.2 of financial year 2007/2008, constitutes 1.64 percent of the total approved budget, which is within the 3 percent limit as required by the Budget Act. However, Government through its spending agencies should effectively utilise the budgeting process to capture realistic estimates for staff salaries and wages, which shortfalls ultimately distort budget priorities, affect anticipated outputs, and which supplementary request waste legislative time.

Finally, the committee recommends that a sum of Shs 76,361,555,800 be approved as a recurrent supplementary expenditure under Schedule No. 2 for financial year 2007/2008. A sum of Shs 25,575,356,540 be approved as development supplementary expenditure Schedule No.2 for financial year 2007/2008, and ultimately a sum of Shs 5,549,058,080 be approved as a supplementary statutory expenditure Schedule No.2 for financial year 2007/2008. 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker and I thank honourable members for having scrutinised this schedule in time. Thank you.

MR WILLIAM B. NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to seek clarification from the chairperson before I debate. On page 6, the chairperson has just informed us that the amount, which he is asking Parliament to approve, is 1.64 percent of the total budget that was allocated by Parliament. However, he goes ahead to give us that the first supplementary schedule- and when you add the first to the second, it goes to 4.16 percent.  

He even went ahead, Madam Speaker, to state in the second paragraph that in effect this practice denies Parliament the opportunity to vet the proposed expenditure before money is released. He adds that Parliament in future should desist from approving more than one schedule of supplementary expenditure in one financial year. 

However, when I go to the conclusion, Madam Speaker, I get lost. To be exact, the conclusion reads: “In conclusion, the resource supplementary expenditure requested under Schedule No.2 of financial year 2007/2008 constitutes 1.64 of the total approved budget, which is within the 3 percent limit.”  So, request the chairperson to assist me because the law stipulates that if the Executive wants to spend money below 3 percent, they can do it without seeking Parliamentary approval. But that if it is over and above then Parliament approval should be sought. 

Now, the chairperson has not highlighted that, but he is telling us to just approve. Why when he has told us that when you add the first one to the second, it comes to 4.16 percent, which implies that the ministry should have sought Parliamentary approval before spending the money. I just want the chairperson to guide me. Otherwise, I am at loss; I do not know what he wants us to do.

MR OKECHO: Madam Speaker, it is very good that that question has been raised by the Member. In the first paragraph of page 6, the resource supplementary expenditure Schedule No.2 of financial year 2007/2008 amounts to Shs 73.226 billion. This constitutes 1.64 percent. That one is, I think, understood and which we are asking Parliament to approve. 

However, the second paragraph on that page raises the question which is a bit vague with respect to our Budget Act. Section 12 of the Budget Act says: “The total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what is appropriated by Parliament shall not exceed three percent of the total approved budget for that financial year without prior approval of Parliament. Where funds are expended under sub section 1, supplementary estimates showing the sums spent shall be laid before Parliament within four months after the money is spent. Any re-allocation of funds shall be made in consultation with all the affected ministries, departments, institutions -” that is additional information. 

The issue here is that in the first supplementary schedule, we approved a certain amount of money that was calculated to be a certain proportion of the approved budget. The issue is that if we continue approving supplementary schedules as and when they arrive, at the end of the year, we shall end up with more money approved under supplementary than is actually required. That is why a supplementary schedule should come in once in a while. That is the point I am trying to make.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The clarification I want to seek from the Chairman of the Budget Committee is: Is it the cumulative figure or an identical figure that contributes to the 3 percent? If you are a chairman, whom we believe you are, you should have known –(Laughter)– because it was reading 4.16 percent. That means that 3 percent had already been exhausted, and for anything to be done, Government had to come to Parliament first. As a chairman, how would you go a head to deal with these supplementaries before asking the Executive to first come to Parliament? 

MR OKECHO: If you want to interpreter this provision in the Budget Act very well, it would even appear – actually after you have approved one supplementary schedule, you can add that to the approved budget –(Interjections)- yes, it is here in the law. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, I think you have contributed substantively – hon. Nsubuga, have you got the clarification now? You said you wanted clarification before you contribute.

MR WILLIAM B. NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, with due respect, before we even debate, we must debate within the law. If the report – the chairman himself highlighted and said that when you add supplementary Schedule No.2 to No.1, it surpasses the budget. So the question is, before the committee making this report got an answer – because the law is very clear, if the Executive wants to spend over and above 3 percent, they should come to Parliament. So, the question is, how could the honourable chairperson of a committee of Parliament go ahead to ask us to support what he knows to be contrary to our laws?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe the minister will tell us why he did not come; at the appropriate time; maybe you are harassing the wrong person.

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, the law says that if we are going to spend more than 3 percent, then we must get the approval of Parliament, and this we did. We came here with Supplementary Schedule No. 1 and we received the approval of Parliament. So that means that subsequently we can spend again – incur supplementary –(Laughter)– because if we did not, the budget would become impossible to operate. Once you have the approval of Parliament, you can spend more than 3 percent. In fact at one time we went up to 5 percent, but with the approval of Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know – you mean once we approve then we create a licence? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we are getting more worried. The first one was called Supplementary No.1, then why did you call this one Supplementary No.2? By the way, is that English? The moment something is supplementary, then you are adding to what already exists. I went to Mwiri for six years. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, unless Parliament becomes serious now, we are going to lose our oversight function with effect from tonight. If you say that they will come and do supplementary No.1, and then they bring No.2, which is 0.1 percent, then they bring another one which is 2.9 percent, in the end we shall only have supplementary budgets and then they would dodge Parliament.

The reason for that law was that the moment a supplementary is over 3 percent then you have to come here. After you have exhausted your 3 percent, for any additional funds, you must seek authority before you move on. 

Madam Speaker, what is a supplementary? A supplementary is when you have already budgeted for an activity “A” and you have got money that is not enough. If you look at what the chairman has presented to us, some of the activities are completely new activities; that ceases to be a supplementary – supplementary to what? So the moment something new comes in, then you get dangers. 

We what to advise the Minister of Finance, under Article 157 of the Constitution which deals with the contingencies fund – you better bring that law quickly if you have such emergencies; failure to do that would mean you are taking us for granted and this is very dangerous for us as Parliament. If we are supposed to represent the people and look at their resources carefully, than I want to tell you, Dr Suruma, that what you are doing is an illegal act and you must apologise now before we can move on. Failure to do that – I think we have authority to deal with you.

DR SURUMA:  Madam Speaker, we did come here and we did get the authority of Parliament for Schedule No.1. I am not aware that the law says that once you have one schedule passed then there will be no further supplementary. We did get the approval and we are now coming for approval for the additional supplementary that has been made. 

I would like to point out, hon. Members, that a large part of this supplementary is reallocations and non-tax payments - in fact it is not involving additional expenditures but all this is included as part of the supplementary so that- in fact if we did calculations, we would find that there is no distortion whatsoever of the law. But it is my understanding of the law that once we come here and get approval of Parliament then this is what the law requires and this is what we are doing.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been scrutinising this supplementary schedule. When you look at Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, it is seeking   Shs 2,729,284 trillion. It is saying that it is a shortfall in the ministry on gross tax payment and accounting arising from an over expenditure which was not even budgeted for and which was not sought of the permission too, and this is the second schedule. So it cannot be an over expenditure and you are asking for an over expenditure; and it is in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It is here indicated in the schedule supplementary No.2. So, it means we are budgeting for another item which was not budgeted for and you are coming here - already money is spent and you want us to pass it retrospectively. It is illegal because Parliament did not approve it.

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Madam Speaker, I also rise to seek explanation on funds given to National Advisory Agricultural Services (NAADS), with regard to promoting strategic crops. Right now we have a programme at hand with cotton. Farmers in the cotton growing areas do not have seeds to plant simply because there was no money to pay for it.  

Additionally there are a number of national operators who raised coffee seedlings and up to now have not been paid.  Now these are serious issues for which this money would have sorted out. But I also do not understand the rationale of passing the money through National Agricultural Advisory Services when we have statutory bodies that are self-accounting, like Uganda Coffee Development Authority and Uganda Cotton Development Authority. So there are two issues: One, what did the money do since we have these practical issues? And secondly, why was money channelled through NAADS instead of channelling it directly through UCDA or Uganda Cotton Development Authority? Thank you.

MR NANDALA- MAFABI: Thank you hon. Bucyanayandi for that. But I think if the Minister of Finance is saying there is no need for a new additional resource, then I want to direct him to page 5 of the chairman’s report. It says, Resource, the first column reads 47.65 percent. What does that mean?  Madam Speaker, you must help us here first to deal with the law otherwise without the law we are not going to debate these things. If need be, we have to consult our legal guys here so that they assist us before we debate this thing.  

One, the Minister of Finance is telling us that there are no additional resources. In column one, recurrent, there is Shs47.65 billion; in column 3, there is Shs 25.57 billion; this is resource. For reallocation, you could say, “I have come here for approval for reallocation”. But let us deal with the law. What does 3 percent mean before we can deal with this debate very well?

5.18
PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (NRM, Sheema County South, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker, it is true the House will need guidance because the minister has presented the Budget. (Interjection) Madam Speaker, hon. Nandala-Mafabi is very well known for controversies even sometimes where they do not exist. You can imagine he is parading his chairmanship of Bugisu as an excuse to entitle him to heckle Members of Parliament in the House. 

But on a serious note, if you reason through that a Minister of Finance will present to the House the Budget and we approve it, after we have approved it with the figures and you go into the year and demand an additional expenditure, the Budget Act provides in the law and I can read it again as the Chairman has read: “After this Budget is approved with the figures, if in future this Budget requires change by way of supplementary budgets, the supplementary expenditures that require additional resources over and above what has been approved in this Budget, as long as it does not exceed 3 percent of this approved Budget, it requires prior approval of Parliament.

Now the interpretation which, Madam Speaker, -(Interruptions). Let me read it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him read the provision.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, you see, I do not need evidence. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi is professional in heckling. But the point is the total supplementary expenditure that requires –(Interruptions)

MR NANDALA - MAFABI: Order, sit down! Madam Speaker, is the Minister of Trade in order to say I am not saying the right thing when he himself says that you must come here prior for approval of parliament, and now he is telling me that when I laugh at his mistakes, he says I am not doing it rightly. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, read the provision.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I do not need evidence.  First, I am not a Minister of Trade, that is technically wrong. But let me read the provision in the law and demonstrate to you that there are some things which we can explain. “The total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what is appropriated by Parliament shall not exceed 3 per cent of the total approved budget for the financial year without prior approval of Parliament.”  

Now, the point at issue is for purposes of argument, this Budget is approved with the figures in it. If like in March next year, the minister comes with supplementaries, we will approve those supplementaries and they will be below 3 per cent of the total budget. If at every stage the minister comes to the House, he presents figures which are below 3 per cent –(Interjection)- there is no accumulative in the law. That is the whole point. The accumulative -(Interjection)– there is no accumulative in the provision in the law. It is not that we do not understand -(Prof. Latigo rose_)- yes I will take the information.

PROF. LATIGO:  The information I want to give the hon. Prof. Kamuntu is this, if the minister comes with a supplementary for agriculture et cetera and it is less than 3 per cent, we approve. If he comes back for another sector and it is still less than 3 per cent, it is okay. But if he comes back to agriculture again -(Laughter)– it has happened in your thing so do not laugh. (Laughter) If he comes back to agriculture again, and the previous percentage was 2.5 per cent and the new supplementary raises the figure above 3 per cent, it is not possible. [Mr Nandala-Mafabi: “That is it; I thought you knew some mathematics.”]  Let me put it this way -(Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU:  You have total supplementary expenditure which requires additional resources. As long as the Minister of Finance whenever he comes to this House with additional requests, that additional request does not exceed 3 per cent –(Interjection)– you see, it is not. I would concede if within the law –(Interjection)- no, I would concede the point only if in the law it was mentioned that cumulatively it should not exceed 3 per cent. It is not provided for. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But, hon. Members, what was the mischief that was intended to be cured by that provision? What was the mischief?

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, I believe that the fundamental objective of the law is to allow flexibility so that every time there is an Ebola scourge, for example, as there was or there is a flood and people are displaced, we have the flexibility. The law says as long as the amount we are spending as a ministry does not exceed 3 per cent, we do not need to come to Parliament, we spend and come and then come and report to Parliament as we did.

 We spent on the floods in Eastern Uganda as a supplementary because it was not in the Budget; we did not foresee the floods; we spent on Ebola when it occurred; we did not foresee that this would be there. We have spent on hunger in Karamoja - our people are dying; we did not foresee and we have reported subsequently to Parliament within the four months that are provided to report to Parliament. 

Now, I do not believe that it is the intent of the law to say that after we have reported to Parliament and we have been approved that there will be no further supplementary. That would make the government impossible to function and the country will ground to a halt. I believe that the intent of the law and the correct interpretation of the law is that we should not exceed 3 per cent of the approved budget and that we can go ahead and spend within that limit and get the approval of Parliament subsequently.

I would also like to correct the impression created by the Leader of the Opposition that it is sector by sector because it is an overall budget rather that a sector by sector limit. Thank you. [Hon. Member: “You are right.”] 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am really thinking that we need to get the proper interpretation of this provision. I do not think that it was the intention of the law that you can come ten times so long as you ask for small amounts many times -(Laughter)- I do not think that is what the law intended. 

So, I want to propose that we task the Attorney-General to give us an interpretation tomorrow- [Hon. Members: “Yes.”]  - So that we lay this matter to rest. I do not think that we should have this debate where we can come ten times. You are saying no, no, isn’t it; is it okay?  [Hon. Members: “Yeah”]  Okay, hon. Members, we are requesting the Attorney-General to interpret this matter tomorrow so that we can lay it to rest and then conclude this matter.   So House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock.  In the meantime, hon. Members let us go to the Conference Hall. I had announced the gardens but we are not in the gardens; let us go to the Conference Hall for the old sessional committees to handover to the new sessional committees. 

(The House rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 2 July 2008 at 2.00 p.m.)



