Tuesday, 6 July 2004

(Parliament met at 2.27 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to take this opportunity to welcome you to this meeting and to thank you for what you have been able to do in the past two weeks. Let me also take this opportunity to thank hon. Alaso and her committee for the work they were able to do in respect of matters affecting our people in Northern Uganda and for the contribution you have made in respect of this particular report. I also thank the ministers for being able to respond to the issues raised during the debate.  

In the past few days there have been media reports that the drinking water in this Chamber and elsewhere in the precincts of the House has been supplied by the company called Messrs. Berllagi Group Tri-Star Limited in Kawempe, which was closed last week in a crackdown of industries manufacturing sub-standard drinks. The drinking water in Parliament is supplied by an international reputable company, Aqua Coolers Ltd of Ntinda Industrial Area, properly permitted by Uganda National Bureau of Standards.  

The Parliamentary Commission has a formal agreement with the Aqua Coolers Limited to supply drinking water for use in this Chamber, in the committee rooms and departments in the Parliamentary Service, and there is no way any other company would have supplied water without going through these thorough procedures. Honourable members, please feel comfortable, continue drinking your water. (Applause).

2.30
MR MAURICE KAGIMU (Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to raise two issues, which I feel are important and urgent. In the Monitor of yesterday there was a report that a company headed by a gentleman called Basangira, Basangira Building Contractors, was given Shs 756 million. Today, the former Minister for Ethics clarified that by the time she left the office, this money had been queried and Cabinet had stopped the payment. She was very much surprised that this money was paid after all. I am seeking clarification from the Prime Minister or the Minister for Ethics why this money was paid. 

Yesterday when they were explaining how this money was paid, there was a handwritten note saying, pay Shs 500 million from this Vote, Shs 200 million from this Vote, and many people were shocked that this money was paid. It seems the money was paid shoddily.  

Another issue on which I am seeking clarification and a statement from the minister is about this Minister of Public Service. He is asking for Shs 1.8 billion from the Government but from the way Mr Cheeye explained today, it is not very clear who is right. Is the minister still claiming this Shs 1.8 billion? Because, he said the Shs 300 million, which was given to him, the President was just sympathetic to him, so he was not counting that. He says the President was sorry that he had lost so much money, so he said let them give him Shs 300 million. But the man insists that that was a token. The Government on the other hand says, “No, the man was paid Shs 400 million and the matter was closed”. The Minister says, “No, he was asked for a bribe of 40 percent in order to be paid.” Now, which is which?  

Mr Speaker, during this period when corruption is rampant, money is being given out very unclearly. Shs 20 billion was paid to a certain Slovak company, the Minister was almost arrested. It is also very shocking; how can a minister be arrested from Cabinet? So I think we need a statement from these ministers, Mr Speaker. If not, at least the Prime Minister could shed some light on this. Thank you very much.

2.33
PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (Sheema County South, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On the same issue about the statement made by the Minister of State for Public Service, he complained that he is entitled of nearly Shs 1.8 billion but he had been frustrated by the civil servants demanding 40 percent. The clarification I am seeking from the Prime Minister is, if a Minister of State who is providing political guidance to the civil servants can complain of being frustrated because of 40 percent requirement, how much more of the peasants, how much more of the ordinary people who have all sorts of claims against Government – how much are they paying to get these claims settled? How much of those who are not willing to pay have suffered denial of their entitlement? I think the Prime Minister, for the good name of Government, should really come forward and make a statement on this matter; it is a very serious matter. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR BEN WACHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In connection with what hon. Kamuntu has just said, I saw the newspaper report today, which is supposed to have emanated from one Cheeye, who stated that some money was given to the same Minister because of the President’s magnanimity. Are we to assume, Mr Prime Minister, that these sort of payments depend on the mood of the President?

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was on the Select Committee of the Sixth Parliament that investigated the valley dams and we made strong recommendations on this man they call Basangira, who owns the Basangira Construction Company. And since that intervention by Parliament, there has not been any more works on these valley dams and valley tanks. I am now imagining how the ministry could go ahead to begin paying him. I remember the recommendations we made in that report, and the Prime Minister also made an undertaking to make regular reports to Parliament until the conclusion of the case. Actually, I was even imagining that now we would be getting a report on how Government has handled the Basangira Company. 

There was another company called Afro Electrical something, which did shoddy work. Much of the work was not complete but now payment has been made to it too! So I think, Mr Speaker, a very elaborate and explicit explanation must be given by Government on the issue of valley dams.

THE SPEAKER: There is a question, but in view of the advance recommendations the report made, I think we need to know on what basis the payment was made.

2.39
MR PATRICK APUUN (Bokora County, Moroto): Mr Speaker, I also rise with great concern about this issue of valley dams. This issue has been talked of for 18 years now when we are in this House. When we see people being paid for nothing, it becomes a very great concern to many of us. I think there is something very fishy about valley dams. I would like, if possible, a probe into this valley dam saga, and if it was probed in the past, I do not know whether those issues were resolved. 

As I speak now, none of the 16 valley dams, which were built in Karamoja, is functional. We raised some matters concerning the constructors in this House, one of whom was Zzimwe. Zzimwe was even supposed to be blacklisted but he is enjoying his construction. He has been paid for doing nothing.  

As we talk now there is a looming famine and drought in Karamoja. We are wondering where these cattle keepers in Karamoja are going. We would like government to make a statement on this to find out where the people of Karamoja are going this year. And if there is no solution to that, then we expect a very serious disaster in Karamoja. So Mr Speaker, we would like you to bail us out of this saga of valley dams, it has taken long. Thank you.

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, I am asking for your guidance. Is it procedurally right to discuss a minister’s private business when the minister is not present? In the ethics of gentility and of being gentleman, is it really procedurally right for us – it was the issue of the Minister of Public Service. As we know, it was personal. I think that according to the ethics of this House I would have expected that the minister would be - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, nobody is discussing a minister. I think the question concerns payment from public funds; that is all.

2.43
MR ANTHONY MUKASA (Buikwe County South, Mukono): I rise on a point of extreme importance and national interest. I represent a constituency in Mukono, Buikwe County South. It is one of the leading constituencies as far as producing vanilla is concerned. Last season, a kilogram of cured and treated vanilla was at Shs O.2 million. Last week the Vanilla Growing Association of Uganda, which most of my farmers do not belong to, sat and fixed the price for vanilla this season at Shs 5,000 per kilogram. The reason they are giving is that the prices have fallen. But some of my farmers have got sons and daughters who can surf the Internet, when they surf the Internet the prices are indicated to be between US $390 and US $600 a kilo of cured vanilla. 

We have a Minister of Trade, Industry, and Tourism, I know Government liberalized trade and does not involve itself in trade but it is the responsibility of government to search for markets, monitor prices and disseminate information concerning prices to its people. The ministry is keeping quiet! I was in my constituency over the weekend and my farmers told me they are not going to give me a re-election if I do not give them a convincing explanation. As a Member of Parliament I have no convincing explanation to give them. That is why I am raising this issue for the Minister of Trade, Industry and Tourism to come out and explain to the people what has caused the fall in prices. Is this fall genuine? If it is genuine, what is the current price?

MR MARTIN WANDERA: Mr Speaker, I have with me a copy of the Order Paper. It has a communication from the Chair, which from my understanding has been dealt with. I see a number of colleagues raising very important and relevant matters. I would like to know from you, under which rule are these things being raised because some of us are beginning to have a problem –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I assume my honourable friend and colleague is familiar with a red book called Rules of Procedure. One of the most important rules is that you do not question the Speaker; his word is final. When the Speaker decides this is how I am going to run the House, that is his privilege, which you cannot question. Is he in order to start questioning the way the Speaker is running the show?

THE SPEAKER: I think it is in order for anybody to increase his knowledge of how things are done. (Laughter). Anyway, it is only very important matters that may be raised after the communication from the Chair. 

I was informed by the honourable member, who is on the Floor, that there is a serious matter in his constituency. That is why I permitted him. Otherwise I entirely agree with you, not anything has to be brought up.

MR NSUBUGA WILLIAM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to give information regarding the same problem. We have received information that some of the few traders - there are a few traders who export vanilla - last season they exported poor quality vanilla because they bought vanilla before it was ready. So, this season, they have just colluded - they are not many - with the assistance of some government officials such that they can pay the farmers very little money. We have been raising this issue to government officials but the only answer they give us is that, “If you want, enter the market”. But if really one of the objectives of our government is to eradicate poverty, I am just appealing to it to save the situation. A kilo, which went up to Shs 200,000 cannot now cost Shs 5000! 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you should be careful with the questions you ask, because if you put a question in such a way that you provide an answer, somebody will just adopt your answer as a complete answer to your problem. The question was about the falling prices of vanilla and now you have come in with claims of poor quality. Suppose the minister tells you it is because of the poor quality, are you going to be satisfied? So, when you put the question, put it in such a way that you get an answer; and then if you have a supplementary one, you can bring it up. Let us hear from the minister.

2.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRADE (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you very much –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let another person from Mukono speak before you answer. But we are going to end with these two.

2.48
MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Indeed my constituency is one of those that grow vanilla. Because of the drastic fall in the prices unilaterally fixed by the Uganda Vanilla Exporters Association, we have done some homework. Indeed we have found that the type of vanilla, which we grow here is being sold in the United States by Café Depo. One such bean is being sold at US $10 and the advert is saying, “You better order early because prices will go up”. I have a number of websites, which I can avail to the minister to ascertain and indeed find out what the market is like, internationally.  

What is disturbing my voters and me is that the growers have heard that there are some big politicians who have infiltrated the Vanilla Exporters’ Association. Some of the buyers of vanilla were coming from Kenya and were offering very good prices. Those influential citizens in this country have now mobilized to frustrate buyers from outside and stop them from buying vanilla so that they can buy vanilla cheaply and re-sell it on the international market at a premium. 

Indeed our vanilla is graded as one of the best, only competing with the one from Madagascar, and Madagascar lost a crop recently due to a blizzard. They had strong winds, which were moving at a speed of 140 miles per hour, and these spoilt all the beans –(Interjection)– a cyclone, yes, thank you very much.  

The question is, Mr Speaker, we know that the ministry would like to do the least interference, but are we going to leave our farmers at the hands of sharks that are ready to make super profits at the expense of the people who are growing? Indeed, His Excellency the President came to my constituency to thank the farmers for having taken on vanilla as an export crop. I think the farmers need an explanation, and I would be grateful if the minister obliged. Thank you.

MRS SSEBAGEREKA: Point of information, Mr Speaker – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, why don’t you get the answer of the minister first; maybe it may cover what you want to ask?

MRS SSEBAGEREKA: I am just giving information because I am one of the people who started vanilla growing in Mukono when I was the Member of Parliament for Mukono. Kayunga also grows vanilla, but the farmers are getting very frustrated. The problem is not in the international market; the problem is not market forces; the problem is within us here. I am not saying here in Parliament, but it is within Uganda. We have middlemen who fix their prices at that level. I know that when Madagascar lost its crop, that was last year, there was synthetic vanilla produced in America. But I also know that America still wants Uganda vanilla because it is organically grown and has got very long pods. It is one of the best vanilla that there is but our problem is – I grow vanilla myself, I have been cheated - there are a lot of people who are conniving with the vanilla buyers and they go and steal vanilla from the gardens.  

So, Mr Speaker, I would like the farmers to be protected so that there is price control here. I know that internationally prices have gone down, and I know that at least it should be Shs 30,000 per kilo other than Shs 5,000 because the vanilla growers are very intimated; they have lost steam, some of them have started cutting plants down. But I know that vanilla has helped a lot to alleviate poverty in the country. I think it is not market forces, it is not liberalization; it is within us here. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Please, let us get the answer from the minister.

DR RICHARD NDUHUURA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue of falling prices of vanilla is of concern to our ministry. I have been receiving calls from farmers, traders and administrators of districts where vanilla is grown. We have tried to establish the reasons for the falling prices and, Mr Speaker, with your permission, I will be giving a statement in this House on Thursday afternoon. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, would you like to answer them?

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The other ministries will be responding to the questions raised within this week. I thank you.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON HUMANITARIAN AFFAIRS ON THE WAR AFFECTED AREAS

(Debate continued.)

2.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Kezimbira Miyingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want from the very beginning to thank the Alaso Committee for the good work they did in investigating issues concerning the Northern region and also for the interaction that we had with them as a ministry. We are grateful for their work and for the good report that was written.  

Mr Speaker, in the Ministry of Internal Affairs we analysed the issue that has befallen Acholi, Lango and Teso areas under the insurgency of Kony as very grave. The situation has interrupted normal life within this area and inflicted great harm on our people. Even if government and the international community have put in a lot of resources, because of the extensive suffering of our people, sometimes they think that nothing is being done by government yet a lot of effort is being put in, in terms of deployment of our soldiers, in terms of assisting our people in the internally displaced persons’ camps and other social services that are being extended.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we are pleased that the committee realised that the issue of insurgency in Northern Uganda must be a concerted issue to be handled by government, the community concerned and our international partners in development.  

The Ministry of Internal Affairs is mainly concerned with maintenance of law and order in this country, to ensure peace and stability and in situations like what is happening in these insurgency areas, it is more of military intervention than law and order keeping. But the Police is involved in the Northern region to make sure that within IDP camps law and order is maintained and also in towns where life is normal or near to normal, again law and order is maintained.  

Unfortunately, Mr Speaker, the Police force is not as large as we would have wished and, therefore, our deployment is not as efficient as it should be if we had the numbers that we require. Our Police force, as Members are aware, is around 13,000 men and women, which is about a-third of what we would ideally require. So, our deployment in the different areas, the towns where life is near normal, trading centers and camps, is below what we would require. 

There are many cases that these officers must handle especially because of idleness; there is a lot of habitual wrong doing that is developing within the camps, like drunkenness, addiction to drugs, cases of assault and rape, which the Police must contain in order to bring at least law and order within these camps and towns. Police is also supposed to offer protection to especially the young children who come and spend nights within town centers at verandas. 

Mr Speaker, we hope the situation in the North is going to be resolved in the end but still the Police will be required as people return to their places when the insurgency is over. The work of the Police will be even more to try and settle disputes that can arise and also extending further down into the countryside. Therefore, we have been anticipating that government will be able to increase the force especially by recruiting some special police constables and we are looking at a number of about 3,000 because of resources. That number could help us, and some of these would be deployed in these areas where insurgency is or insurgency is going to subside.

Mr Speaker, as the war gets resolved, I hope some of the auxiliary forces that have been recruited into the Army will be taken up by the Police, because we want to utilise that special training that they have had so that we deploy them as Special Police Constables. We can utilise them rather than them becoming redundant when they finish the job, like what is now happening in the Teso region where the insurgency has now calmed down. The Arrow boys must be getting redundant and it would be good if these could be taken up.  

Many members here, and citizens think that the Uganda Government has not been taking keen interest in negotiating with Kony and bringing an end to the insurgency through talks, but this is far from the truth. Government has continued to make all efforts to talk to Kony and many efforts have been made here, in Kenya, Libya, Vienna, USA, Iran and other international capitals. Many organisations have been involved in mediating between Kony and us but as you are all aware, Kony has been illusive and not serious about talks. Even as we talk now, Mr Speaker, efforts are still being made to make sure that we get to Kony and be able to talk so that we can end this insurgency peacefully through negotiations. I have mentioned in our paper that lately the former Minister of Uganda, Madam Bigombe, has been trying to make efforts to see if negotiations could take place. We are also now seeing efforts that are being made through Prof. Okumu to see if he can be a medium for negotiation between the LRA and us. This of course does not mean that the military front has been forgotten, but we will pursue both of them.

Mr Speaker, my ministry houses the Uganda Amnesty Commission, which was put in place under a law that was enacted in the year 2000 in this Parliament so that it could take care of individuals that denounce insurgency or acts of war and are ready to come back and become normal citizens of this country. I am glad to note that the committee has appreciated the work done by the commission in achieving that reconciliation, rehabilitating and resettlement of reporters as they come out of insurgency.  

As you are aware, Mr Speaker and honourable members, this commission will definitely continue even when insurgency is over, to be able further to rehabilitate these Ugandans when the war has come to an end.  

There are lessons that have been learnt by the commission as implementation of this law is going on. You remember there are amendments, which were made to the law, after realizing that some of the people who come and claim amnesty, soon after they have been granted amnesty return again to insurgency. Something had to be done in order to prevent this from happening. As you are aware, we now have an amendment, which is pending, of the Amnesty Bill, where we thought that leaders of the insurgency could be eliminated from the amnesty. This amendment will soon be tabled before Parliament for discussion. 

I have also mentioned in my report the implementation of the agreement that this Government reached with UNLF II. This was one of the insurgency groups in Uganda, which we have come to terms with. These people have been settled and their remuneration or facilitation is also being paid so that they can also be rehabilitated into the population of Uganda.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, I once again commit our ministry to ensuring that law and order is going to be maintained in the country. A high level presidential committee was put in place by Cabinet under the chairmanship of the Vice-President, and my ministry is one of the ministries concerned. This is also looking at ways in which attention and assistance can be extended to our people in Northern Uganda where the insurgency still exists. We will continue to work with other stakeholders, the international community and the local community and leadership, to ensure that law and order is kept in the internally displaced peoples’ camps and also the towns and trading centers where our people are and require to be helped.

Mr Speaker, I am grateful to the committee once again for the work that was done and to honourable members for the different contributions that you have made. We shall continue to pursue negotiations through the Presidential Peace Committee. Any other avenues that will become available from whatever angle will also be initiated. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister.

3.09
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification with respect to the testimony made by the Minister of Internal Affairs on the issue of dialogue. For quite a long time the people of Uganda have been looking forward to seeing a proposal related to the practicality of peace talks with the rebels. Certainly, no rebel would volunteer to be talked to within Uganda. Is government’s proposal capable of enabling the rebels to sit on a round table outside Uganda in practical terms, without exaggeration?

DR KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Lukyamuzi. This has been stated in this House repeatedly that we are ready to talk to Kony at a place that would be conducive to both parties. For example, I have just mentioned that Madam Bigombe has traveled to Sudan itself to try and seek out Kony himself. I think that is an effort to show you that we can go anywhere. There have also been negotiations elsewhere before outside this country. If hon. Lukyamuzi has got a venue and can convene Kony, we are ready to talk.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Certainly, I can convince Kony and his group to talk in Nairobi, the capital city of Kenya. (Laughter) In other words, I would be searching for support from my government to give me the green light so that I can talk to the NARC Government headed by President Kibaki. If you give me the green light, I will bring you results.

THE SPEAKER: You mean logistics?  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Otherwise, how do I talk? (Laughter)

MR WILLIAM KIWAGAMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification on a very nagging question regarding the strength of the Police. On the third page of his report the minister is again lamenting that the Police force they have now is only one third of what they need. But this is not the first time we are hearing about this. Every time the minister stands up, he laments about the numbers in the Police force being inadequate. What is the problem? Could the Minister tell us? Is it the training facilities? Is it funds? What is it? Is it lack of youth or educated manpower in the country that they cannot train the Police force to the level where we can say we have enough? Minister, please.

DR KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO: Mr Speaker, yes, we have lamented the issue of numbers year in, year out, and this is because of our past. It is money that is causing us this problem; our budget cannot stand the numbers that we would prefer. That is why we are going slowly. But you should also take into account that quite a number of police officers were weeded out during the time of reform. Many police officers who were non-performers were weeded out and, therefore, these are being replaced before we can get back to the previous numbers.

But as far as expansion is concerned, we must also consider facilities where we are going to put these people. They must be accommodated, equipped and so on. So, it is really the funds that are limiting us. That is why I am saying that we are now going to make an effort of having at least 3,000 more on top of what we have now in terms of special constables. These are at a lower rank in terms of remuneration but they would do the same amount of work like the police officers are doing. I think we shall go slowly but surely as long as we have an efficient force, which you also appreciate in your own constituency.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Minister of Defence. (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order in line with our Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.  

Rule number 62(b) says, “All Members of Parliament shall dress in a decent and dignified manner, that is to say –
(b) “a suit; a jacket, blouse, and skirt; a dress or a Busuuti for lady Members”.  

This is in line with the Minister in charge of Northern Uganda, hon. Grace Akello. Is she dressed in a decent manner in line with our Rules of Procedure according to the three options that have been given in this rule?  

Mr Speaker, I beg for your indulgence, through your relevant weapons that justice be passed and she probably be offloaded from the House. Is she in order to dress in such an unbecoming manner?

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I have not been advantaged enough to look at her standing up. She is seated, so I am not in position to -(Hon. Akello stood up)- -(Laughter and Applause). I think there has been general approval. You are cheering her. Can you repeat the rule, please?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, rule 62 (b) gives three options for our female counterparts:  (1) a suit (2) a jacket, blouse, and skirt; and (3) a dress or a Busuuti.

THE SPEAKER: You mean these are conjunctive or disjunctive?  

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: When you read it, as you have, are they conjunctive or disjunctive?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, if you would go through, the semicolon is between each, which means you should have the three in the second instance, together. They have given three categories. In other words they could have said, “a suit, or a jacket, blouse, and skirt”, that is for the second aspect, “or a dress”. So -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Would the suit carry the jacket? No, I do not really understand this kind of thing. When you wear a suit, don’t you put on a jacket? Is the jacket not part of the suit?  

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, the chairman of the Rules Committee would help you understand it.

THE SPEAKER: Certainly, the chairman of Rules would help me to say this, what is the idea here? I would imagine that a blouse and a skirt would be one way of dressing? Yes, these were not – are they conjunctive or disjunctive? 

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Mr Speaker, when you look at the rules and in that particular instance -(Laughter)- 62(b) says, “a suit” and then there is a semicolon. Then the next one is, “a jacket, blouse and skirt” another semicolon. In other words the jacket, blouse and the skirt are a package of dressing. Then after that semicolon you have “dress or busuuti for lady Members”, another semicolon.

MRS AKWERO ODWONG: Mr Speaker, in -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear, no – it is not as easy as you seem to put it.

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, I would not have put it any better than hon. Ogenga Latigo. These are supposed to be different methods of dress.  

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MR WACHA: To me, a suit, the way we understand it is that both the jacket and the trousers or the skirt are of the same colour; they match. The reason why they put a jacket, blouse and skirt, is that the jacket in this instance does not necessarily have to be the same colour as the trousers or skirt, but could be a different colour. But of course in the present instance, it is for you to interpret the rules, Sir. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Well, in the present circumstances, I will study the situation and give my ruling later.  (Laughter)

MRS AKWERO ODWONG: Clarification?

THE SPEAKER: Proceed, Minister.

3.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those of members who have congratulated the Members of the Alaso Committee who went on the ground, especially those who visited the North for the first time. I thank the committee for their findings.  

To respond to the Alaso Report, section (b), which starts from page 45, when I visited the committee I started by updating it the on security situation and this is what is recorded on page 45. Therefore, in my response from the Ministry of Defence, I thought it prudent to update Parliament briefly on the security situation because it was recorded in the report.  

Mr Speaker, the security situation is generally calm in the entire country apart from the LRA terrorists who still remain the only source of unrest in some parts of Northern Uganda especially in Gulu, Kitgum and Pader. However, with the on-going operations both in Southern Sudan and Northern Uganda, the LRA’s capacity to continue with terrorism has been greatly weakened in terms of manpower/ammunitions and their lines of supply for both food and equipment are greatly affected.  

The LRA dispositions in Southern Sudan; Kony is still located in Southern Sudan Nisitu, Rasile, Lukwiya, and Jabelin general areas. Some of the commanders within his close proximity include Odiambo, Lapanyikwara, Lamora, Wod Paco, Makasi and Labalpiny. Therefore, the purpose of launching attacks on civilian settlements and SPLA detaches is mainly for food, which they are in need of. 

For the last three months –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Madam Minister, you been having such detailed information on the whereabouts of the rebels including their names and the exact number. You have been giving such reports for the last nine and half years. According to the latest report you are now giving us, the number dwindled to less than 1,000. We have got a force in this country, the UPDF, of more than 40,000 able-bodied persons. Two weeks ago we authorized you with a Vote-on-Account of more than Shs 130 billion. What is it that stops you, given your weaponry, transport, helicopters, name it all, from finishing that job within 26 hours?

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you, hon. Aggrey Awori for that clarification. Actually it is not a new clarification. Yes, the UPDF has got capacity to know the number of Kony commanders who are still alive. But I am sure, hon. Aggrey Awori, you know the background of this insurgency. I have stood on this Floor and I have explained all the players in the insurgency in Northern Uganda and the problems that this government is faced with. It is not only lack of money, but there are also countries that keep on facilitating LRA. That is why we are going beyond Uganda to look for people who can prevail over Joseph Kony. But, if you could give me time and I finish this report, we would make a meaningful interaction rather than interjecting before I tell you the package I have come with. I thank you.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I prepared this report on the 30th June and for the last three months Kony had been rotating in general areas of Lubang-Tek in Jabelin, these are former LRA camps. As I speak now the camps are not there but Kony keeps on rotating among them. These areas are close to the “red line”. The red line is the line that was drawn between the Government of Uganda and Sudan to –(Interjection)- they are imaginary lines. This means Uganda is not supposed to go beyond this line in pursuit of the LRA, into Southern Sudan. So, that is where Kony is rotating and now the main camp is near Nisitu. If you have a look at the map of Southern Sudan you will be able to understand why it is sometimes difficult for the UPDF to pursue LRA once they are beyond the places I am talking about.  

Kony is psychologically affected by the continued defections of LRA officers and men, which is now causing mistrust and frustrations within the LRA in Sudan and in Uganda.  

In Gulu areas, Mr Speaker, commanders Vincent Otti, Otto Sam and Dominic are still roaming in northern parts of Gulu. They have been disturbing the population in search of food, carrying out ambushes along the roads, coupled with raids on IDPs. The UPDF mobile forces continue to pursue them and their small splinter groups in the general areas of Pabbo, Arebe and Kilak hills. 

For the last two days, or as per 30th June, Otti and Otto’s group had lost a total of 37 LRA fighters. On the 21st of June this year, in contact with the LRA group under Otto Sam in Guru-Guru southeast of Kilak hill of Labala, the UPDF killed 17 rebels and rescued three abductees.

On the 22nd June, again the UPDF came into contact with Otto Sam’s group in Guru-Guru areas, and killed ten rebels. On the same day the UPDF came in contact with another group under Otti Vincent in areas northeast of Arebe in Kilak hills and killed rebels and captured five others.  

In Kitgum and Pader, Mr Speaker, the LRA commanders that are in those areas are Ocan Bunia, Abudema, Kapere, Labong and Angola are still roaming in the areas of Kitgum and Pader Districts. Continued pressure by the UPDF against these groups has forced several of them to defect to the UPDF and others to flee to Sudan, for example, Raska who recently crossed back into Sudan.

In Lango area, that is Lira and Apac, these are generally calm. The UPDF is critically observing the areas that border Acholi, Pader, Gulu and Kitgum. No known rebel commander is still operating in that sector. The formation of Amuka units has helped in protecting the masses in the IDP camps.

In Soroti and Katakwi, this region is generally peaceful following the recent losses suffered by the LRA when it infiltrated a non-traditional area in an attempt to increase its operations. The population in this area in liaison with the UPDF stood firm against these terrorists, forcing them to flee to Pader by the end of November last year.  

The Arrow group is a local militia organised from vigilantes, and these were a major force behind the successes of the UPDF against the terrorists in this region.

The LRA still fragments into small splinter groups between 10-15 fighters with instructors from Kony to elude pursuing UPDF forces. This has been their survival tactic, especially during the dry season.

These small groups are able to sneak in and cause terror to the civilian population through laying ambushes and attacks on IDPs camps, and attacks on any soft target that comes their way. All these attacks against the population are carried out because of desperate need for food and drugs, which are deficient. 

The UPDF’s operations against these terrorists continue day and night hence many successes are to be achieved. Many LRA senior commanders continue to be either killed or wounded in action while others continue to defect to the UPDF with their weapons. Those killed since January this year include Brig. Nyeko, he was an LRA army commander; Lt Col Livingstone Opiro, he was a director of medical services in the LRA; Lt Col Okudi, he was in charge of Kony’s shrines; Maj. Ojok James, Maj. Ochola, Capt. Omara, Capt. Onyee, Capt. Obula, Lt Luka Apeta, Lt Okur, Lt Ojok Ochieng Martin; a total of about 690 LRA fighters have been killed since –(Interruption) 

MR ONZIMA: Mr Speaker, I thank the Minister for giving way. I only want to seek clarification from her as to whether she still continues to refer to these military ranks of the rebels when the government position is that these ranks should not be used for Kony’s boys? Thank you.

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I did not get the question the member is raising. I hope he moves a bit further from the microphone so that I can hear him.

MR ONZIMA: What I said is that I thought it was the position of government not to refer to these military ranks for Kony’s boys? Why are you using those titles?  

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I circulated this document. I am reading it, and the ranks are in quotes.  

THE SPEAKER: It is understandable.

MS NANKABIRWA: Those who we have defected since January 4th include Maj. Okot Ayoli, Capt. Charles Abola, Capt. Hillary Lageni, Capt. James Owino, Capt. Charles Lukwiya, Capt. Otto Ataki and Capt. Vincent Okello –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, I see the Minister using sign language. Is it in order for her to keep using sign language, which cannot be captured on the Hansard? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, it is not easy to rule on that particular point of order, as you might appreciate.  

MR WACHA: May be I could help her, Mr Speaker. If the Minister thinks that these ranks are not proper ranks, she could say, quotes, Major so and so.

THE SEPAKER: She put it in inverted commas, which means really, it is a joke. That is what it means.

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr speaker, it has gone on the record that the ranks I am reading are in quotes. Secondly, I want to bring out these ranks because initially Kony had told his fighters that, “When you escape when you are at the rank of a ‘captain’ and above and the Government of Museveni arrests you, you will be killed”. So, we want these ranks to come out so that it encourages others who have been fidgeting to escape. We are even moving around with these people so that their counterparts hear them. I think the issue of the quotes has now been clarified.  

A total of more than 230 LRA fighters including some women has defected from the LRA and reported to the UPDF since January this year. A total of more than 540 riffles have been recovered from the LRA since January this year.  

In general, Mr Speaker, the UPDF’s successes against the LRA are so far encouraging. The LRA’s strength in terms of power and ammunitions continues to diminish hour by hour as exemplified by the rate at which defections are taking place within the ranks and file of the LRA.

The LRA rebels have lost the will and morale to fight because of lack of food, drugs and ammunitions. With continued operations by UPDF mobile forces, both inside Sudan and Uganda, LRA’s capacity to commit atrocities against the civilians dwindles day by day and the end of this LRA terror is in sight.  

However, UPDF still has challenges of improving on its mobility, communication, airlift capacity and armoured truck vehicles for soldiers to respond timely to the available intelligence. The government’s offer of cease fire to LRA terrorists provided they abandon terror is still in place and the hand of peace through amnesty, which was extended to LRA terrorists who report or surrender, still holds.

In Western Uganda, Sir, the security situation remained calm despite some raids by RCD-Goma in Muramba sub-county, Kisoro District in mid-June. Our forces repulsed the rebels, leaving five dead and recovering three arms.  

In areas of Ishasha, around 24th June inside DRC, the Mai Mai attacked RCD-Goma forcing civilians to cross into Uganda. Mr Speaker, that is now the security situation.  

The report has observations, which I concur with except that on page 45 it was reported that there were many incidents involving gunships. I want to make a correction. Mr Speaker, there was only one incident of a helicopter gunship attack on the civilians and apart from that there were no other incidents. 

Let me now handle the recommendations that were written down in Madam Alaso’s report. I will summarized, Mr Speaker. The equipping of auxiliary forces to avoid being overrun by the LRA; the auxiliary forces are equipped with AK-47 rifles but cannot be armed with support weapons on which they have not yet been trained. However, wherever they are located they are deployed with elements of UPDF who are trained and offer backup support.  

Some of the bigger camps like Patongo, Aloi, Ongo and Pabo, have tanks deployed there. IDPCs protection force is a mixture of LDUs and regular forces. These auxiliary forces are under the command and control of UPDF, that is, each auxiliary unit has a UPDF commanding officer and some UPDF non-commissioned officers. A documentation process to know who is armed and register all rifles is in process.  

About cattle rustling/Karamoja Disarmament Programme, Mr Speaker, the UPDF continues to carry out operations to stop intra and inter-clan raids by Karimojong warriors and return the recovered herds of cattle to owners. The disarmament programme, which involved both voluntary and forceful means, has slackened due to the fact that some ASTU from Karamoja were withdrawn and focused to the operation against LRA terrorists in Northern Uganda. This created a vacuum, which has been capitalised on by some warriors. Of course that is coupled with other factors such as gun trafficking from Sudan and within; limited cooperation from illegal armed warriors is also a factor. 

The Army has a plan of more training, improving transport both on ground and air capacity as well as communication equipment.  

The welfare of Amuka, Arrow groups and the LDUs. This issue of welfare for auxiliary forces has been greatly affected by the fact that they never authorized the budget until recently. All that was being used on them was charged on the Ministry of Defence budget, which was already constrained. The committee notes rightly that even the supplementary expenditure that was authorized recently is not enough as it fell below what was required.  

Salaries for the auxiliary forces; the delay in payment of salaries to auxiliaries may be divided into two categories. The recently recruited forces of the Amuka and Arrow boys did not have a budget, as I mentioned, and had to be managed in arrears using the Ministry of Defence budget. 

The second category is the force of the LDUs that existed before. The money for the management of this force is from the Ministry of Internal Affairs and is never on time. An example is the fact that monies for April and May this year were released to us last week of June 2004. I prepared this report on 30th. That means the money was released around 24th or 25th of June. The monies for June this year have not yet been released and I am not sure whether they will be released. Last year there were arrears that were carried forward and to-date have not been partially managed. 

Stepping up of food and rations of auxiliary forces so as to equate them with what the UPDF gets. The required facilitation was passed on to the Ministry of Internal Affairs to factor into the budget for financial year 2004/2005 and it is hoped that if the monies are released as requested, then facilitation of these forces shall be more regular and in time. The perceived lower levels of rations for the auxiliaries did not only apply to auxiliaries but also to the regular UPDF and was a result again of having no budget and having to share of what was available for the regular forces, by all forces.

Uniforms; all auxiliary forces have been provided with uniforms. More orders have been placed to our suppliers to supply more uniforms with a view to enabling each force member to have at least two pairs of uniform, in future.

Government efforts to solve the LRA question in Northern Uganda. Mr Speaker, some of the issues pointed out were not from the report but since I am the last speaker I have been noting the issues that have been raised by my colleagues and I have attempted to briefly answer them.  

There are some efforts - although many have been articulated by my colleagues like hon. Miyingo and others who spoke since this debate started - we are aware for example that there have been peace talks, which have been the effort of government. The peace team is still willing to co-ordinate with the Amnesty Commission and other NGOs or stakeholders on rehabilitation and resettlement of LRA returnees. The team continues with mobilization of the public in all districts in Northern Uganda while remaining available for peace negotiations.  

The Government continues to encourage the peace team and other stakeholders like the Acholi cultural and religious leaders, to remain open to dialogue with LRA.  

Launching of peace campaign rallies and meetings to cover the war-ravaged districts in Northern Uganda like in Gulu, Kitgum and Pader is going on.  

The ceasefire. Mr Speaker, the Government offered a ceasefire to the LRA provided they fulfilled the set of conditions namely to stop abductions of children and to stop extermination of families of captives who escape, and stop attacking civilian traffic.  

The amnesty point has been articulated by hon. Miyingo Kezimbira. Diplomatic initiatives like NGOs, peace initiatives and human rights interests have all been supported in order to reach a lasting solution by peaceful means to the LRA conflict. For example, the Jimmy Charter Peace Initiatives, St. Egidio Peace Initiatives and others are some of government’s relentless efforts of securing the lives and property of the people of Northern Uganda.  

On humanitarian aid, there is ample protection to all agencies, which provide humanitarian assistance or relief in all districts of Northern Uganda. All relief convoys are secured by UPDF units, which are well equipped with armoured escort vehicles. These ply several IDP camps (over 86) to distribute relief supplies. There is tight security at loading centers, distribution centers and the route to the distribution centers.  

The creation of IDP camps; assembling of people in camps, which are protected by the UPDF, denies rebels the chance to mingle with the population who are vulnerable to force recruitment and being used as shield against the UPDF pursuing process.  

Patrols and convoys along the main roads are some of the security measures put in place to protect the lives of the road users especially the civilian population.  

On counselling and rehabilitation, Mr Speaker, all rescued abductees by the UPDF and those who are captured or surrender are handed over to local based NGOs like World Vision, GUSCO, Give Me a Chance, etcetera, which are spread in all districts in Northern Uganda for counselling and rehabilitation before they are finally re-united with their families.  

The counselling gives them tremendous psychological impact since most of them are traumatized. However, Sir, I would say that the period for counselling is not enough because most of these children spend a lot of time with the rebels, get indoctrinated and de-humanised. You cannot use just months to humanize them again. But they are doing what they can. Most of them, especially young girls and boys who are malnourished, are given immediate medical attention and other forms of care even by the mobile UPDF troops before reaching the rehabilitation centers. And before they are finally re-integrated into the community they are given a basic package in terms of essential requirements as a basis of where to start from after re-unification with their families.

In conclusion, Sir, UPDF continues to sufficiently reduce the fighting capacity of LRA terrorists to keep Northern Uganda a safe region to live in and it is focused on its constitutional obligation to protect and defend the sovereignty of Uganda within its borders. Thank you very much, honourable members.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister.

3.59
MR WAMBI KIBAALE (Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am standing on a point of clarification from the minister. On page 7 of her response on matters of the documentation process to know who is armed and who is not, the Minister is talking of documentation implying that the arms were being given to people without record. On this page she is implying that the right process is going on. I believe this can be very dangerous.  She has to explain to us what she means by that documentation process.

Two, I would like to know about the remunerations for auxiliary forces especially the LDUs. In areas of Sironko where the Karimojong also cause insecurity, most of the auxiliary forces are not armed, neither are they properly dressed. The point is that they are not paid and yet here you are saying you have paid some and probably there are still arrears. May I be clarified if the arrears of those to be paid include those of Sironko, Muyembe area and Bunambutye.

4.02
MR JOHN ODIT (Erute County South, Lira): I thank you, Mr Speaker and the Minister for this response. My concern is on page 8, the welfare of Amuka, Arrow groups and the LDUs. When these young men were being passed out, the Minister herself was the guest of honour and she assured them that payment would be effected - in the presence of the Commander of the UPDF. Now this page expresses a lot of uncertainty. I want to really know from her whether this message can console those people in the field?

Two, these people were given only a pair of uniforms, days and months have passed since, and these uniforms are torn. It is really important that you get the next stock as quickly as possible.

Three, which probably is the last one, equipment being given to this auxiliary forces; we are satisfied with the AK-47s and indeed these people have done a good job. But the worry is on the communication gadgets. These people are deployed in various cites, posts and stations and often when they are pursuing the enemies they actually sometimes go to the next area under the control of different commanders, and in the course of pursuing these people they can easily end up fighting among themselves because communication will not have reached the other stations. This is a report, which they actually appealed to me to express in this House. If these areas can be saved, even if you are not giving them salary but regular and adequate food ratio should be there for the time being as we pursue the line of payment. That would make a bit of sense. I thank you. 

4.04
MR ALEX NDEEZI (Persons With Disabilities, Central): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I wish to thank the Minister of State for Defence for this very informative statement. I salute you, honourable minister. 

I have one concern and I request the Minister to take it into account. This is on page 4. My concern pertains to our language especially when you talk about success and then we go on to say that, “We have killed, we have killed, we have killed; we should start celebrating”. It is true and I know some of these people we call rebels and killed were forced into the rebellion. Some could be your sisters or brothers; they are Ugandans and they are part of us. I do not think it is the humane way of conduct to qualify the killing of these people and celebrate the killing of these people. This is simply the sad and very unavoidable aspect of the tragic situation in Northern Uganda and other parts of the country. 

I know it is unavoidable. I am not a rebel sympathizer at all. I do not condone rebellion but I am asking you, hon. Minister and Government, this is not the first time we have heard people glorifying killings. Can we not get other words to use; can we not try to tone down our vocabulary? Why should we try to encourage this culture of believing that killing our people is good? Thank you. 

4.06
MS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Government through the Minister of Defence for the effort that is put in place to get the situation controlled. I have a clarification that I am seeking from the minister and this is in regard to the soldiers of the UPDF together with the Amuka, and the other armed groups. In case they die, is there any initiative put in place to take care of their families?

There is this expression especially among the Amuka boys that they were not considered in the budget. The families of those who died have continued to complain that the Government has not helped them. I want to find out from the Minister about this. Thank you.

4.07
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the two ministers for the responses they have presented. Referring to page 2 of the report from the Ministry of Defence, in last paragraph the Minister has reported that on 21st June the UPDF killed 17 rebels and rescued three abductees. I know that the LRA usually move with abductees and in a battle the bullet does not choose who is who.  Could the Minister be kind enough and also tell us how many abductees they have killed? How do you differentiate between a dead rebel and a dead abductee? I imagine that some of the dead may actually be abductees. 

Page 7, there is a report about cattle rustling and disarmament. The Minister also said that factors such as gun trafficking from Sudan and within have affected the security situation in Karamoja and yet in the last statement she says the Army has a plan of more training and improving transport both on the ground and by air. I wonder how these plans could solve the problem of gun trafficking from Sudan. Surely, even if the disarmament programme were accomplished within Karamoja the factor of gun trafficking from Sudan, the porous borders between Uganda and Sudan and also with Kenya have not been adequately addressed. It would still be like we are running a jigsaw puzzle; we remove guns and leave the inlets of those guns open. 

I would have expected a plan such as concrete deployment to block those porous spots, to deny any entry of more guns and ammunitions into the region. So, Government should sit together with other counterparts, the Sudan and Kenya, and handle this problem of the porous borders regionally. 

On the issue of the salary for auxiliary forces on page 8, I notice that the funds come from the Ministry of Internal Affairs and they are taken to the Ministry of Defence for payment of LDUs who are otherwise under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. So, these anomalies of delayed releases may now be blamed on both ministries. Sometimes we hear that the Minister of Internal Affairs actually has released money but the LDUs do not get their payment. I would suggest that the Minister of Internal Affairs continues to directly manage the remunerations of the LDUs who are otherwise under the Ministry of Internal Affairs rather than channeling money from one ministry to another to pay the staff of the same ministry, which released the funds. I think in that way we would avoid a number of anomalies.  

But indeed the minister has stated here something that is lamentable and it is a shame that arrears of even last year have up to now only been partially paid. That reduces the morale of these sons and daughters who are working tooth and nail to defend this country. I think there is need for government to tag a lot of priority to the welfare and remuneration of this staff if their morale is to be boosted because they are really doing things in a very difficult state. Those are the few comments that I wanted clarification on. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you making an observation or clarification because not everything is clarification?

4.13
MR CHRISTOPHER MBALIBULHA (Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also have a similar clarification to that of hon. Ndeezi. The language used here is really frightening. I do not know whether the Minister meant what he wrote -(Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker is it in order for a member to come to this House dressed in a T-shirt? That attire does not fall under any category under our rules. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think you are trying to provoke a ruling from me on this issue. I have examined the rule, which for instance hon. Otto raised in respect of hon. Akello, but what you must know is that what is stated here is not exhaustive. Somebody can put on a skirt and a jacket; it may not be decent if there is a slit going up to the waist. (Laughter). These were just examples of decent dressing. Imagine if one of our lady Members of Parliament visited India and she was given Indian attire and walks in here dressed in it, it is not mentioned here in our rules. Am I going to say, “That is indecent go away?” 

Suppose one day you get an Asian lady Member of Parliament and she decides to dress the way they do, you will not find that attire in our rules. So, decent depends on judgment. Even things that are mentioned here may not be decent. Suppose somebody has a skirt and it is the sort of skirts for Bimansulo, am I going to say, “Because it is a skirt, a blouse and a jacket therefore you are decent”? I will be in position to say in my judgment, “You are not”. So, this is a question of judgment. Let us not stretch it. We shall always see what is decent and what is not.

MR MBALIBULHA: Thank you for kind ruling, Mr Speaker. My concern is about the language and the delay to release the money for the auxiliary forces. On page 8, last paragraph under “salaries for auxiliary forces,” the minister wrote, “The monies for June have as yet not been released and I am not sure whether they will be released.” This is discouraging and disgusting.  

In Supplementary II, Shs 14.9 billion was passed to take care to these gallant sons of Uganda. Mr Speaker, one of the reasons why the war is not ending is because of sabotage from within. Who is this person in the Ministry of Finance that is not releasing this money even when Parliament passed this money so that we can boost the morale of these fellows? I am concerned. I want the minister to clarify where is the money? 

Why is the money not released and why are you not sure that you will have this money? If you are not sure, what about the boys who are rotting away in Mbuya? I went to Mbuya, most of them have nothing, not even an Aspirin and yet they protect us here in our Kaunda suits. Why are you not releasing this money? Who is this one sabotaging government programmes? I thank you very much.

MR AEL ARK LODOU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to seek some clarification on the issue of disarmament in Karamoja. The Minister of State for Northern Uganda Rehabilitation states that there has been construction and opening up of security roads in Karamoja but to date none has been opened. There were planned roads from Moroto, Nakiloro to Loyoro and Kapelepelot but none has been opened. Also from Kaabong to Kapelepelot to Piri, none has been opened. Then from Kaabong to Karenga to Oromo, none has been opened.

Secondly, she says there has been construction of valley dams in Karamoja. I went with the Minister for Water to Karamoja and there is no single dam in Matheniko County. Can we get some clarification on that?

4.17
MRS MARGARET ATENG (Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her response to the issues insecurity in Northern Uganda. The first statement reads: “Generally the security situation in the entire country is calm apart from the LRA terrorists who still remain the only source of unrest in some of the Northern parts of the country within Gulu, Kitgum and Pader Districts”. 

I would like to say that this still happens in Lira as well but my main point is since she has taken Uganda as a whole, there is a new wave of insecurity in Lira District namely of people being arrested under the guise of involvement in rebel activities. This is not part of it here. Eight people were picked up from Lira District and the manner in which this was done is quite funny. One of them called Okello was picked around the 21st of last month, together with others. Someone followed him up to his farm where he was cultivating and arrested him. Up to today his whereabouts are not known but information says that he was brought to Kampala. That is very serious matter. We want to know the whereabouts of these people. If there are any rebel activities going on we should be informed because we are all stakeholders in this.

I would like to thank the Army in Lira for their operations to rescue children and hand them over to Laker Rehabilitation Center and then back to their families. However, there is one person who returned last year in December by the name of Ojok. He comes from the same place from which I hail. To date he has never been released. His parents are being told to pay money before he can be released. Those are the issues I wanted to raise. I thank you.

4.22
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Erute County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There is an issue, which I would like to raise on page 11 regarding information about humanitarian aid. When the honourable minister states that this is being provided in all districts of Northern Uganda namely Gulu, Kitgum, Pader and Lira, I do not know why Apac is always forgotten. Or is this a typing error? 

I remember last time my honourable colleague Okulo Epak was very bitter about forgetting Apac when we submitted this report. I want to stress that the northern part of Apac, which includes Minakul, Aber, Otwal, Ngai, Icheme and then Alito, these are areas that have been seriously affected by this insurgency. I always wonder why Apac, in most cases whenever reports are being submitted to this House, is always forgotten? Maybe the Minister has reason for leaving it out because at one time she also toured the same place together with hon. Members of Parliament of Lango sub-region and she saw for herself the situation there.  

However, Mr Speaker, this relief that we have got this year, we are not going to enjoy it next year because this was a resolve of people of these affected areas who produce some beans and maize. I thought the hon. Minister for Agriculture would also respond here. When you drive from Kampala to Kitgum you hardly see signs of life because all the crops have failed. If you go to Loro Prison Farm, where we were expecting the highest yield of maize, you just say, “Sorry”. The flowering maize is all dead and there is no chance for the beans. 

I am sounding this as a request that unless the Government, through the Ministry of Agriculture, does something this remaining rainy season and next year, this is just a drop in the ocean. All these IDPs in the camps, unless we are expecting food from somewhere else because reliably I have been informed that even our neighbouring countries are also facing the same trend of this sunshine, and it is very intense.  

When I went down to my area, I was on the ground, I found out that the same thing happened in 1994 and it was very serious, and this is 2004. After every ten years it seems this sunshine is very stubborn. So, maybe the Minister of Defence and any other relevant sectors will see to it that something is done to ensure that famine of next year, which is already looming, is handled appropriately. Thank you very much.

4.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank colleagues who have made observations and raised queries. I will try to group them.

On documentation as raised by hon. Kibaale Wambi, I would like to inform you that documentation is part and parcel of our armed forces. Even within the regular routine we have to carry out documentation to see who still has the guns especially within the Amuka. If you see how we raise them up, sometimes in a hurried manner, we have to carry out the documentation and I think the committee raised it.  That is why I picked it to make a clarification on it. Some of them lose their guns and you have to explain where you have put the gun that you were given. We have to ask you, “To whom have you given the gun? Have you sold it”? That is why we carry out this documentation.

On remuneration of auxiliary forces, we raised their salary to Shs 60,000. This was requested by the people who met His Excellency the President, because they were getting Shs 40,000 and he said, “Okay, you will be getting Shs 60,000”. And now the Ministry of Defence is really in a problem of implementing the President’s directive. You find that we used to wait for this salary – let us say this is July, you wait for August salary. You get the Shs 20,000 and then you top up the Shs 40,000 so that you can give that person the whole package of Shs 60,000. Now, you are remaining with Shs 40,000 for that salary where you have sliced Shs 20,000. That is how we have been managing these auxiliaries but of course, we could not go and explain all this I am explaining to you to those people. In the end, you end up delaying in payment of salary on top of the delays from the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

The Sironko LDUs are part of the auxiliaries that I was talking about –(Mr Awori rose_)- If you can allow me to clarify because I stood to clarify to members who raised queries.

Hon. Odit wanted me to give further assurance. I would like to give you further assurance because the supplementary that we passed here was eventually released to the Ministry of Internal Affairs. And money was released, I think two weeks ago, to the Ministry of Defence and we want to make sure that at least money for two to three months is sent down. We were fearing that maybe some of these sons and daughters of ours would run away from the job because of the money, but I have talked to the Army Commander and said, “Let this be their boom because they have suffered for some months.” Let the money go down and what we have to do, me and you and colleagues, is to find out whether the money has gone down. And if it has not in any unit, which you know, please inform me so that I can follow it up.  

We have even purchased more uniforms and this time we will have to make sure that the delivery of uniforms – you know sometimes if the delivery is not streamlined, you find that some officers at the lower level can decide to get three when others are getting two. We are trying to make sure that we really streamline all these, and this is what happens in many institutions. You have to keep a keen eye on that.

One of the challenges I mentioned, hon. Odit, in my report was communication. But I would like to inform you that all the procedure of procurement has been through contracts, signed and all that. I will only not tell you the date when we are receiving communication, but we are soon getting these communications and it is going to be a boost to us. 

Hon. Ndeezi and hon. Kibanzanga raised a point on language. I for one do not feel comfortable when I am reading this and in the first reports I used to give to this House I was using the language of “putting out of action” or “neutralising.” But I am being defeated because when you are reporting on a technical matter - this is a report from the Ministry of Defence and the military - the point on the killing is a technical operation from the field. They tell me the rebels attacked a certain IDP camp and killed people. When you are reporting about the encounter you have done, why do you want to avoid the word “killing”? 

This is the challenge they put across when I was telling them to soften the language. They say: “But when the rebels attack the IDPs, the word circulates that the rebels attacked and killed 200. When you go to battle with them and you kill certain numbers, Madam, why do you not want us to say ‘we killed’?” So, I do not feel comfortable reporting that we killed but I was advised that this is an operational matter. Rebels kill us and we also kill them. But I am at your disposal to advise me on how to report and what words to use. I will listen to you and take your advice.  

Hon. Teopista Ssentongo, you mentioned the fallen soldiers – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You have silenced, eradicated –(Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: Technically you may need to explain further. Silenced by surrendering so that they –(Interruption)

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Speaker, if I heard the contribution of my colleague in the corner correctly, the minister has reduced the figures and the killing he was talking about to a debate on figures. I do not think he was raising the issue of language of killing or the figures. If I heard him well he was concerned about the fact that we Ugandans are killing ourselves. I think that is his concern; I do not think the concern was the language, which the minister has now made to be the crux of the issue. I think his idea was, “Are you thinking of another way we can resolve our problems in the country so that we do not kill each other?” I think that is the issue. 

I do not think he would just be concerned about the language of killing. In fact the appeal in his contribution is asking government, “What effective measure do you have so that we Ugandans can stop killing each other and resolve our problems amicably”?

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I listened to hon. Ndeezi, and he was concerned about the word “killing”. He said that, “These are Ugandans we are killing, can we not find a way of explaining it instead of using this language we are using of killing, killing, killing”? Otherwise, if he were talking about peaceful resolution, he would have been clear. Peaceful resolution has nothing to do with language.  

Mr Speaker, I was telling hon. Teopista Ssentongo that with the UPDF regulations clearly stipulated in their laws demand that there are forms that one fills. Before one dies he/she is expected to register; each soldier is supposed to have a file where you put your next of kin, your wife, your spouse, the children each day you produce a child you are supposed to register that child. When you die and your wife dies, then your parents.  

With the Amuka, Sir, I hope that when we debate the UPDF Bill we would be in a position to put this matter to rest and put in place clear provisions to cater for the Amuka. But as I speak now we considered them as the auxiliary forces that come to the UPDF for assistance and enforcement. There are provisions in the UPDF regulations to cater for such auxiliary forces that come up to beef up UPDF. But I am sure if we handle the UPDF Bill we shall see where to place these.

Dr Epetait wanted to know how we differentiate a dead rebel from the abductee. I would like to inform this House that 99.9 percent of the LRA are abductees. Why we report that we killed 17 rebels is because we kill them in action. In most cases they are armed and they are fighting, these are the ones that kill the UPDF. But we call them abductees sometimes when we exchange with a group or make a raid and we get them trembling and all that. When they talk to you, you really know that these children have just been abducted. So, that is the context within which we consider them. Otherwise, almost everybody in the bush is a former abductee or is an abductee. Very few joined willingly to fight with Kony.  

You were wondering how my suggestion for more training and improvement in transport, especially air, will help to deal with the challenges, which I mentioned of gun trafficking. But again before you sat down you recommended that we do more deployment maybe at the border. How do you do more deployment without doing more training and improving all this? So, I think it will help us if we do more training, if we increase the capacity on air transport and all that, we shall be in a position to handle this problem. But this problem of gun trafficking, Mr Speaker, is on the agenda of the regional cooperation. IGAD, for example, is discussing this. In the African Union we discuss this and in all the other regional organisations. Gun trafficking is something, which cannot be done by only one country just like Karamoja disarmament cannot be successful without co-operation from our neighbours.

Lastly, hon. Margaret Ateng raised an issue about a new wave of insecurity in Lira and about one Ojok who has never been released. I am hearing this for the first time. I only hope that hon. Ateng Margaret raised this issue with me as she always does either in the lobby or - you do not have to come to Bombo I move with my office - I would have followed up this issue. But I can only pledge that I will try to find out what happened to Ojok. I will need more information about him. 

About the arrests of people in Lira, I also have to find out that. Maybe these are collaborators because these returnees, these defectors whom I have mentioned here are surrendering a lot of information willingly. I will find out as to whether it is not this information that is leading to the arrests in Lira and I will get back to you, if you could give me more details like the names of the people that have been arrested. Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, thank you my honourable colleague. You asked for names of people who may have been arrested. May I also take this opportunity to inform you that my former chief escort during presidential elections, Inspector Okello, who until recently had been posted to Arua, right now is languishing in Luzira more less charged with treason on a similar situation?

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I think we better be formal on some of these things. Well, you have raised it and it has gone on the Hansard but I will still request you to inform me so that I can attach –(Interruption)- yes, this is how we do the work. I attach something and I forward it to the relevant office and I am sure you will do that.

Hon. Angiro, I am sorry that we omitted Apac. We were responding to the report. Since the report also omitted - but I went to all those areas Icheme, Ngai, Minakul you mentioned and it was an omission, which I beg to be included. Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. A serious question was raised here by hon. Kibanzanga about the payment for the auxiliary forces because we passed here a supplementary budget of Shs 4.9 billion and the minister was saying she is not sure whether this money will even be released. We want to know what is happening because we passed this money for these people to be paid and we expect the honourable minister to give us some green light on this matter because we passed the budget on this.

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I hope my honourable colleague was around when I was responding. First of all I said that I grouped the clarifications. Although I did not mention hon. Kibanzanga when I explained how we struggle to pay the auxiliaries, I thought I had tackled his question.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you very much, honourable ministers and members.  

4.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE, NORTHERN UGANDA RECONSTRUCTION PROGRAMME (Ms Grace Akello): Mr Speaker, honourable colleagues, first of all I wish to thank the Alaso Committee for its commitment to assessing the situation in the three sub-regions of Northern Uganda for our debate. I would like to congratulate the chairperson for the successful completion of her mission and for the effort she put into the work of the committee.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to request Parliament to make use of my office in the North so that our combined synergies can accelerate the realisation of peace and the serious inception of reconstruction and development that we all so ardently long for in Northern Uganda.

From the debate a lot of issues were raised about the North. A concern about lack of government in the North was expressed many times by a number of distinguished colleagues in the House. Let me start by stating categorically that when the Movement took power, at no time has there been lack of government presence in any part of the country. The Movement took power precisely in order to be in every part of the country. It set about creating structures of this power and control in the country. Thus, you find throughout Uganda, including the North, that there is the Government up to the village level. So, embedded indeed is this respect for the village level government that even the President will not conduct any function until he has been given permission to do so by the LC I Chairperson of the area. 

So, you have government at the local structures, but you also have government through the Residential District Commissioners appointed at every district. You have powers of government manifested and exercised in institutions such as the Police, the courts and prisons, and the UPDF is just one other manifestation of the powers of government.  

Mr Speaker, in the course of my assignment in the North I have found our sons from Kisoro, from Karamoja, from Bundibugyo, from Masaka, from Wakiso in every part of the North in Palaro, in Madiopei, in Katikakile, in Abia they are all there. The truth is that government is everywhere. To cap it all, from time to time His Excellency the President has moved State House to various places in the North. On many occasions, since 1986, he has run state business from Gulu, Morilinga in Moroto District, Usuk in Katakwi, State Lodge in Soroti, have all been centres of power and government business, so has Aliwang and Adwari in Otuke County in Lira District.  

Perhaps it is only appropriate that I should inform the august House what government is doing in this part of the country on a day-to-day basis. Mr Speaker, the Government of Uganda saw it fit to appoint a Minister of State for Northern Uganda to handle the critical challenges there. My mandate is:

• To promote various peace initiatives and conflict resolution;

• To build consensus with the people and communities about the dangers of war in favour of peace;

• To co-ordinate government’s effort and other stakeholders towards rehabilitation;

• To co-ordinate the design of additional initiatives, interventions and projects to address the problems of people of Northern Uganda and;

•  To participate in liaison with other ministers and agencies in the implementation of the Amnesty Act.  

Mr Speaker, who is doing what in Northern Uganda?  I am currently in the process of compiling a directory of the various sectoral interventions by government and other actors in Northern Uganda. I will make this available to everybody as part of the co-ordination effort for all of us to know what is happening in that part of the country.  

Apart from the sectoral interventions that you have heard my honourable colleagues giving here, one intervention, which is very important, is that by the Ministry of Local Government. The Ministry of Local Government has been sending money under Local Government Development Programme (LGDP) to all the districts of Northern Uganda, just like it has been sending to other districts. The Government of Uganda from July 2000 to October 2003 sent a total of Shs 670 billion to Northern Uganda. For the districts of Acholi in that period, it sent a total sum of Shs 111 billion; for the district of Lira it sent Shs 145 billion. The Teso region got Shs 129 billion; the West Nile region got Shs 182 billion and the Karamoja region got Shs 62 billion, while our district of Pallisa got Shs 45 billion.

Mr Speaker, apart from these interventions, there are targeted programmes for Northern Uganda, which I am directly responsible for. One of them is the government re-stocking project, which covers all the districts of the North. But my colleagues in the House will be interested to know that it also covers Sironko, Tororo, Iganga, Bugiri, Mayuge, and Kapchorwa in the East. It also covers Masindi, Mubende, Hoima, Kibaale, Kiboga, Bundibugyo, Kabarole, Kasese, Rakai, Masaka, Mpigi, Wakiso, Mukono, Kayunga, Nakasongola, Luweero, Sembabule, Mbarara, Kyenjojo and Kamwenge.  

Mr Speaker, this project was started in April 2000 and is funded purely by the Government of Uganda. There is no external funding here and so far the Government of Uganda has put in directly Shs 2.4 billion for the purchase of animals and associated livestock and their upkeep.

Mr Speaker, there is also a project called the Karamoja Data Centre. I am not the sector minister for this but since I am providing an oversight for the region, this Karamoja Data Centre is a government initiative aimed at assisting the districts of Karamoja to develop and manage their own information systems with a sound base to aid the district planning process. The assistance covers capacity building, data collection, analysis, coordination and updating of sectoral data sets.  

Among the achievements to-date is the establishment of a functional Karamoja information system in the office of the Minister of State for Karamoja. The Karamoja Data Centre has become a one-top information centre for most information regarding Karamoja. I would like to invite all of you, honourable colleagues, to make use of it because visitors like investors, researchers, aid agencies, planners and so on make use of it.  

There is field mapping of all schools and health units in Kotido, Moroto and Nakapiripirit. This unit has developed and is hosting a Karamoja website and there are district guides to the districts of Karamoja being produced. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I would like to, with pleasure, lay on the Table of the House a Karamoja atlas, which was produced in this office.  (Applause)

There is another active government programme in Karamoja, which is the disarmament of Karamoja. We all know that the Government recognises Karamoja as a special area requiring special attention because of the unique and special problems of the region. The special problems are manifested in such issues as drought, which occurs regularly and forces people to migrate in search of water, grazing lands and food. This exacerbates conflicts and these conflicts also exacerbate displacement of people to the neighbouring district. This is the reason why a disarmament programme was launched in December 2001 and the Rt hon. Prime Minister was directed to co-ordinate interventions. 

The interventions are provision of ox-ploughs –(Interruption)- could the honourable member not let me finish then I will clarify as much as he likes?
 
THE SPEAKER: But, why do you not let her finish then you can seek the clarification; you mark it where you want to. 

MS AKELLO: The Rt hon. Prime Minister was asked to co-ordinate the following interventions: 

1. To co-ordinate the provision of ox-ploughs and chains to be given to those who voluntarily handed in their guns. I have in my paper indicated how many guns have been handed in and what ploughs have been given, and if members do not have their paper immediately, it will be in their pigeonholes.

2. There was to be the opening up of security roads along the Kenya/Sudan borders and security roads with the neighbours of Karamoja. 

3. There was to be the encouraging of the micro-finance agencies to provide credit to Karamoja.

4. There was to be a provision of pick-up vehicles per district, to facilitate the mobilisation for disarmament and peace by Members of Parliament and the RDCs of Katakwi, Lira, Pader, Kumi and Sironko were asked to provide the Karimojong herdsmen free passage to graze their animals during the dry season.
5.	Government was to grant Karamoja animals and so on. 

Mr Speaker, apart from the Karamoja disarmament, my office does not supervise the Amnesty Commission –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Increasingly, the statement by my honourable colleague in charge of the North sounds more like a policy statement and totally outside what we expected as a response to the concerns raised in the report of hon. Alaso. So, are we really here to listen to a policy statement or are we here to listen to a response to the concerns raised in the report? Because when you talk about data centre, what not, is that humanitarian? No.

THE SPEAKER: I will be able to assess after we have heard it.

MS AKELLO: Mr Speaker, I wish to thank you for that very wise ruling. My office does not supervise the Amnesty Commission, Internal Affairs does. However, my office collaborates with the Amnesty Commission and I would like to report that as a result of the amnesty, which was extended to rebels fighting the Movement Government, we have received over 9,000 rebels who have come out of the bush. There is attached to my report the numbers, but I would like just to inform colleagues in the House, for example, that –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable minister, just summarise. 

MS AKELLO: Among the former rebels who want to come home, for example - members would have read in the paper - is Alice Lakwena of the holy spirit movement whose return and that of her ex-combatants the Government of Uganda has facilitated with US $50,000. 

Mr Speaker, I also supervise the Northern Uganda Youth Rehabilitation Project, which is meant for school dropouts, abducted youth, Karimojong Karacunas and so on - former rebels.
  
Also in my office there is a Northern Uganda Telecommunications Project part one of which is concluded now, providing telecommunications networks to Kampala through Gulu via Wakiso, Luweero, Nakasongola, Masindi and Gulu. Part 2 of this project - hon. Awori, may be interested to know this - will be providing telecommunication services on the eastern leg of the country passing through Mbale, Kumi and Soroti. Other areas, which will be getting the facility, will be Busia, Malaba, Kapchorwa, Nakapiripirit, Moroto and so on. 

I also supervise the Acholi programme - Mr Speaker, the reason why I am emphasising this is not so much because I want to tell Members of Parliament what my department is doing but I would like to say that government is operating in Northern Uganda and despite the problems that we are encountering there, there are a lot of activities going on and our people are benefiting from them. So, it is not correct to say that there is no government presence in Northern Uganda. That is why I am emphasising this.

We have the Acholi programme, which has a donation of 4 million Euros and with this our people in Pader and Kitgum have been able to build schools, they have been able to build health units, they have been able to build community roads, and they have been able to fight poverty. 

The biggest programme that we have, Mr Speaker, in Northern Uganda at the moment is the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund. Since the launch of this project in February 2003 we have disbursed Shs 2.5 billion to 140 projects. There are 813 sub projects still waiting for funding and there are more being written by our communities. I would like to lay details of NUSAF operations on the Table. 

Mr Speaker, you were not here last week but I want to correct an impression, now that I have the chance, which was created that the Minister in Charge of NUSAF was using NUSAF money illegally. This impression was corrected by the Office of the Prime Minister when they said I had not used this money illegally, but I want to emphasise it here that as I am supervising NUSAF a very sensitive government programme for poverty eradication among our people in the North. Members of Parliament should have full confidence in me. I believe that I am a labourer who is worth my hire and I will not take anything from the project, which I am not supposed to.  

On reconstruction and development of the North, Mr Speaker, as the war comes to an end in the North we are squaring ourselves up for the war now against poverty. The Government of Uganda with its development partners has come to an agreement about how to finalise a reconstruction and development programme for Northern Uganda. This is in the context of PEAP (Poverty Eradication Action Plan) and the whole objective of the plan is to accelerate the pace of development in Northern Uganda so that the North can be brought at parity with the rest of the country. The objectives of the recovery plan are:

1. To enhance security and sustainable management of conflict in the region.

2. To improve physical infrastructure.

3. To increase agricultural production.

4. To accelerate private sector development.

5. To enhance the development of human resources through improved availability and equitable access to basic social services; and

6. To enhance sustainable use and management of the natural resources. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a copy of the recovery and development plan for the North, on the Table. 

Peace to the North:

The Government of Uganda’s position on adopting peaceful means of resolving the conflict in Uganda has a record, which dates as far back as the rebellion against it. Evidence of this is in the many leaders in government who were former rebels at one time or the other. For example, when the LRA made their fateful June 2003 incursion into Teso, most of the top leadership of Arrow boys who were instrumental in successfully resisting LRA were themselves former hardcore rebels. This time, totally reconciled and accepting to government and their communities, they were at the frontline united with the UPDF against the LRA. 

From Teso, we have former UPA in total reconciliation with government. From Acholi there are former rebels who are now leading figures in government. West Nile has industrious leaders within the Movement who were former rebels. As you know, the latest reconciliation with West Nile took place with Maj. Bamwoze, bringing 3,000 fighters out of the bush.

As for the Acholi sub-region, Mr Speaker, there have been efforts made at reconciliation with many different actors. His Excellency the President for example wrote to Dr James Obita of the Lord’s Resistance Army on 22nd November 1997. He said and I quote: “We have never hesitated to negotiate peace with former enemies. As far as your group is concerned, we have never prosecuted any of your members that have been surrendering, not even the ones we have captured. All along we have never needed convincing to engage in dialogue with enemies.” This quote comes from a publication, which reveals peace initiatives worldwide. It is not a government publication, Mr Speaker. Indeed, many times it is critical of the Government of Uganda, but Government of Uganda takes the criticism along its stride and so, I wish to lay this publication on the Table for the House so that members can see what efforts have been made towards reconciliation even with forces like this.

THE SPEAKER: You seem to have come well equipped.

MS AKELLO: Yes, Sir. The peaceful initiatives that we have initiated include the cultural leaders, the Acholi religious leaders, the district peace teams, St Egidio team, the Carter Centre, now we have a functioning Northern Uganda Peace Initiative, you have the special Betty Bigombe Sudan Mission and you have the presidential team.  

Government is aware that peace is not a one-person effort, Mr Speaker. Government has, therefore, appointed the biblical 72-plus peace agents because it realises the need for a harvest of peace but the struggle for peace is tough because there are many wolves out there. Peace unto the North shall however be. 

Honourable colleagues, government’s commitment to Northern Uganda and its people is clear for many interventions pertaining to the North. I would like to urge Parliament and all agents and people who wish peace and prosperity for the North to utilise the humble services of my office. Together, determined, united, with one full accord we shall get peace in Northern Uganda and we shall reap laughter and joy in the North, and I know we shall resolve in this manner. Mr Speaker, honourable colleagues, I wish to thank you for your attention.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Minister.

5.02
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Actually, I am just trying to implement your ruling that we should wait until she has finished the report then we assess whether it is a policy statement or a response to the concerns raised in the Alice Alaso Report. My conclusion and my observation is that it is a wonderful policy statement. I like it, the concerns they lay out, how they are going to tackle the problems in the North, most likely post-war, but essentially it has not touched on the basic issues raised in the report of hon. Alice Alaso. 

Take, for instance, this matter of lack of food. You are the minister in charge of supplying the immediate needs of the people, not what they will need tomorrow by having a data centre in Karamoja, not by having all these other issues, but the immediate needs. I may have given an example relating to disaster, but really what is the response of the ministry? This is a wonderful policy statement, thank you. But what is the response to these humanitarian concerns?

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thought that the Minister for Disaster, who is supposed to do a short-term programme was here and ably put her programme and what she is doing? She also reported that the Prime Minister’s Office has constituted a committee that will work with the statistics that are now available in this report to augment the food that has been given. What the minister is stating is that these people do not only need food to eat now; they need to grow, hence the ploughs. They need medication, hence what you are talking about in Karamoja. 

But even after the war there must be a programme because we should not wait until the war ends to solicit for funding and programmes to start. So, I just wanted a clarification from my colleague, are you mixed up with Disaster Preparedness and Northern Rehabilitation Programme? This is rehabilitation; the other one is eating.  

MR AWORI: Thank you, honourable colleague. I am not the one who mixed up the two reports; it is the two reports that are mixed up. One, this particular response would have been called “post war development plan” not a response to the current crisis. Otherwise, it was not necessary for the honourable colleague to come and give us a policy statement. As a matter of fact, for your own information, we had an interaction this morning under a different committee on this particular issue and the report she gave us this morning and the report she has read this afternoon are synonymous - basically the same. That is why I am saying it is a wonderful report, it covers all the aspects but not for this particular purpose.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr speaker. I do not know what is wrong this afternoon with hon. Aggrey Awori, but I will try to assist him. One of the issues, which have been raised, is absence of government presence in the North and she has concretised the presence of government in the North. She has given, for example, activities under NUSAF, under the Acholi programme and so on and so forth. 

With regard to feeding, as my colleague has pointed out, hon. Aporu gave a lot of details. So, we are supplementing each other to tackle the multi-faceted problems of the North. I thank you.

5.07
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu Count, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just need a brief clarification from my hon. Minister in charge of the North, on NUSAF. Your statistics show that Arua has got Shs 52 million, Apac already Shs 81 million, Kotido Shs 121 million, Lira Shs 208 million. Pader has not benefited even one shilling from NUSAF, and I raised it to you in the seminar while you were there in Pader and Gulu. These other traditional districts hosting the war have just benefited from Shs 28 million. So, it becomes very interesting that the traditional districts, the worst hit districts in Uganda have not benefited a coin from this NUSAF money and you said the money would be given according to absorption capacity. 

If I may quote what you said in my constituency, “The more you finish, the more you will be given” and my people are fed up of filling those forms, which seem so complex and with a lot of gimmicks. So, if there is a way we could help those peasants understand these forms so that they can also get something, please advise us.

Secondly, I hope you are aware that there are a lot of complaints on your senior administrator, Mr Opio Ogal. The ordinary voices are that his sense of favouritism exists and this explains why the areas of Lango are doing better than Acholi area in NUSAF funds. I have to bring you what the ears on the ground pick up so that it is not a surprise when we take other actions. 

Meanwhile, I wonder why and under what facility NUSAF can be used for foreign activities like the seminar, which has just been concluded in Canada two days ago looking for peace? You look for Kony in Canada where ministers got facilitated, none of the Acholi Members of Parliament was there, and none was from Lira. What kind of NUSAF activity was that? It would be very interesting for this House to know otherwise, we are grateful for all your efforts. Thank you.

5.10
MR MICAH LOLEM (Upe County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me begin with what has been laid on the Table, the Karamoja Data Centre. I think that is a book and that book is very dangerous, I want to tell you. Kampala Data Centre is a political thing, you check it; I have got a copy. And that book they call the atlas, it must be taken to the Prime Minister’s Office and not to be distributed to other districts otherwise, that book will cause other things, which I cannot tell here now.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, about the Northern Uganda Youth Rehabilitation Project I want the minister in charge to tell me when the youth project of Karamoja, that is gun dropouts, is taking place off. I know the data of those boys who gave out the guns but I know you will give the money. 

On page 11 she said: “Since this NUSAF programme was inaugurated on the 5th of February, it has made significant progress.” How? How many districts have benefited? How many districts have progressed and how many have not yet? Why?

Go to page 12, “Imagine my shock when it was suggested in this august House that I had been…” – this is the report of the Auditor General to Parliament on the Public Accounts of the Republic of Uganda for the year ended 30 June 2003, page 158; you will read it. “On the 2 June 2003, Shs 15 million…” -(Interruption) - it is not a suggestion.  

Go to project under Northern Uganda, you go to No. 3, which is Karamoja Programme Implementation Unit. This is where I want to thank the Prime Minister’s Office though after a long struggle we pulled ropes plus some people in the Prime Minister’s Office and then we succeeded. So, that programme is going on well. But when you go to N0. 5, Karamoja Data Centre, as I have already told you earlier, the problem of this centre – I hate this politics. When you read the Mustard Seed, Museveni put it clearly, but there are people misusing the Mustard Seed in this Government of Uganda. That is why I said, Karamoja Data Centre is political and not what is stipulated here. If you go and check those books, I have gone there several times, I have tried to correct them, I know every village but now you find them putting the wrong things! So I disqualify that book. Thank you very much.

5.13
MR MICHEAL OCULA (Kilak County, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity. I have got to be very brief. One, I am a bit disappointed at times with the way projects are handled by government. When the Government is coming to this House to borrow money, we are very good friends with government but when the projects are being implemented, there is no friendship. It is something, which is happening similarly with Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme (NURSP), which is actually NURP II that the involvement of the leaders at a national level is very minimal.  

In my constituency, it is only when I storm and go down there that I am confronted by those people in the village that, “You know, we have been filling our form, it has been returned and we do not know why” and so on. So, Mr Speaker, this makes the implementation of the project, which we cherish, very difficult.

Mr Speaker, indeed there is a problem as far as the impact of the project on the ground is concerned, especially in Gulu District with which I am well versed. I was expecting a place like Gulu District where virtually everybody is living in camps, the mobilisation of the community to be much easier like if you go to Kilak County, there are about 24 camps. It is very simple to gather people, explain to them what NUSAF is and what is expected out of them. But the problem we have on the ground is that the staff of NUSAF do not reach the ground, so they leave the villagers gambling. I would like the honourable minister to try to rectify this. It is as an appeal because really the people are easy to mobilise, they are already available in the camps. It should not be a very big problem.

Finally, Mr Speaker, about the issues of NUSAF. I still concur with my elder brother, hon. Awori, that it is only being brought in here to maybe show what government is trying to do but we may still need a little deeper analysis and so on about whatever is taking place. I thank you so much.

5.16
MR JOHN ODIT (Erute County South, Lira): Mr Speaker, prophets used to speak to the Kings, giving them warnings. Last year we had a lot of problems convincing Parliament on what PMA is, and it took us a bit of time only to discover that PMA is just a framework; there is nothing to be shown on the ground. It is not a plan, it is not a programme, it is not a project; it is a framework. 

Now government is addressing it gradually, although we have lost a number of years, and NUSAF has just come. The story around it is also going to be the same as PMA –(Mr Wambi rose_)- let me finish I am only supplementing the concerns of our colleagues. We come from these affected areas. It is very difficult for you to ask villagers to form themselves into groups, poverty-stricken and illiterate villagers to come and pick a form from the sub-county, the forms are drafted in English, and they have to go and design something, which they believe can address their poverty. 

I have had to discourage three or four groups, which requested for the construction of Church buildings and we said, “Look, this is not what government does. That is nothing social; that is spiritual. Nobody will give you money for building a Church.” I have been in that discipline, we were moving all over the world over this matter of the Church, begging for money to construct Churches; it is not there. 

So, this is a very good programme. There is a lot of money being thrown around but let the authorities go and handle these programmes squarely and early enough because when I hear Shs 200 million in Lira, I begin to wonder. What is the balance now left for Lira? How are we going to help so that these people start requesting for the appropriate projects, which can be able to address their poverty? I think, honourable minister, you need to do something - like a Christian - very spiritual and honestly, which can be measured and we shall have impact. Thank you very much.

MR WAMBI: I rise, Mr Speaker, seeking clarification from the Minister of Northern Uganda, hon. Akello. Is it true that a government project like NUSAF could become an analytical tool as proposed by or propounded by hon. Odit? Is it true that this NUSAF is just a framework, a framework being a tool for analysis of a situation, or is it a project?

5.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE, NORTHERN UGANDA RECONSTRUCTION PROGRAMME (MS Grace Akello): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I would like to thank my colleagues for the questions. It goes to show that we all own the problems in Northern Uganda and we are concerned. I thank you very much for that. I am glad we can move together. 

I think the Prime Minister and my senior colleagues have already answered the first question, on why my report did not sound like it was a response to the Alaso report. I think they have provided sufficient information on that; I do not need to repeat it.

Hon. Odonga Otto read only the first part of the funding that has been distributed. If I can call his attention to page 7, he actually quoted for you the figures of the monies, which were given to various projects in the pilot districts of Arua, Apac, Gulu, Katakwi and Kotido. To that extent he is correct because those are the monies, which were disbursed and Pader was not one of the pilot districts, neither was Kitgum although Gulu was. 

But if you can go on to the attachments, those of you who have the documents you will still find it. You will find that under the new arrangements now when we have rolled out NUSAF to all the 18 districts, we have started giving out monies. Arua has just received a total of Shs 193 million and this is to concrete projects. This also serves to answer the question whether NUSAF is a framework and an analytical tool or just a scarecrow. NUSAF is for real, NUSAF has life and blood, NUSAF has the people behind it, NUSAF will put concrete things on the ground and the people themselves have identified the concrete things that are to be put on the ground.  

For example, if you look at Arua, we have transferred Shs 9.0 million to NUSAF Wandi Borehole Project. If you look at Arua again, we have transferred to NUSAF Okazara Primary School Classroom Project Shs 19 million and we expect those people to build classrooms, and so it goes on. We transferred a total of Shs 74 million to Gulu and the projects from Gulu are still coming.  Some of these projects in Gulu are water, teaching widows and foster parents poultry projects, and some of them are building teachers’ houses. We have transferred Shs 20 million to build the teachers’ houses for Kitgum Girls’ School. We have transferred  –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: So, you are really saying if you look at the Annexture you will be able to get an answer?

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. So, it has got concrete blood and life. Pader is not there, I agree, because we are waiting for projects from Pader to come and our teams are compiling the information as it is coming from the people on the ground. (Interjection) But I thought the honourable member had already clarified and I am answering his questions, and he has not always been there to mobilise the people when we want him to help us to mobilise the people for the district. So, Mr Speaker, allow me to continue.

There was another very serious allegation, which has been put to this august House and I would like to refute it that Lango is getting more projects because the Executive Director NUSAF is a Langi. I would like to say that to the best of my knowledge the Executive Director of NUSAF is not a tribalist. I believe that Dr Opio has served this country in various capacities including as Director of the Economic Policy Research Centre in Makerere, and he did an excellent job. He also served as the Executive Director of IFRI International. (Interruption). It is not proper to treat Dr Opio as a tribalist. The only reason –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable member, I would suggest that this be dealt with later.

MR LOLEM: It is very important, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay.

MR LOLEM: This is what I wanted to say, Mr Speaker. I wanted to inform the minister that as much as you give the executive director credit, there is confusion in Nakapiripirit. Dr Opio went to Nakapiripirit and confused the district.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, proceed please.

MS AKELLO: Thank you Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. Hon. Lolem wanted to know how many people benefited from NUSAF. I would like to refer him to the appendix attached to my document. My advice to hon. Lolem is this. I know there are many questions, which are being raised on NUSAF because it is a new intervention. What you should do is to go and mobilize our people so that they can benefit from the projects. We have Shs 3 billion for Nakapiripirit District, which has not been used at all but you are busy misinterpreting all kinds of things. So, go and mobilize the people and take advantage of the money. 

I thank hon. Ocula for his concern that the leadership at national level is not being involved in NUSAF. I want to refute that allegation because on many occasions we have carried out workshops, we have invited leaders to our meetings in the Prime Ministers Office, we have been to many areas and I have requested MPs to accompany me on mobilization tours. Some of the MPs from Gulu have accompanied me and others have not. In fact all the MPs from Kitgum have done so. Even my dear son, hon. Otto, has come and accompanied me on mobilization tours but I have never seen hon. Ocula on mobilization. So, I cannot imagine how we could have neglected him. 

I would like to say that since you have expressed interest, you are invited to a meeting on the 27th of this month. I will be very happy to go with you to your constituency.

I also want to refute that Dr Odongtara who is a NUSAF district technical officer, is not reaching Gulu. As far as I know Dr Odongtara has actually come up with programmes of mobilization. He has traveled unescorted in some instances because he is committed to those same camps and mobilized the population to write projects. So, our people on the ground are actually working.  

As for hon. Odit, I have told him that there is no framework. What you see is as concrete as hon. Odit and hon. Akello standing here in front of you and we are going to continue to show you that we are made of life, blood and physical clay.  

You also wondered how these illiterate people from the village could be expected to design projects? I want to answer this in this manner. There was a time, a long time ago, when the thinking was that there was a select group of people who knew what was good for everybody. Now this thinking is what developed for us all those development paradigms that have failed and our people are still in poverty. The thinking now is that the people know what they want, power belongs to the people, people know what they want to better their lives, people are the ones who should run their own situations and in this country we actually embedded that in our decentralization law. Therefore, we will go by that.  

I have also answered hon. Kibaale’s point very well. I want to thank honourable colleagues for their questions.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We have received the responses from the ministers, hon. Alaso do you have some closing remarks? If you do, what I am proposing is this; you will make your closing remarks tomorrow because I will be putting the question then. So, you prepare your closing remarks, if any, for tomorrow.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to at least hand over the documents that I have been moving up and down with and then I will make the closing remarks tomorrow. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the Select Committee on the Humanitarian Situation in Lango, Teso and Acholi sub-region. These include the guiding principles on internal displacement, pursuing peace in Northern Uganda, lessons from peace initiatives commissioned by civil society organizations for peace in Northern Uganda, the Amnesty Commission Report 2000/2003, the net economic cost of the conflict in Acholi sub-region of Uganda commissioned by civil society organizations for peace in Northern Uganda, statements from various ministries and a report on the Speaker’s visit to Kitgum and Lira. 

They also include papers presented during the consultation with humanitarian agencies, committee communications and reports from the affected districts. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay them on the Table.

LT COL KATIRIMA: Mr Speaker, the chairperson and her committee made a very comprehensive report, which has been debated at length and government had time to make comprehensive responses on some of the issues and recommendations they raised in addition to what the honourable chairperson has just tabled. I would like to be guided on how we shall proceed on adopting the report. Will it be that report, hence some of the responses that have been accepted and other responses, which have remained outstanding so that we focus on those that remain outstanding for final resolution? Or, is it possible for the committee to go back and look at these reports to be able to come up with the final position about their findings? Are we going to adopt the Government responses and also the committees, representations and whatever we have debated? What is the way forward, Sir?

THE SPEAKER: Well, taking into account the purpose of this exercise, it is not just a matter of tag of war between a committee of Parliament and the Executive. We are trying to solve a problem, a problem that is facing us. Whatever information we have received, be it from the committee or from individual members’ contributions or responses, we should use it, we as a government. When we talk about the Government, we are part of it. So, we shall study this thing and say, “What is the way forward, how do we assist?” Rather than taking government’s position, which is executive, or Parliament’s position or the committee’s decisions. I think the information we have got is ours. Let us use it to see how we can solve this problem.  

As I have said, I intend to put the question to the question on adopting the report for purposes of studying it, tomorrow. I am not putting it today but I want to make a small adjustment to our Order Paper. The hon. Minister for Constitutional Affairs should have been involved. I understand she has a paper to lay on the Table. Let us receive it and see how to proceed.

5.36
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to formally present to Parliament the proposed roadmap to 2006 to government. The copies of the speech, with your permission, can be distributed.

On 1 July 2004, I addressed the country through a press briefing with journalists from the media houses, on the political roadmap leading to the new constitutional dispensation in 2006. Today, I would like to present the said political roadmap to Parliament. 

As honourable members will note from the document attached to this statement, the programme of activities, which the Executive and Parliament is required to implement between now and March 2006 when general elections –(Interruption)

MR OCULA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. As the honourable minister has said, the copies of the statement are not ready and as we know also, such a statement may require some bit of debate. Is it really very urgent that the roadmap must be presented today? Why can’t we have the copies, then tomorrow it is presented? Is it very urgent? Is there something we shall lose if it is not presented today? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think as it is, this is a proposed roadmap from the Executive to Parliament. I imagine when she has finished the statement she will lay the paper on the Table then we shall take up our machinery to examine it. We are not going to debate it because we cannot do that now. We have committees, which will go and examine it and then later come and report to us. It is not final. 

I have mentioned it before. The Executive’s roadmap may not be final because the Executive is the one that worked on this roadmap, and Parliament is a stakeholder. We shall have to study it and maybe adjust it. So, definitely this is not going to be final, but let the Executive present it, then we shall study it and make a compromise because as you remember before prorogation we also presented ours. So, we shall have to compare and then work out the roadmap.

MR OCULA: Mr Speaker, then why can she not just lay it on the Table and then we proceed tomorrow with the reading and other things when it is properly on the Order Paper?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, what do you say?

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I have to inform my colleague. I said the copies are with the Clerk and that is the normal way of doing things. And I asked for the permission of the Speaker that the copies be distributed.  

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, today I would like to present –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, I think what the honourable member who has just left the Floor is saying is correct because factually she cannot present something to the House, which we do not have. That is the problem. Let her lay it on the Table. 

MRS MUKWAYA: The Clerk has my statement –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: But we do not have it.

MRS MUKWAYA: I can sit down and wait for circulation of the papers. Okay, Mr Speaker, if colleagues do not want me to talk about my roadmap, let met lay it on the Table and then the Speaker will do the needful.

THE SPEAKER: It is on Table, let the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs take it up, study it and then make a report to us. Meanwhile, if the copies are there, let them be distributed.

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, can I make some corrections because the papers that are being circulated do not have the corrections? On page 4 –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Give them some time.

MRS MUKWAYA: Colleagues, on page 3, item 7, the last line should read, “Rather than resort to either a referendum or Parliament and the District Councils…” - that is a constitutional provision. 

In Item 8, I was writing hoping that the Business Committee would have –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: That is page 3?

MRS MUKWAYA: Page 3. Then on page 4, item 8, after “September 2004”, that sentence should read, “It will be sent to the Standing Committee as decided by the Speaker.”  

Then on page 5 –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think the position is, your concern is that you bring it here and we decide what we want to do with the Bill.

MRS MUKWAYA: Okay, to the relevant committee, okay. Then on No. 10 on page 5, the third line from the bottom should be, “which requires a referendum and ratification by the districts”. In between “a referendum” and “for”, add “and ratification by the districts”. That is item No. 10, third line from the bottom where it is said, “which require a referendum for amendment” add “and ratification by the districts”. 

In item 11, after “a referendum” add “ratification by the districts to approve the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, in February 2005.” Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. So, honourable members, go and study this matter and then also attend the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to discuss it so that eventually we get a report and we are able to discuss it. I think the minister will go to the committee to explain and discuss with them.  

Honourable members, I think what we have done today is enough. So, we have come to the end of today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.46 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 7 July 2003 at 2.00 p.m.)

