Wednesday 7th July 1999

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House

PRAYERS

The Speaker (Mr. Francis Ayume) in the Chair

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 1998/99.

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr. Opio)  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I beg to move the following Motion that:  Whereas Clause (2) of Article 156 of the Constitution allows that "If in respect of any Financial Year it is found_  
(a) that the amount appropriated for any purpose under the Appropriation Act is insufficient or that a need has arisen for expenditure for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that Act; or 

(b) that any money has been expended for any purpose in excess of the amount appropriated for that purpose or for a purpose for which amount has been appropriated by that Act,  a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be read before Parliament and in the case of excess expenditure, within four mounts after the money spent";  

Now, therefore, be it resolved that Parliament approves Supplementary Schedule 3 of 1996/97 Financial Year and of 1998/99 Financial Year attached to this resolution.  I beg to move, Mr. Speaker.

(Motion seconded.)

MR. OPIO: Mr. Speaker, before I comment on the supplementaries, I wish to draw your attention, Mr. Speaker and that of the hon. Members that there were a few typing errors in the copies circulated earlier to Members.  These have been corrected and the corrections have been circulated on a one sheet of paper.  I hope Members have got them now.  Allow me, Mr. Speaker, to make a few clarifications regarding the supplementary schedule for the Members to note.  

Recurrent: 
Under the Recurrent Budget, a total of Shs.12.34 billion is regarded as technical supplementary in the sense that they are allocations within the Budget estimates.  Mr. Speaker, what we did is to get the total of the details under technical supplementaries and when we sum them, they add up to this figure of 12.34 billion.  These are funds which have been supplemented from one vote to the other e.g. in the case of contingency funds like the Poverty Alleviation Fund (PAF), arrears and wages and funds which have been moved from one side of the Budget, i.e. from Development  to Recurrent.  We call these technical supplementary, Mr. Speaker. These technical supplementaries account for about 17 per cent of the total supplementaries.  

You will also note that the government approved a substantial level of supplementaries for Defence of over Shs.50 billion in view of the national emergency regarding security.  This supplementary accounts for 70 per cent of the total supplementary under Recurrent.  It should also be noted that government spent Shs.4.6 billion to compensate donor supported projects for funds lost under International Credit Bank closure.

Development: 
Mr. Speaker, under development budget, a total of about 17 billion is technical supplementary with Shs.10.5 billion in taxes.  These technical supplementaries represent 45 percent of the total supplementaries for development.  In effect, the real additional resource base supplementaries for the period up to the end of March 1999 excluding national emergency funds accounts so far for 2.2 per cent of the budget for 1998/99.  i.e. if we remove the emergency funds for security, our supplementaries only add up to 2.2 per cent over and above the budgeted estimates.  However, if you include the national emergency for defence, these account for 4.9 percent of the approved budget. Mr. Speaker, I request the House to pass this supplementary schedule.

We also have schedule 3 which is the supplementary for 96/97 Financial Year and we are presenting it for the approval of the House to regularise expenditure for funds which were released at the end of 1996/97 but the figures were not captured in the two supplementary schedules which were approved by this House.  Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Finance was drawn to this anomaly by the Auditor General. So, it is important that despite the fact that it was for 1997, constitutionally we are required to bring this for approval of the House.

Expenditures in Schedule 3 relate to transitional cases. i.e. Parliament to facilitate the Parliamentary Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs' work and; two, payment of salaries of delegated staff in the Districts of Mbale, Tororo, Jinja and Kumi.  I am requesting the House, Mr. Speaker, to regularise these expenditures.  Mr. Speaker, with these comments I request the House to approve the supplementaries as stated.

THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr. Abura Kene):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Let me give some comments from the Committee on the Supplementary  Appropriation Bill, 1998/99. 

One of the reasons for the divergence between the strategic objectives and actual spending patterns has been the increasing recourse in the supplementaries within the Ministry of Finance, which are financial in the main, by technical transfer cut-back releases to other Ministries. 

Last year the Minister informed this House that he will not spend beyond 3 per cent of the approved budget but this year, he overshot by about 9 per cent over and above what was approved.  Mr. Speaker, the following is the summary of the supplementary expenditure: 

The Recurrent budget on the Appropriation Bill for 1998 is Shs.8,806,148,276 billion.  On the Development Expenditure, it is Shs.799,548,446 billion.  The Supplementary being requested all spent is Shs.71,404,894 billion. On the Development Expenditure, it is Shs.37,560,329 billion. The total, therefore, Mr. Speaker, for Recurrent is Shs.877,553,170 billion.  On the Development Expenditure, the total is Shs.8,337,759,855.  The Supplementary, therefore, Mr. Speaker, for Recurrent is 8.1 per cent of the total expenditure and for Development is about 4.5 per cent.

Of particular concern were the following ministries: In Ministry of Defence, there was a supplementary expenditure of about 50 billion.  The Minister clarified that this account is classified.  The committee wanted to know whether all this is the classified procurement and whether they could be verified. As he said, they are classified. 

Ministry of Finance: The supplementaries are many due to technical transfer, Mr. Speaker, and  Uganda Shilling 4.8 billion was spent as additional funds to meet the cost of reimbursement for project account balances withheld in ICB bank. 

Other ministries with large supplementaries are shown below in addition to the above: Ministry of Defence the details is 50,114,402 billion;  Finance and Economic Development is 4,833,199 billion, Mr. Speaker.  Office of the President - 2,317,921 billion.  Parliament - 3,262,880 billion. The total of these ministries narrated here is 60,558,402 billion, Mr. Speaker. The two ministries, i.e. Defence and Finance account for about 50.3 per cent of the total supplementaries, Mr. Speaker. 

The divergence in districts: If you look at the table, Mr. Speaker, there is some over-spending in the districts but we were informed that there was some money set aside by Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development waiting distribution by line ministries.  

Mr. Speaker, in order to  ensure that expenditure is in line with the strategic objectives, supplementaries need to be minimized.  It may be difficult to justify these large supplementaries when all the country's needs have not been considered.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

MR. OKUMU RINGA (Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand to support the Motion grudgingly because certain basic principles upon which we agreed last year were not taken into consideration by the Minister responsible for Finance.

When you look at the supplementary estimates as given in schedule One and you look at the explanation given by the minister responsible, terming it "technical supplementary", it leaves a lot of explanation to be given by the Minister. Here, technical supplementary, if I may say, within a ministry would be re-allocation of funds within the ministry from vote 1 to a given vote within that ministry but if the technical supplementary the minister refers to means removing or re-allocating money approved from one ministry to another ministry, then there should be a better explanation because if you look, Mr. Speaker, at schedule 1 - let me give one example, and take a ministry at random.  

Let us take Makerere university for that matter;  Vote 024 - 26,075,333.  Here, it is reflected that there was zero supplementary.  Now supposing a release to this institution was only 23 billion, it would mean the remaining 3 billion could been re-allocated and given to another institution and that would mean, maybe in the words of the minister, the technical supplementary he talked about.  Now supposing this applies across many, many institutions and ministries, why do we allow the presentation to remain the way it is, where you have approved estimates and yet the release  is less than what is approved and is re-allocated to support the overall budgetary estimates of other ministries or institutions within the budgetary framework?  

In my view, Mr. Speaker,  the explanation given by the minister would best suit a situation where we are talking of a balance budget - that we are operating within a balance budget in a sense that our envelope is so much, allocated to so many ministries but at the time of disbursement, some ministries or institutions got less allocations so the balances were re-allocated within the budgetary frame-work. That would suffice as a technical supplementary.  So I would like to request the Minister later on to explain this.

My last point on this issue, Mr. Speaker, was that last financial year when we were discussing supplementary expenditure, I made a patent point on this matter, requesting the minister to start giving us a third column.  I think the record is there in the Hansard. The Minister yielded to this request that there will be a third column showing actual releases.  In other words, actual releases to institutions so that this would give a better explanation of how we are managing our budget. 

If what the Minister explained is true that there were technical supplementaries, and that the actual release of funds was under 3 percent, then we would be operating within the constitutional requirements and we would applaud him for that  but for us to applaud him, he must be able to present the statistical information the way it should be, so that it is well explained and understood by all.

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, I have also noted with concern that some districts get unnecessarily large amounts of supplementaries while others do not.  Maybe they have bigger muscles to push, I do not know. One such district is Nebbi District which hardly gets any supplementary, even when it is requested.  Maybe we need to know the method used so that we are able to meet some of our requirements.  With these brief remarks, Mr. Speaker, I would like to support the supplementary expenditure, but request the Minister to give timely explanations to the issues he is raising so that he is properly supported not only today, but also in he future.  I thank you.

MR. AGGREY AWORI (Samia Bugwe North, Busia): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity once again to denounce this Motion, notwithstanding the fact that it was moved by my Brother.  

I denounce this Motion for two specific reasons:  One; once again the executive branch of the State has flouted its own promise to this House that it will not exceed a certain percentage - three per cent - in terms of expenditure.  Two, Mr. Speaker, they have deliberately exceeded the ceiling for an expenditure which is more or less illegal.  Mr. Speaker, I call it illegal because most of the money was spent outside this country without the approval of this House, and I am referring specifically to the Defence expenditure.  

I am referring to the Democratic Republic of Congo which was invaded by our troops without reference to the constitutional provisions of our country.  Mr. Speaker, we have a specific Article in the Constitution - 210, sub-section (d) which demands that before the troops are deployed outside this country, there shall be a law in place.  Mr. Speaker, I call this an invasion because it was not authorised by this House.  

To spend 50 million dollars under technical expenditure - that is equipment - and then on top of that, Mr. Speaker, the Ministry says this is classified beyond the Auditor General's eyes?  Mr. Speaker, I raised in this House that we bought equipment which was not combat-worthy and once again, I rise to say we have again purchased equipment which is dubious in terms of performance.  

I am referring to the MIG-21, but staged up that we have purchased for the Resistance Air Force.  Mr. Speaker, at an appropriate time, I will require the Minister responsible for Defence to give us the details on this particular equipment because we have information to the effect that this equipment is more than three years old and cannot perform in the areas where we have what we call "subversive activities".

If this equipment has been acquired for the purpose of reinforcing our forces outside the country to acquire other people's territory, then I would also call upon them to look at technical advice from other people because the people who are challenging have got better equipment which can nullify the effectiveness of this equipment.  That is why, Mr. Speaker, I am saying the 50 million dollars we have spent on the MIG-21s and 23s is ill-spent.  This money could have been spent on hospitals, especially in Bundibugyo area and Busia for that matter, which does not have a district hospital and yet we are pretending that we are defending Bundibugyo, Kasese and other areas.

I would like once again to re-emphasize that when it comes to supplementary expenditure, really we should bear special attention or special reference to our internal needs.  This question of militarising our foreign policy is costing us unnecessary amounts of money which we can ill-afford, Mr. Speaker.  

DR. RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr. Speaker, thank you very much and I want to thank hon. Awori for giving way. First, it is very well known, Mr. Speaker, that Uganda is in the DRC primarily because the security interest of Uganda have been persistently and arrogantly abused by some of our neighbours, especially Sudan and Sudan surrogates who my Friend Awori knows very well.  It is also known, Mr. Speaker, that for quite some time, we combated some of these Forces but whenever they were punished, they would just go back to their sanctuary in the DRC.  It, therefore, became necessary to go and look for them and indeed destroy their bases.  It is just a question of time that these Forces are indeed going to be cleared.

Let me also add, Mr. Speaker, that the policy of Uganda in terms of foreign relations has been and continues to be "good neighbourliness and regional co-operation"  but when some neighbours become hostile, Uganda has no choice but to resort to reinforcing itself to punish these neighbours, and indeed punish their surrogates.  

So, Mr. Speaker, hon. Awori should be fair to Uganda's foreign policy and should not use this forum and this House to announce new acquisitions that Uganda may have acquired.  He has full access to the Minister of State for Defence and other Senior Government Officials, he can always go to them and appeal to them or give them information instead of always and persistently using this forum to announce what Uganda may have acquired.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. AWORI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I especially thank the hon. Minister who has just said something that I would like to comment on. Mr. Speaker, the hon. Minister who has just resumed his seat says I persistently use this House to announce Defence acquisitions.  This is the only forum I have!  I am not a Member of the caucus, I do not belong there.  Who else can I talk to?  If it is the Minister of Defence, or Minister for Presidential Affairs, they are here. I would like witnesses, my Colleagues here to tell him that they are not spending our money properly.  

Definitely, Mr. Speaker, the hon. Minister is misleading this House by telling us that the recent acquisition will be used to flush out the so-called dissidents who have sanctuary beyond our borders.  Mr. Speaker, to be more specific, ADF can definitely not move from Kisangani to Bundibugyo to cause havoc.  We are stationed in Bundibugyo; our Chief of Staff now lives outside the Country for the sake of Bundibugyo which he does not guard at all! 

At an appropriate stage, I am going to ask the Line Minister for Defence to tell us how many lives we have lost since we invaded DRC.  How many lives did we lose the other day in Goma when we had a misunderstanding with our compatriots from Kigali?  How much equipment was returned the other day from Kigali allegedly for the defence of Bundibugyo?  Was it in working condition, and where are they by the way?  Did we get them back or did we get the scrap back? - (Interruptions)

MR. BASOGA NSADHU: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am rising on a point of clarification to ask hon. Awori, with due respect to our Rules of Procedure, to clarify to me why he is not using the time that we have for questions to raise some of the issues he is raising now so that he saves us the trouble of deviating from debating the matter on the Table?  Mr. Speaker, he is free to put any question to any Member of the Executive and I know that we have allotted time to answer those questions.  Would he clarify to me, Mr. Speaker.  

MR. AWORI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to reply my dear hon. Brother, the Minister for Information that I am raising the issue of expenditure.  We have overspent by more than six per cent and I am saying, among other things, that this money was not properly used.  The purpose for which it was spent has not been designated, has not been outlined in the estimates.  I am only denouncing the Motion, as I said, notwithstanding the fact that it was moved by my Brother.  I am simply saying, this Motion actually should not be accepted because 50 million dollars has been misspent; misused.  Now, why do I have to wait until next week or next year to ask how you misspent 50 million dollars?  

The equipment you are talking about should not have cost more than ten million dollars.  At an appropriate stage, if you wish Mr. Minister, I will tell you that one time in this House and elsewhere in State House, we were promised to be given a report on how money was misused in the so-called "classified expenditure".  To date, we do not have that Report.  Today we have been given a supplementary budget for 50 million dollars.  Where is this money?  Was it properly spent?  

I know sometimes the executive branch of the State would like to use the Legislature as a rubber stamp but on this occasion, we are telling you, please stick to the ceiling.  You and I agreed last year that do not exceed three per cent of the Budget.  You have come to us, you have exceeded it by six per cent over and above what we authorised you. And how did you overspend?  You misused it.  How did you misuse it?  You are spending it outside this country when we have got dire needs in this country for such money!  I have mentioned Bundibugyo; half of the population of Bundibugyo is sleeping outside their homes.  When did you move troops there?  Why have you not moved troops there to guard them?  
Mr. Speaker, this kind of misuse of public money cannot be condoned and I am not going to wait for another occasion to condemn it.  I condemn it and I denounce this Motion, Mr. Speaker.  

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (Ibanda North, Mbarara): Mr. Speaker, I would wish, first of all, to be assured by the Minister whether he has taken care of the funds required by Parliament which totals 780 million shillings, to meet the arrears for June, so that it is over and above the 1999-2000 budget because there are supplementary figures which are not reflected here for Parliament and we have privately talked to him but he has not been very clear. We would want his assurance that this 783 million Uganda shillings will be over and above the Recurrent Budget for the Financial Year 1999 - 2000, and that it will not eat into our budget.  I would want that assurance from the hon. Minister.

Then; two is that in the submission of this supplementary figures, I have hurriedly gone through and I have seen that on Programme 014 - Ministry of Health, in the explanatory notes column  they say: "Additional funds required for the monitoring of the Poverty Eradication Programmes to the tune of 362".  Then down on Audit,  there is 440 million - "Additional funds required for the monitoring of the Poverty Eradication Programmes".  Under Local Government, there is - "Additional funds sought for monitoring of the Poverty Eradication Programme".  Under the Inspectorate of Government, there is 278.4 million -  "Additional funds required for monitoring of the Poverty Eradication Areas."  
Mr. Speaker, I would want the hon. Minister of Finance to clarify - first of all, somewhere they talk of the eradication of poverty programmes - whether monitoring of the poverty eradication policies are under the Inspectorate of Government, Audit, Local Government or Health  so that we can go along and see whether to support the Motion moved by the hon. Minister or not because I am really confused by these figures.  

Under Development Budget which he calls "Capital Expenditure", I have seen Ministry of Agriculture - 586.5 million; "funds sought to cover the cost of the implementation of the project transferred from Head 143, NARO."  I do not know what that means.  Does that include the many NISSAN Patrols written on UA, which are very dominant on Kampala streets or what?  - and that is in this financial year which ended just three days ago.  Thank you.

MR. RWAKOOJO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  In supporting the motion, I just wanted to seek a few clarifications.  

Ordinarily, to have a supplementary would either be because you have had an unexpected emergency and you have to spend or it would be because you under-budgeted.  You could also under-budget intentionally.  What I wanted to know was, what percentage of these supplementaries came as a result of deliberate under-budgeting and not emergency?  

Number two, the Minister referred to technical supplementaries.  I know for a fact that every time the Ministries are budgeting, they go through a laborious exercise: They present their figures to the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Finance sends the figures back to the Ministries and this information is traded back and forth and in most cases, the budget is trimmed.  What I am trying to find out in this case is where the affected Ministries could have got this money to transfer to other Ministries. Basically what happens, where they refer to a technical supplementary, it means that they must have taken some money, for instance from Gender and given it to Ministry of Finance.  Now, that means the Ministry of Gender must have remained with so much fat after the budget that needed to be trimmed and added to the lean meat of the Ministry of Finance.  But since they had been trimming over and over again, how could they have left this huge chunk of fat in whatever Ministries that were affected?  

The third clarification that I am seeking is on the 4.8 billion that was spent to pay for some projects that lost money in ICB.  I am kind of perturbed here because when Bank of Uganda closed the bank, all the customers were told that they would not withdraw their money.  Later on, I think the maximum amount of money that was allowed was three million shillings.  The rest of the money is waiting to be paid afterwards, I think, as the government has decided.  So, when you spend the 4.8 billion to pay the projects, what does that mean?  It means that some customers in ICB got their money while the rest of us did not get our money!  This is my understanding unless there is some other explanation.  

If my money is still held up in ICB because I unfortunately had an account there or someone had an account there, why would the project benefit from government and why would the taxpayer pay for that decision that was made by some manager, by somebody who took a decision to bank in that bank?  If this money is not recovered or even it is recovered, is the taxpayer going to get an interest on this money?  Otherwise, the rest of us should have been paid!  

I did not have an account in ICB but whoever had an account in ICB should have been paid when the projects were being paid because our needs are as great, or even greater than the projects.  Some of these were decisions that were taken by managers for various reasons and I do not see why I, as a taxpayer, have to pay for a bad decision that was made by some manager sitting in some office running some projects and by the way, which projects are those? We need to know.

Lastly, hon. Aggrey Awori made a statement and I wanted it clarified by the Minister because it would be an error if it goes like that.  Hon. Aggrey Awori said the 50 billion that Ministry of Defence spent was spent on MIG-21 and MIG-23s.  In my understanding, an expenditure of that magnitude is a capital expenditure but the 50 billion that I am seeing here is in the recurrent expenditure.  So, it could not have been on MIG-21s,  unless this was badly classified and needs to go to the capital expenditure.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to express my concern on the issue of accountability of the 50 billion shillings by the Ministry of Defence.  Mr. Speaker, when I asked the Minister responsible to clarify this expenditure, the reply of the Minister was that it was classified and therefore the committee was incapacitated and in their report, the committee wanted to know how and who audits classified procurement and whether they can be verified.  

I think this is a very damaging report by the committee. It may escape our attention now, but for the committee to come out to a House of Parliament and say that the committee wanted to know from the Minister who audits classified procurement and whether they were verified; and the Minister's answer is that they are classified and the committee has no answer, is a matter of extreme concern, and I think it should not be left at that.  Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I wish to use this occasion to ask the responsible Minister to inform this House and in fact educate me in particular; what is this thing called "classified expenditure", and who decided on what is classified?  

AN HON. MEMBER: Thank you, hon. Atubo, for giving way.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to get clarification on this issue of classified accounts because I remember some time back, in our Committee of Presidential and Foreign Affairs, we agreed with the Minister in charge of Security that we were to form a sub-committee of Parliament which was to look into these classified accounts because we believe, as Parliamentarians who are representing the people, that we have to have a way of examining these accounts.  I am just seeking clarification from the responsible Minister, and since the Minister in charge of the Presidency is here, what happened to that scheme?  Because; really I need to know what is happening to these classified accounts and we had agreed to have a sub-committee.

MR. TOSKIN:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wanted the Member on the Floor to just clarify to this House because I quite remember  that he was also one time a Minister of State for Defence. Could you also clarify to us how it was being done at the time when you were the Minister of Defence?  Thank you.

MR. ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, at our time, we did not use to do things like this - (Laughter) -  we were very transparent. We were not outside Uganda at that time and we used to know what was classified and how it was to be verified and so on.  But my concern is this, and I think hon. Toskin will agree with me, that I do appreciate that in every country, there is something which should be held confidential.  There is no doubt about that and I think at my level as a leader, I do know that there are certain things which you just cannot publish in the papers. 

There are certain things which are definitely classified - (Interjections). Yes! I am moving forward, and in fact that is exactly the point which my Brother, hon. Onyango Kakoba was saying that you do not just come with a blanket answer before a committee and say this is classified, there is no answer to it! That is what I am questioning.  Are we being told that everything is classified, or a special committee of Parliament is not entitled to know whether this is really spent on what is called classified?  I think this is where we are moving a step forward and I do remember that it was reported to this House that for purposes of a committee of Intelligence in the President's Office, there should be that small group holding their meeting in camera. You do not have to come with details of what is told to you.  You just have to come and say that the committee was satisfied that what is called classified was properly spent. But when the committee comes up and says, "we asked the Minister for verification and the Minister just said this is classified" is no answer.

MR. DOMBO: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker, and hon. Omara Atubo for giving way. Mr. Speaker, this issue of classified information makes us get more concerned, especially considering what the President was quoted to have said in the Press today. Mr. Speaker, in one of the newspapers, the President was quoted to have said he has been lied to quite often about the ADF position in Bundibugyo.  This is a strong statement from a Commander-in-Chief and Minister of Defence, especially considering that the position and the strength of ADF affects the financial position and the budget and supplementary expenditure which we are considering now.  I will think it appropriate in future that a committee of this House specifically confirms what exactly is classified, given also that at one time, His Excellency when addressing Parliament said that at one time, he had to personally intervene to make a saving of 400 million per month; money which was being squandered in the war ravaged areas of northern Uganda.  Thank you very much.

MR. ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, you can see that the issue of classified accounts is of great concern to this House.  I only wish to conclude my remarks on this issue of classified accounts that we are concerned because it is a potential area of financial abuse, of financial corruption and I think time has come for us to devise a method, while we do not wish for that confidential information to be disclosed, for some form of verification which still protects the confidentiality of the matter.  

Mr. Speaker, let me just say that this thing which we call "classified", I am sure that the money is not in cash where somebody is going to pick it from Bank of Uganda, whether in Uganda shillings or in dollars.  This money is processed in a Ministry by a clerk, it is approved by somebody in the Ministry of Finance.  The cheque is written by somebody in the computer room and then when it comes to us hon. Members in Parliament, when even clerks in government know this, you call it "classified", I think this is ridiculous!  

So, I would like  the Minister to really be very clear to us today. What is "classified"; who decides what is classified? Is there a Standing Order somewhere in government which says the following expenditures are classified? And once it is classified, I want to know under which law in this country classified expenditure is not supposed to be audited or verified.  

Mr. Speaker, this is important because whether classified or not, every expenditure in this country must be approved by this Parliament. And when it comes to supplementary expenditure, Mr. Speaker, we have got to be extra careful because two important activities are taking place: In the first place, for purposes of supplementary expenditure, it is being spent without prior approval of this House and, therefore, it is again an area of abuse.  It is an area which is liable to human weakness.  Somebody can come up and abuse supplementary expenditure, especially when it is called "classified".

MR. AGGREY AWORI: Thank you hon. Atubo for giving way. I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that this so-called "classified expenditure" to most of us is actually public knowledge, especially when it comes to capital equipment, especially assets of Defence.  If it is a question of talking about the cost of a tank, a Mig or a particular type of a gun, all you have to do is to go to any news magazine store in London or New York and look for a magazine called The Defence Weekly.  All these things are clearly labelled: A tank 252/272 costs 2 million dollars.  It is public knowledge!  It is just us Ugandans who some people in the Executive branch would like to blindfold to think it is classified.  

As for as I am concerned, "classified expenditure" in security would be recurrent; the money you use to pay off spies and other things.  That one can be classified but for equipment, it is public knowledge. You just buy a magazine and it will tell you.  If you surfed the Internet in our library here, within half an hour, you can get the cost of all these things.  It is only classified for the purpose of taking away our money for certain private ends.

MR. ATUBO: Secondly, Mr. Speaker, as I was ending, the issue of supplementary is of extra importance to us because it is an expenditure over and above what has been approved. Therefore, this thing should not come to this House and we ratify it and we are seen to rubber stamp it.  I mean, that should not be the case!  We should get an answer to every issue, especially where there is doubt.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. PINTO (Kakuuto County, Rakai):  I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Of course, I find myself in a situation where there is no alternative but to go along with this Motion because the money has already been spent, and we will continue with this kind of situation, except that the remarks that we make should be taken very seriously.  

My Colleagues who have spoken earlier understand, and have expressed themselves as to how difficult it is to operate a Budget or to control it.  So, we will expect in any Budget to have some overruns. And for that reason, Parliament gave guidance and allowed up to three per cent. That is being reasonable but now, nine per cent is spent in excess! something went wrong, and of course, the items indicate accordingly!  But it is important that the Minister takes caution that we are not happy with the overrun of about three per cent and, therefore, it is important for us to remind him and continue clamouring that we shall expect  our expenditure to be within the limits, that is our rightful duty.  

Mr. Speaker, let me go to some of the items starting with Vote 001  Programme 0010: The Department of Information where we are asking for Shs.181 million as supplementary funds sought to utilise revenue generated from Star Radio.  I do not understand!  We are giving money to that department to utilise revenue operated from Star Radio?  Could the Ministry try to clarify this please?  Earlier on, hon. Awori was making a point, I could see hon. Basoga Nsadhu who is now an expert in dramatising - even when he rose to try to reply, he tried to dramatise, but these are serious matters, it is no obangaina! -(Interruption)

MR. BASOGA NSADHU:  Thank you very much my friend for giving way.  I must say that we are trying to restructure Radio Uganda and Uganda Television with a view to forming a Uganda Broadcasting Agency, and all Members here know that Radio Uganda and Uganda Television are operating obsolete equipment belonging to the first generation of transmission, and studio equipment that was first manufactured when transmission started.  The pieces we have there are good for the museum.  This money which you are seeing here enabled us to put in place a new station called the Star Radio 'e munyeenye y'eggwanga'.  That is the one, and it is a precursor to the Uganda Broadcasting Agency.  So it runs on an autonomous basis.  

The appropriation-in-aid that is indicated  here, was to enable that Star Radio charge for announcements and other commercials that come to it, and then we put the money to use to buy more studio equipment and to pay some allowances to artists. As you know, with the liberalised media now, other private stations pay better than the Shs.20,000 proposed to pay to our people through the Public Service. That is why many of them have left and they are in all those stations.  That is the money which is being talked about here.  I thank you.  

MR. PINTO:  Mr. Speaker, I understand what the hon. Minister is trying to explain; he is generating revenue as a government department. I would like to hear from the Ministry of Finance what arrangements there are for that revenue to come to the Ministry of Finance first and be given to them to spend because,  you know, they are generating revenue through commercials and whatever.  I think it would be interesting for us to hear.  Let me go to the other item which hon. Rwakoojo touched on  -(Interruption).

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you hon. Pinto for giving way.  Actually, the fact that this money is shown in the books here, the fact that it is being asked for as a supplementary in itself means that it came to the Ministry of Finance, however, it did not come physically to Finance. They applied for it to be used at source which is appropriation in aid and in the books of accounts, it looks like it came but it was not physically moved to Finance, it was used at source. That is why it is indicated as appropriation in aid and, therefore, that is why it is a supplementary.

MR. PINTO:  Thank you, hon. Manzi. Then there is this matter of the Shs.4.6 billion on Vote 008 - "Additional funds for the project account in the ICB".  Mr. Speaker, the story of ICB has not been fully told;  something went wrong.  ICB, if I understand correctly, was authorised to operate as a bank irregularly on a certain day, not a working day of the week. People utilised for personal use funds from ICB using deposits emanating from public funds!  I mean, we would like to get the whole story of ICB and how government money found itself there.  

I have heard that there are personal debts that were due to be paid in UCB and that these were not allowed to go to NPART but instead, somehow they were diverted through this bank by individuals taking advantage. This is a matter where I would like to hear some comments from the Minister.  It is a great mystery and there is a lot of public anxiety on the operations of these funds. But, as hon. Rwakoojo asked, if we are asking the tax payer to pay, what is said here is that the project account balance was withheld in International Credit Bank instead of Bank of Uganda. 

I would think that if there was any money in ICB when Bank of Uganda seized it, then Bank of Uganda has got that money.  Or, are we saying that the project funds that were in ICB had been utilised in that bank for purposes not related to those projects?  But if it was taken from ICB, since ICB was closed and brought to Bank of Uganda, one would want to know when Bank of Uganda is going to pay back this money to the Treasury with interest. Shs.4.3 billion is not a small amount!  

Let me go to item 021 - Defence.  First of all, I see here 021 - Defence: Programme 6100, Programme 02.  In the description, it says  "NRA Land Forces".   Mr. Speaker, I thought with the coming of the new Constitution, our forces are known as UPDF!  What is "NRA Land Forces"?  We know UPDF since NRA ceased to exist, but now we hear these gallant gentlemen are meeting to reminisce over their achievements in the past and they have come out to say that they are not playing an active part in the restructuring of UPDF!  So how does "NRA Land Forces" appear in our current expenditure, Mr. Speaker?

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and hon. Pinto for giving way.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that whatever appears on the papers he is holding has nothing to do with the soldiers or with the UPDF.  It is typed in the Ministry of Finance, who are the ones presenting the Bill and sending the supplementaries;  it has nothing to do with the Army or with restructuring of the Army or with anything else.  So, he should know it as a typing error, rather than make it into something else. I do not think that it should be used.  I would like to inform the Member that matters that concern the Army should not always be mixed up in other politicking statements.  I thank you. 

MR. PINTO:  I very much appreciate the explanation by my Colleague, and for that reason, we shall expect the Minister of Finance to explain because he knows it is a typing error and yet they have put it here, asking for a supplementary for NRA Land Forces!  

Mr. Speaker, another matter that continues to bog our heads and concern us is the war in Congo.  The way Congo was entered into was not in accordance with our constitutional provisions but it is a matter that we have come to live with. The President did not allude to it in his speech, nor have we spoken about it, but it is there and we cannot simply wish it away! The fact is that we are in the Congo.  May I ask, Mr. Speaker, the Minister in charge of the presidency to ask the Minister of Defence to bring here a statement which will realign us with the Constitution for the ratification of Uganda's involvement in the Congo and call the matters bygones?  Because, it will continue to be asked; we are in Congo without the provisions of the Constitution!  Until that is done, the question will be a legitimate question.  

It is a constitutional matter, we cannot simply wish it away by not talking about it in a presidential speech, in a national address, in a state of the nation address and hope that time will erase it.  It is a historical fact, it is there!  We are there and whatever happens, let us hear, let us get a ratification and get back to square one. That matter has already happened and we hope that our boys will come back soon -  boys and girls I am told. I did not know that girls had gone there.   

Let me not take any more time. I want to express myself on a matter of development for capital expenditure under Head 101 - Office of the President.  I see here in the last item in the box  "strengthening President's Office",  191 "Other fixed assets".  The explanatory note is "funds sought to settle minority share holders of Embassy House".  I thought Embassy House is being occupied by the Secretariat.  If it is the Secretariat, is it not a self accounting unit?  Does it come under the Office of the President?  I am asking these questions, seeking answers.  

Then the other one, the last one, Mr. Speaker, is Head 112 on page 18.  I see an amount of 3.6 billion shillings, funds sought for the rehabilitation and construction of valley dams in Karamoja.  I have asked my colleagues from Karamoja, are these dams there, were the dams there rehabilitated?  

HON. MEMBERS:  No, no!  

MR. PINTO:  So, where did the 3.6 billion shillings go?  This question of valley dams takes us back to last year:  Up in the West, the area is declared a disaster area.  We would have had some reservoirs of water, and people who were charged with this large expenditure still continue to talk and utilise public funds, including Karamoja.  Where shall we end?  I would like to seek more answers but I would like to give way to my Colleague here who is seeking information. 

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you, very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to thank the hon. Member holding the Floor for giving way.  Mr. Speaker, and Members of this august House, we in Karamoja are still waiting for the implementation of a programme that is bound to spend Shs.3.3. billion for the construction of dams and valley tanks in Karamoja, and we hope to see this but, Mr. Speaker, we hate to see Karamoja ever on record and yet not on the ground.  This shs.3.6 billion in the name of Karamoja is what we will continue to call "hot air" and we will get tired of ever appearing on record and yet we are not, actually, practically catered for.  Hon. Member holding the Floor, there is nothing on the ground and we wonder why we are on the paper!

DR. RUGUNDA:  Mr. Speaker, I am responding to my Colleague from Karamoja.  It is true that Government is aware of the plight of the people of Uganda living in Karamoja in terms of lack of water. Government took a decision recently to make money available to make the dams to contain the water.  The project will be taking off soon. So, it is not just hot air, Mr. Speaker;  the valley dams are going to be built. 

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order.  This  money is a supplementary, already spent over the last three months.  I just came from Karamoja on Sunday this week and  there is no dam whatsoever constructed in Karamoja;  there is no water anywhere, it is actually a disaster zone.  Is the Minister in order to tell us that this money was spent and the dams are there when actually there is nothing; that the project has been approved by people who have not approved anything?  Because there has been nothing which has been on the ground!  Is he in order, Mr. Speaker, to mislead the House that Karamoja is being catered for when actually people are fleeing to other places in Uganda;  is he in order?

THE SPEAKER:  Now, if it is true that on the ground in Karamoja the dams are not there, and yet it is reflected on this document as a supplementary in respect of money already spent, or money which is going to be spent - it can be either way, right? - if that is the situation, then it will be incorrect to say that  the money was spent when the dams are not there.  If the money is being voted - if it is going to be spent, what the Minister is saying is that it is not hot air to say that there is a project which is going to be implemented.  I think the Minister has said that Government has taken a recent decision to construct and build the valley dams there.  If that is the position, then the Minister is not out of order but if it is that the money has been spent on dams which are not there, then the Minister would be out of order. 

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  What hon. Rugunda has said is true. There are two different supplementaries we are commenting on now here;  one is up to March 1999. There was some money which was requisitioned for and was spent.  In the case of the Karamoja project, money was requested for and Finance agreed that this supplementary should be provided because in the original Budget of 1998/99 there was no provision for this money.  However, since it is a recent event, and this money was agreed to by Finance that it be provided, it is prudent and good financial management to now bring it up as a supplementary so that it can be released.  If it is not actually provided for now, it will still come as a supplementary in the April to June one, but this one was approved before March 31st and then we are bringing it as a supplementary in order for the money to be provided because it was not reflected in the Budget of 1998/99.  Therefore, we agree there is not yet any work done but the money is being provided for the work to start now.  

THE SPEAKER:  So hon. Member, I think that satisfies you for the time being.  Hon. Mwandha, I recognise the hon. Fiona Egunyu.

MRS EGUNYU:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the hon. Ministers as to whether an approved extension now in respect of Karamoja which is yet to come should not be coming under the budget which we are going to debate for the next financial year instead of trying to bring it in as a supplementary.  I seek clarification from them.

THE SPEAKER:  I thought that is what the Minister was explaining.  Can you explain it again?

MR. OPIO:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A total of Shs. 3.6 billion was requested for from Ministry of Finance for valley dams but it was late. The money which has been released just to start the project was 500,010 million  but what we would like to tell the House is that this money was asked for, the money is already put aside for that purpose. It is not in the Ministry of Finance as such but pending the use.  So as far as we are concerned, this is a supplementary.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Mwandha.

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Speaker, the explanation given, both by hon. Manzi and hon. Gabriel Opio, are very confusing because our understanding of these accounts is that at the end of the financial year, you draw a line, you add up and say, this is the money which has been spent.  We are now being made to understand  that this money has not been spent!  If it has been spent, has it been spent in the air?  If the money has not been spent, that actually begs more questions.  Are there any such cases, more than what we have been told, where money has actually been released for whatever time you want to use it, but which has not been spent?  

It seems to me that what is happening is that departments of Government are getting these allocations in advance, then later on when we come to budget for them, then we shall be budgeting for them as if they do not have money which has been put aside which they have not yet spent. My understanding is - Mr. Speaker, if you can protect me from hon. Basoga Nsandhu.  

THE SPEAKER:  Were you seeking clarification?

MR. MWANDHA:  Yes, I am seeking clarification.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay.

MR. MWANDHA:  The understanding is that actually the money which should appear as a supplementary is the 500 million which he has mentioned and not 3 billion shillings as read out by hon. Pinto because, otherwise, the whole accounting system is confusing. Maybe there are many such incidents where people have actually reserved money for themselves and then later on, we give them more money on top of what they have not spent!  

THE SPEAKER:  Let us do this hon. Members.  Maybe let us get all the clarifications so that the Minister can respond to all of them at once.  Is that alright?  But I think somebody was on the Floor?

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Yes!

THE SPEAKER:  Now, you are seeking clarification from the Minister?

AN HON. MEMBER:  Yes, on the same -

THE SPEAKER:  Now, there are other people who are informing the Member on the Floor.  I think let us get organised. Obviously hon. Pinto's presentation has generated this anxiety for clarifications and so on and unfortunately or fortunately, these clarifications are not being directed to him but at the Ministers.  I would request hon. Pinto to be patient, let us get the clarifications directed to the Minister all raised so that the Minister or Ministers can respond at once.  Now, hon. Karuhanga, hon. Okullo Epak, hon. Kutesa and you.  Okay?  Hon. Karuhanga.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As the House knows, matters concerning dams affect me very much and I do carry  sufficient research on them.  On this 3.6 billion shillings, I have carried out some research; one in my capacity as Chairman of Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee because Karamoja falls under that, and I have researched to find out what this money is all about.  Then also through interaction with the Office of the Prime Minister, through the Prime Minister and the Minister in the Prime Minister's Office in charge of general duties who held a big meeting recently to address the question of draught.  We were able to interact with hon. Akika and people from the Department of Water and this money also came out.  So, I suppose I have some information which could be useful, not only to hon. Pinto, but also to the Minister who is answering the question.  

There is a place called Kapelebyong in Karamoja -(Interruption)- yes! and other places. Money was provided for as a supplementary from the Ministry of Finance to the Water Department for excavation  of dams and de-silting of other dams and doing some work on dams in Karamoja as a special project after the President had visited that area and directed that, that money be put on the Karamoja account.  What happened was that the Department of Water started complaining that KDA had literary confiscated all the equipment and some of that equipment was not being used and trees were growing in some of that equipment because of the inefficiency of KDA. We have tried to amend the KDA statute but up to now, we have failed to bring that achievement about.  

Anyway, the Department of Water went for private tendering and this takes time.  So, through the process of tendering, recently,  about three weeks ago, they awarded the tender to companies and they had to go through consultants and all these old stories of the tendering business and they have finally, two to three weeks  ago, awarded the tender to some company to do a dam in Kapelebyong, and the results were reported to us in the meeting when we met the Prime Minister. That company is mobilising to go and do those dams.  

Now, what the hon. Mwandha was rasing - in his absence - was the question of the cut-off point that. Now, because of that, does the Finance withdraw the money from the people who have already been awarded the tender from the departments where it has sent the money, to bring it back to themselves, or does the work continue and they report as supplementary?  To me, I think what they are doing is neat and it is good we question that and the people of Karamoja know that the water is going to be done there; that the money has been availed and that the companies have been awarded tenders and that work is proceeding.  And from our point of view, the honourable information we got from hon. Rugunda was correct, and I am speaking as a Chairman of that Committee.  Thank you. 

DR. OKULO EPAK:  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Maybe I will assist my neighbour here, hon. Karuhanga. Kapelebyong is not in Karamoja. The hon. Member of Parliament who represents Kapelebyong is right here. Mr. Speaker, whatever that information is, I am seeking clarification from the hon. Minister because my understanding is that if Shs. 3.6 billion was allocated for this project, and according to one of the Ministers 500 million of if had been used, that means Shs. 3.1 billion remained unused until the end of the last financial year.  In which account is this money which is not utilised yet?  If it is in that account, is it from that account that the contractors mentioned by hon. Karuhanga will be paid?  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Kutesa and then we go back to Pinto and later on in the course of the day, the Ministers can then respond.

MR. KUTESA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wanted to inform hon. Pinto that the main reason why this is a supplementary is because it was originally not budgeted for in the previous budget.  And for you to seek this money, the Ministry of Finance had to create a supplementary because it came subsequent to this House passing the budget.  Now what the Ministry can do, both of Finance and I presume better still that of Water, is to explain to this House that this money has already been committed, some of it may not be seen on the ground but work is in progress and therefore this money qualifies to be a supplementary.  I thank you.

MR. ADOME LOKWII:  Mr. Speaker I was rising, I thought I would catch your eye.

THE SPEAKER:  Still on clarification?.

MR. ADOME LOKWII:  If it is a clarification -

THE SPEAKER:  If you want to make a substantive contribution, you wait until you catch the Speaker's eye, but let hon. Pinto finish.

MR. PINTO:  I used to know that there is more than one way to skin a cat, but you could see how many explanations came through for this  shs.3.8 billion  which will end up with my request to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister as Leader of Government Business.  But let me ask this final question:  In Head 114, District Health Services,  Shs.1.193 billion is being sought for as additional funds for monitoring Poverty Eradication Programmes in health.  I need some explanation. 

In the health sector, district health services has allowances - you see, there are two activities;  one is allowances, the other one is vehicle - OM is what? - operation and maintenance. Those are the sub-divisions - increased provisions by so much.  In allowances and vehicle operations and maintenance,  there is Shs.1.19 billion and the explanatory notes are: "additional funds for monitoring Poverty Eradication Programmes".  

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister should receive my request:  One, in terms of Defence's classified expenditure, we resolved and I thought we had agreed within PAC that a group of members of PAC, vetted and sworn to secrecy to be assigned the responsibility of looking into finances of Defence.  Classified expenditure is not beyond the approach of Parliament as a supervisor, as a superintendent.  You cannot superintend only half. If there is need to keep a certain confidentiality and secrets, a group of people within PAC may be assigned to that. A core group vetted and sworn to secrecy will at least be there on our part but we cannot pretend that we are superintending the budget when one arm is left to operate the way it does.  

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I thank hon. Pinto for giving way. I want to give information on classified expenditure. The matter was discussed by various Committees with the President - the Defence Committee, the Presidential Committee and PAC when we met the President at various times and it was agreed that certain Members of those Committees will have to be sworn to secrecy and they will have access to ESO and ISO expenditure, and those classified expenditure and monitor those throughout the year. The same thing was happening with some Members from Defence because PAC does the post-mortem. Therefore, in order to keep abreast with the day-to-day running of government, it was those Committees which were to monitor and that was done the year before last, at the time when I was the Chairman of Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee. After that, I do not know exactly what happened but I want to assure the hon. Member speaking that in my current regime, we shall definitely revive the matter and we shall definitely come to a conclusion on it.  

MR. PINTO:  I would like to thank the hon. Member. Mr. Speaker, you can see that his time was the year before he bounced back, but there is no action, so, I am right.  Mr. Rt. hon. Prime Minister, through you, Mr. Speaker, please take action in this matter.  This is a matter that has been resolved at the highest level. I think the Minister for the Presidency is listening. We would like to see that this matter is put into practice.  

The other one and that ends my question of credibility.  You can see how many mistakes we have pointed out in this document.  Finance has come out to revise figures but certainly, NRA Land Forces have been disowned by the representative of the Army here.  This brings me back to what we had here when we heard from a Committee of Parliament, where the Chairman of the Committee could not agree with the Minister of Constitutional Affairs. I mean, I could give credit to the Chairman although my confidence in the Minister for Constitutional Affairs waned. 

In other words, the element of credibility as to who we tells the truth so that we commit ourselves to promises is at stake.  I felt very bad that I could lose my confidence in the Minister of Constitutional Affairs because I thought that he was not being very truthful when he was having this little jolt here with the Chairman of the Committee.  So, the element of credibility is very important when we are being open;  and for this, Mr. Prime Minister, there is need for clarity on government documents and policies for us to internalise them. If accountants like the hon. Mwandha and the others can have different visions of the situation, how about the ordinary people who read the documents to understand the accounting procedures?  This is necessary so that we can then interface properly and avoid lugubriousness.    

MR. KINTU MUSOKE (Kalungu East, Masaka):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Before I make my substantive contribution, allow me to share with this House the peasants understanding of "classified" which I shared with the people of Busia when I was there and they seemed to have understood it.  The Baganda have a saying that "eby'omunju tebitottolwa".  That not everything that happens in a house should be talked about.  In other words, what you discuss with your wife in the bedroom should not be repeated in the sitting room for the children to hear, and what you discuss with your family in the sitting room should not be repeated in the courtyard for everybody to hear and what you discuss in the courtyard, you do not take on the main road for everybody to hear and at that time, hon. Awori seemed to appreciate and I hope he still appreciates what is classified.

I rise to just seek clarification because, some time ago, the Vice Chancellor of Makerere University came out publicly to say that Government sponsored 2,000 students in the course of the year, but the Ministry of Finance remitted funds for only 1,000.  As a concerned parent, and I am sure many Members of Parliament  who are now self-sponsored at Makerere are interested in this, I thought that I would see a supplementary in this one to pay for the remaining 1,000 students.  Apparently, there is nothing as a supplementary here.  So, the clarification I want is, where did the money come from that paid for the 1,000 students for whom the Ministry did not pay?   Did it come from the amount of money paid by the self-sponsored students, and if so, do we not need a supplementary so that Government can refund the self-sponsored students in the due course of time?  I want a clarification on this one.  Where did the money that paid for the 1,000 students come from when only 1,000 was paid for by the Ministry?   Thank you very much.

MR. LUKYAMUZI  (Lubaga South, Kampala):   Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.   Mr. Speaker, I am most privileged to catch your eye.  Mr. Speaker, this Motion - (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Lukyamuzi, it is your right as a Member of Parliament to catch my eye.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Speaker, the discussion of this Motion, according to the people I represent from Lubaga South, is the beginning of a noble crusade to check on how Government is spending the tax payers' money and if we find there excessive expenditure unaccounted for, then this would help us to find out whether Ministry X, Y, Z  deserve approval in the coming budgetary expenditures.  So, Mr. Speaker, this is a very crucial point.  

I would first of all like to draw the attention of hon. Members to the astronomical expenditure by way of supplementaries associated to Defence;  Shs.50 billion as a supplementary, in my view, Mr. Speaker, is a lot of money and I would like to challenge the Attorney General and the Minister of Finance with reference to the Constitution of Uganda. Yesterday, we dismissed a Motion because it had not qualified or it was not abiding with the Constitutional requirements and here we are, approving a supplementary which in equal capacity  has failed to abide by the constitutional demands. 

Without hesitation, I would like to refer to Article 210 under which an enabling law which warrants the deployment of troops outside Uganda should have come into place. I would also like to refer to Article 124 sub-section (1) and (2).  72 hours have long passed since UPDF went to the Congo. It is almost more than a year since we have been in the Congo and if things had been correctly done, the President was supposed to have got a two-thirds approval of Parliament before the forces could stay on in the Congo beyond 72 hours.  They are still in the Congo, they are in the Congo, they are to be in the Congo, they will be in the Congo.  Where are we going?  

I am charging on behalf of the people I represent from Lubaga South that this kind of expenditure which is astronomical needs a just demand and we are doing a disservice to the people we represent if we are letting this expenditure go without quantifying, without meeting the demands of the Constitution which we all respect.  

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the following questions by way of seeking clarification.  Last year, when I made noise about the presence of UPDF in the Congo, people were saying Lukyamuzi is bad but here you are, the evidence is coming back on the ground.  In Bundibugyo, in Acholi, there are camps. I have been reading newspapers; The New Vision and The Monitor, there are people dying of malnutrition, disease; the conditions are not hygienic.  Where have you been putting the supplementaries?  

In Lubaga South, notably, Quarter Zone, there is one Joyce Namuli and one Jane Namuddu whose husbands were soldiers. They disappeared in the Congo, they died but the women have not received the bodies back. Those two people I represent have a right to receive their dear ones, even if they are in a dead state.  Since we have already given you money, why do you not return the bodies so that the dear ones can see them?  

In the recent past, Kakooza Mutale - the Major, dumped fifteen children from the North on Buganda Road. They were nearing starvation.  The money that was supposed to maintain them was part of this money we are trying to pass in connection with the supplementaries of Defence.  Where was the money put?  Many people are dying, many are abducted, the conditions are chaotic in Defence;  where is the money?  

The people I represent in Lubaga South cautioned me to be hesitant in approving this supplementary without justification and they are also saying that in view of the fact that we have failed as Parliament to comply with Article 210 and Article 124 sub-sections (1) and (2), it is prudent for us to advise the Ministry of Defence to account for that money or else in this coming Budget, we do not approve this money.  Alternatively, we approve short of this money shs. 50 billion because this is tax payers' money. 

Many people are poor in this country; their children do not go to school, the roads are in terrible conditions.  I once tried to go on strike because of the road infrastructure.  So, I would like to end by saying, until we have got an explanation as to why the shs. 50 billion was not been properly spent, I would like the shs. 50 billion to be reduced out of the coming budget of Defence.  Thank you very much and I beg to move. 

MR. ADOME LOKWII  (Jie County, Kotido):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to support the Motion, but before that, I would like to get some clarification from the Minister who moved the Motion, on the following areas:  On Vote 001, Office of the President, I see items 8030 appearing twice and all of them having remarks  "additional funds to pay outstanding bills in respect of rentals, garage bills and other suppliers".  I do not know whether it is an error or there is another reason why they put it twice. Also, somebody raised something about the Star Radio. I thought this revenue would come as appropriation-in-aid, which is supposed to be in accordance with Article 156 of the Constitution which obliges the Ministers concerned to come to Parliament first to seek for approval for any appropriation-in-aid.  I am wondering whether appearance of this revenue or usage of this money is not in contravention of that Article of the Constitution.  

On poverty alleviation, there is what we call additional funds required for the monitoring of poverty eradication programmes.  It appears in Head 6120, it appears in Head 1060, in Audit - I do not know how Audit monitors poverty eradication programmes - it also appears in IGG.  So, I want to be clarified.  How is this spread in almost every other Ministry and every other department, I thought it is the Office of the Prime Minister that is concerned with poverty eradication?  I need to be clarified why everybody is getting involved, and whether we are not risking too many cooks spoiling the broth.

On the famous Vote 112 which hon. Pinto talked about, I still need a lot of clarification because the explanation I got from the Minister is that the money has been got and it is kept somewhere, I do not know by whom.  But before that, Mr. Speaker, what hon. Karuhanga was saying, Kapelebyong is in Teso, in Katakwi district and not in Karamoja. I think it could have been a slip of the tongue but the dam which is in my village is called Nakapelimoru, if that is what he means.  

Let me say this; that dam is going to cause a lot of problems for Government if people hear that there is some money kept somewhere by somebody and their cows are dying.  In addition to that, if they hear that some places are being declared disaster areas and theirs is not, I think they will take Government - not to court, but they will take Government to task because some people are starting to wonder whether the Movement Government is only waiting for people to wage war against it first before it turns to give services to them.  Mr. Speaker, you are aware in these 13 years, this is what has been promised and now, even when the money has been approved, it is kept by somebody somewhere. This is very dangerous. 

Last week, some engineers from the Water department asked us to give them the locations of these dams.  Mr. Speaker, some of us did so within the very first hour we received that letter, but up to day, the Ministry in charge of Water is still dilly-dallying about the issue. At one point they said there was a lot of rain, so they could not go there, when there was virtually no drop of water from heaven that fell in Karamoja and I am speaking here with the whole of my heart finished because, when somebody is telling me that there is still this bidding processes going on when the President was there in April and told the people that before the end of the year they would have water and somebody is still keeping the money somewhere, I think I need a more serious explanation about this money such that when I go back next week, I can assure the Karimajong that the water is going to be there before December 1999 because, Mr. Speaker, when things happen in the neighbouring districts - I want to explain this - when things happen in the neighbouring districts because of the mobility of these people, everybody is cursing every other Karimajong but when it comes to money, we seem to be handling it with soft gloves.  

I am sorry to say that if we continue having this kind of soft touch, you may not have us to account for the loss of your votes.  I am sorry to say this but we are tired, Mr. Speaker, of promising people every year that Government is concerned about them when actually there is no action and nobody seems to be concerned.

THE SPEAKER:  Can you come to your concluding remarks?

MR. ADOME LOKWII:   I am coming, Mr. Speaker.  In Vote 082 where Kotido is, I am sure other districts must have the same questions but there is somewhere where Kotido is mentioned. Just between March and June, there is about shs. 100  million  given to that district and the funds are said to cater for road maintenance, they are said to cater for lower level range health units and many other districts are receiving about the same amount of money.  Can I get the clarification because in the last six months, the districts have been having no funds and these funds are said to have been given.  I am wondering what this money went for in most of these districts because for the last six months, every district has been crying for money and yet it is said the money went there.  

Lastly, Mr. Speaker - unfortunately, hon. Lukyamuzi is not in the House but I wanted to touch something on Defence and clarify to him that if the bombs in Kampala are so bad, would he like the situation if the terrorists got an advantage of more training in those centres in Congo? Because, if we do not give defence the chance to remove these people from their bases, they will have better skills of destroying many more people within peaceful centres like Kampala.  Now, I am wondering, should we leave that breeding ground for these people because we want to save the money, I do not know for what?  

It is unfortunate this brother of mine is not here but I thought we would use all the money to actually finish up these people from their training centres such that we have more peace and more time to do other things.  With that, Mr. Speaker, if I am cleared by the Ministers, I will support the Motion.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, we have also another opportunity during the debate on detailed items when we are in the Committee of Supply.  I think it is now an opportune moment for me to give the Minister or Ministers - hon. Tumubweinee, I am addressing your Colleague, you might be interested in that.  I am now giving an opportunity for him to respond, taking into account the points of clarification raised on the Floor. 

MR. OPIO:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I thank the Members of Parliament for the contribution they have made through clarifications and information.  I would like to start with hon. Okumu Ringa.  He was concerned about the promise which the Minister of Finance made the last time he was presenting the supplementaries that in future, the supplementaries will be limited to within 3 per cent.  

I would like to state that that was said.  However, I would like to clarify that this is not a constitutional matter. That point should be cleared so that we do not feel that the Minister has contravened the Constitution.  It was a commitment and as we said, we would have lived within the 2.2 per cent had it not been for the emergency which required our forward purchases of equipment to make sure that we safeguard the citizens of this country.  So, it was an emergency which made us spend more and this is something which most Members of Parliament should appreciate.  

The other point hon. Okumu Ringa stated was about technical supplementaries. I would like to briefly state that in certain cases where the Minister of Finance is not certain on the criteria under which the money is going to be used, the Minister of Finance usually keeps this money under contingency and this also applies to money which was sent to districts.  For instance, the Ministry of Local Government or line Ministries may not be in position to provide the criteria through which money should be sent to districts. 

An example would be the Ministry of Education.  They may know that they are going to spend money on construction of buildings but by the time we come to the House to debate the Budget, they may have not provided the criteria.  So what the Ministry of Finance does is to put that money as a contingency, awaiting the criteria or criterion from such line Ministries.   For instance, this year we have put aside about two billion shillings under equalisation grants but we could not really put that money to various districts because we have not established the criteria or criterion for sending this money to these people.  So, part of the technical supplementaries is because we keep this money in the Ministry of Finance awaiting the criteria of line Ministries.  And this amounts to almost 12 billion shillings which you have seen in these supplementaries.  

Other areas of technical supplementaries come because of change of priorities of a line Ministry.  At the time we pass the budget here, a line Ministry may have wanted to have such an amount of money under recurrent but then afterwards, this Ministry finds it more appropriate to use this money under development.  And in order to fulfil the requirement of the Constitution, we say this is a technical supplementary.  Therefore, we should realise that because of the constitutional requirement, any change from one vote to another must be reported here as technical supplementary.  

When it comes to some districts getting more money than others,  again I would like to emphasise here that it is the line Ministries which, using the criteria, provide which areas or districts, for instance, are going to have more money for feeder roads, for maybe construction of schools and these are worked out specifically by the line Ministries and for Ministry of Finance, we release money according to the guidelines given to us by the line Ministries.  So, the reason why some differ is; first of all because of the peculiarities of some districts.  

Some districts may have hardly any feeder roads and when it comes to assessment of the problem, we say okay, a district such and such should have more money therefore, the line Ministry sends the requisition to the Ministry of Finance saying a district such and such should have more money and we disburse the money according to that.   Some districts have got special programmes with donor agencies which require counter funding and, therefore, to honour our part we send that money in order to make sure that donor agencies implement those programmes in those districts.

Now, the hon. Aggrey Awori - he has gone - he was more on the topic of Defence. Also, hon. Omara Atubo especially wanted us as Ministry of Finance to provide a definition for "classified expenditure".  We have seen from contributions from the Floor that this issue has been discussed for a long time. It was even discussed at the level of the President of this country and from the information we got from hon. Karuhanga, at least there is progress towards the auditing of classified expenditures.  He has told us that at a certain level, when they discussed this issue with the President, they were sure that if they should get a small number of Members of Parliament who would take the Oath, these Members of Parliament would audit these accounts on the behalf of Parliament.  So we are moving towards that. It is not really possible for Ministry of Finance at this point to define classified expenditures when we are moving towards the definition for the whole programme.  

The hon. Guma was asking whether the supplementaries we have now take into account the requisition by Parliament to a tune of about 780 million shillings.  This has not been spent, it is going to be within our current Budget therefore, we would have not included it as a supplementary when we have not spent it.  But he should be assured that we take into account all the interest groups in the whole country, including Parliament as a Commission, and we know the amount of work Parliament and the  other organs in the country are doing to make sure that we enhance good governance which includes democratic decision making and we are not going to overlook Parliament, being the major player in this area.  

On additional funds for monitoring of the Poverty Alleviation Programme, I would like to state that this programme is now very, very important in this country.  We have created a fund called PAF which is "Poverty Alleviation Fund" and we have put there money from tax payers. We have also attracted donors who have put money in that fund.  The donors and the Uganda Government are interested in making sure that all this money which we are putting in the major priority areas, namely; primary education, primary health care, feeder roads, agriculture extension, water and so forth, is well accounted for. Therefore, we have increased money in the areas of Audit, in the Treasury itself, with the IGG and this money is partly provided by Uganda Government and partly provided by the donor agencies which would like to make sure that this money which they have put in PAF is utilised properly.  

So, when you see this amount of money going under Poverty Alleviation, it is the money which the Ministry of Finance put as a contingency awaiting the criteria or criterion which would be used for disbursing this money, and when we established the criteria, we spent some of this money for monitoring the performance of this fund.  It is now a very, very substantial amount of budget and we and the donor agencies must make sure that this money is monitored and is accounted for. 

Then the hon. Rwakoojo sought clarification on technical supplementaries and contingency in general.  I would like to repeat what I stated at the beginning that technical supplementaries are very, very important because first of all, we must be allowed to review our budgets; we must at the same time be allowed to change our mind within the Ministry, which means being allowed to change our funds from one vote to another.  Secondly, we must make sure that the Treasury has always some contingency funds which it must disburse when new situations arise and because we have that type of money, we must show how we have spent it at the end of the Financial Year.  For instance now, it is good that we are discussing the disaster before we have passed the Budget but if we had passed the Budget and we find that almost half of the country is having problems, it would be very important to re-allocate some of this money and put it where we need it most.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: I thank the hon. Minister for giving way.  Mr. Speaker, the clarification I am seeking from the Minister is with regard to the issue of technical re-allocation or technical supplementary as he has been putting it.  In my earlier submission, I requested the Minister to explain the import of the technical supplementary with respect to deductions from Ministries or in respect of allocation within a Ministry.  If it is an allocation within a Ministry, then the vote - for example, if you take President's Office Vote 001, if there was any re-allocation within that Vote, then it will be an internal technical re-allocation but now when you deduct from a Ministry "X" to re-allocate to another Ministry, what would you do?  

I am insisting on this clarification because some Ministries do not get the full allocation which is approved by Parliament so, why should the Minister responsible for Finance, at the time of presenting the supplementaries, reflect those estimates as if they were actually released when actually there was an "under-release"?  And this also applies to the issue raised by hon. Kintu Musoke regarding Makerere.  All these would help to explain the situation.  So I am requesting the Minister to explain this again.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. OPIO:  Mr. Speaker, hon. Okumu Ringa was right on the first definition of technical supplementaries but I would like to state that we do not remove money from one Ministry so as to go and give to another Ministry.  If the Ministry does not receive the money during that Financial Year, it will be because of cash constraints and the outturn will show that they received less.  I think that is the point I would like to -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Minister, you do not have to look at hon. Okumu, I will make sure he does not jump on you.  You just make your contribution.

MR. OPIO:  Okay,  I am sorry. I am not threatening him, sorry.  So, that point is very clear that we do not move from one Ministry to another and if a Ministry does not have funds, it is not because money was moved from another Ministry. It will be because Treasury did not have enough money. I will come to the Makerere issue when I talk about the question which was raised by hon. Kintu Musoke.  

Now the hon. Rwakoojo also raised the issue of money which was in ICB.  It is true that when ICB was closed there were what we call public deposits and private deposits. Now, some of the public funds belong to projects.  Now for the project to continue, it was necessary to have this money paid to them because if we did not, then we would have a problem because programmes have got time frames. If it is for three years and you do not release the money, then the programme will not continue.  Therefore, it was found very prudent for these projects to have the money.  

I would like to assure Members of Parliament that as we speak now, there has already  been clearance for Bank of Uganda to pay the uninsured deposits in ICB.  To remind Members, there were two types of deposits; there were insured deposits which have been paid, then there were the uninsured deposits some of which have been paid.  The remaining uninsured deposits have been cleared and the Bank of Uganda will begin to pay them soon.  

The hon. Omara Atubo we have already answered;  the hon. Pinto, the issue of appropriation in Aid was ably answered by the Minister in charge of Information when he talked about the money earned by Star Radio. When they requisitioned for that money, Treasury provided that money to make sure that they carry out the activities and investments in that sector.  On the issue of ICB money paid for projects, I think I have already answered it when I was tackling hon. Rwakoojo's question.  

Now, the issue of the name Defence; we apologise that we used the name NRA instead of UPDF and I hope that apology will be accepted by Members of Parliament, including hon. Pinto.  And having accepted that this was an error, I do not think that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should be declared incompetent to the extent of calling upon the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister to reprimand the Minister. 

Now, the Development Expenditure in the President's Office as it relates to paying for the part of Embassy House.  Up to recently, President's Office has been in charge of rentals of government buildings including ownership of buildings which belong to government.  So, Presidents Office wanted funds to pay for its minority ownership in Embassy House. We provided the money and that is why it appears as a supplementary.

Now, the valley dam issue is still as hot as it was, but we would like to say that the Ministry of Finance, because of our concern for the lives of people and animals, and although we received the requisition nearing the end of the Financial Year, and because the problem was very, very urgent, we released the money to the Ministry of  Water, Lands and Environment. Most of this money is still on the Consolidated Fund.  So, during the Policy Statement by the Ministry of  Water, Lands and Environment, I think Members should be reminded that this is the time we shall ask for the progress report.  But the money was released, and it is on the Consolidated Fund although some of it has been used as stated earlier but it was released because we saw there was an urgent need.

Now the hon. Kintu Musoke wanted to find out where the University got the money for the extra 1,000 students.  What we did was to request the Ministry of Education and Sports to re-allocate within its budget, including Appropriation in Aid, for the extra amount of money to the tune of about 11 billion.  And we may have to realise that Appropriation in Aid refers to funds which are generated by an institution which belongs to government. The funds belong to Government and the Ministry of Finance has the right to claim it or release it to the institution making the funds under Appropriation in Aid. Makerere University should be treated like other institutions in Government.

Hon. Lukyamuzi's question was about the missing two men and I would like to say that this should be an issue of investigating where these men are because we may not know whether they are in  Congo or other places; or even whether they are dead or alive.  He said that there are two persons in his Constituency who are men and are missing.  I think that this is a very important issue for both hon. Lukyamuzi and the rest of the country and I would like to suggest that the Police is informed about this so that we establish the whereabouts of these people.  

About the roads in his constituency, we are very, very aware he has made a lot of contribution in this area. There was a time when he had to go on a hunger strike because of this.  We are very, very considerate and we do not want him to go on a hunger strike again.  Honourable Minister in charge of Roads, I think I would like to remind you that we do not want to have to declare a constituency vacant because Hon. Lukyamuzi has died of hunger.  So we would like to make sure that we cater for him in the next Budget because this one is a supplementary, it is not possible to do that.  But as you said you are going to wait until we are debating the Budget and see the amount of money which will be allocated for road maintenance both by the City Council and by the Central Government, we really appreciate your concern about the Members of your Constituency.  So I would like to say that those were some of the major areas which were raised.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Minister for giving way.  I remember I made one pertinent point and I said, aware of the fact that up to now much as we are already in the Congo we have not lived to the expectations of the Law namely; Article 210 subsection (d) and Article 124 subsection (1).  What arrangements are being made so that we speed up the legalisation of the process so that those people in the Congo are there legally?  That issue has not been answered.

MR. OPIO:  Mr. Speaker, my Motion says that I am raising this Motion under Article 156 clauses (a) and (b) which requires me to ask you for supplementaries.  I did not come here for that part of hon. Lukyamuzi's question.  So, Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I now put the question on the motion moved by the Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development that: "Parliament do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for the consideration and approval of the Supplementary Expenditure for the fiscal years 1998/99 and 1996/97".

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think, it is an appropriate time to stop. I adjourn the House to tomorrow for the Committee of Supply Stage.  The House is adjourned until tomorrow Thursday, at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose and adjourned until Thursday, 8th July 1999 at 2.00 p.m.)
