Thursday, 8th July, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

The Council was called to order.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE CHAIRMAN OF THE NRC COMMITTEE ON THE ECONOMY (Mr. E. Rwakakooko):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the fourth Report of the NRC Committee on the Economy which highlights the Committee’s observations and recommendations together with those of the Sectoral Committees on the 1992/1993 Budget for perusal by Members of this Council in preparation for the Debate on the current Budget.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to lay this Report, on the Table. (Applause)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1993

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. A.K. Mayanja): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled ‘The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 1993 be read the Second Time.  The object of the Bill, Mr. Chairman, is to amend the Constitution in order to cancel the abolition by the existing Article 118 of the Constitution of traditional rulers which was done in 1967 and it removed all existing legal barriers to the return to traditional rulers of assets and properties which were seized from them when the institution of traditional was abolished.  

Members, you will agree, this object is in line with the policies of the Ten Point Political Programme of the National Resistance Movement in so far as it seeks to promote the efforts of correcting errors of past regimes and is also intended to promote the National reconciliation and unity of Uganda.  Members will recall that in line with this policy, the National Resistance Army council on the 3rd of April, 1992 passed a resolution stating that it had no objection to the relevant national authority entering into discussions with the concerned traditional groups with a view to the eventual return to them of their traditional and cultural sites or any other mutually acceptable, appropriate arrangement concerning the traditional and cultural sites of these traditional groups provided that this does not interfere with security of the country.

Members will further recall that on the 30th of April, this year, this august Council itself sitting as a Political Organ under the chairmanship of his excellency the President, in furtherance of this objective by Resolution of the Council directed that government should take all necessary steps to return certain assets and properties previously confiscated by the state and listed in the Resolution and referred to in that Resolution are the Cultural sites to the traditional authorities of Buganda in accordance with the Laws of Uganda.  These two Resolutions are in strict compliance with the stated aims and objectives of the NRM.  These are to correct mistakes that were made by past administrators that have in turn resulted in the turmoil and instability that Uganda has gone through since independence.  The intention now is to build a National Consensus on all issues that concern Ugandans generally and identifiable groupings.  The traditional rulers affected by the present Bill are the traditional rulers of the Kingdoms of Buganda, Toro, Bunyoro, Ankole and the territory of Busoga.  

As Members of this Council are aware, the arbitrary destruction and the trampling under foot by the Obote Regime of cultural and traditional Institutions, long cherished by significant sections of the population of Uganda and the confiscation of their assets and properties by the state have since the perpetration of these acts divided the population and seriously alienated the communities affected by these acts from the Body politic of Uganda.  Indeed these acts have shaken their faith in belonging to that body politic.  All Members will agree, therefore, that it is essential for the future unity, harmony and prosperity of the Ugandan society that the state and indeed this Council should clear the air and take all necessary steps to bring these estranged communities back into the pot so that we can all march together into the future as one strong and united people. (Applause) Giving to these communities the freedom to have back their traditional rulers and their cultural assets and property is clearly the only way to food their feelings of being wronged and to eliminate their feeling of alienation.

The Resolutions of the National Resistance Army Council and of this Council itself on the matter are clearly salutary steps in this direction.  It is very important that all Ugandans should learn to accommodate and tolerate one another despite our cultural differences. (Applause) Indeed we should learn to enjoy unity in cultural diversity.  No person or community is being required by the Bill to have or accept a traditional ruler.  Having a traditional ruler will be purely a voluntary matter for those communities who wish to have a traditional ruler.  Consequently, the existence  (for those who have them), of traditional rulers as traditional and cultural institutions cannot in any way offend other sections of the population of Uganda who choose not to have traditional rulers.  Indeed the existence of traditional rulers constitutes an important part of the cultural and national heritage of Uganda.  Something which the whole country can uphold cherish and be proud of as with the case in other African countries such as Nigeria and Ghana where the existence of traditional rulers from time immemorial has caused no constitutional or other difficulties and also in countries such as India, Malaysia and Japan.  Japan is important as an example of a highly progressive country but which adheres to its cultural institutions including entering their houses with their shoes off.

I will now go to the actual provisions of the Bill.  The Bill seeks to amend Article 8 of Constitution; to repeal Clauses (3) and (4) which are or seem to be obstacles to the existence of traditional rulers.  It seeks also to introduce a new paragraph (d) of Clause (2) of this Article to confer on every person the freedom to adhere to his culture and the cultural institutions of the community to which he belongs or even a community of his choice.  Such a provision will clearly enable any community in Uganda to practice, promote and uphold their culture and cultural institutions including having, if they so desire, traditional rulers.  It has to be borne in mind however that this new Clause will be subject to the provisions of the existing Clauses (5) and (6) of Article 8.  These Clauses state quite clearly that the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms conferred by Clause (2) of that Article which will include the new rights and freedoms, should not prejudice the rights and freedoms of others or the public interests and in particular that freedom is subject to the human rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution.  Clause (3) of the Bill, seeks to repeal the existing Article 118 of the Constitution and to replace it with three new Articles namely; 118, 118 (a) and 118 (b).  

According to the new Article 118, the previous abolition of traditional rulers by the Constitution is cancelled.  Under that Article the Institution of Traditional Rulers may exist in any community in Uganda where the people so wish.  It is to exist according to the culture, customs and traditions of the people but, under the Article, a traditional ruler is prohibited from taking part in politics and from having or exercising any administrative, legislative, executive or Judicial powers of Central or Local Government. According to the Article, the person designated as a traditional ruler shall be determined in accordance with the customs and traditions of the community for whom that person is to be traditional ruler.  A traditional ruler is exempted by the Article from direct personal tax.  He is also to enjoy such other privileges and benefits as may be conferred upon him by the Legislature that is set by this House, or by the government or by the culture, customs and traditions of his community.  

The new Article 118 defines the expression Traditional Ruler for the purpose of that Article and for Articles 118 (a) and 118 (b) as being a King or ruler, by whatever name called, of a Kingdom or territory, the institution of which was previously abolished under the Constitution.  The new Article 118 (a) empowers the Legislature - that is this august House, to make provision for the return to traditional rulers of any assets or property previously owned by them or connected to these or attached to their offices and which were previously confiscated by the state.  It seeks to implement the Resolutions of the National Resistance Army Council and this Council itself, to the effect that these assets and property should be returned in accordance with the Laws of Uganda.  For facilitating the transfer to them of these assets and property, Clause (4) of the new Article 118 constitutes traditional rulers as a Corporation Ipso with perpetual succession and with capacity to sue and be sued and to hold assets and property in trust for themselves and their community.

If I may explain, a Corporation Ipso, is a Corporation, that is a body corporate that consists of one person.  Examples are; every Bishop is a Corporation Ipso, the Administrator General is a Corporation Ipso, the Public Trustee and so on.  They are corporations; it means that these rulers, if this House passes this Bill, will have two personalities.  They will have personalities, if I may quote one example, for instance, Mutebi as Mutebi but also as Kabaka of Buganda.  Now, as Kabaka of Buganda, he will be a Corporation and as a corporation, he will have capacity to hold property on his behalf and on behalf of the people of Buganda and to sue and be sued in respect of that property but the suing is the suing of the Institution of the Kabakaship not of Mutebi.  It is just like the suing of the Attorney General - I am sued every day, I do not know how many times. (Laughter) It will just be a representative action that the Institution will be sued in respect of the property, not with respect of any other matter but if there is something about the property - I am sure these Institutions will make necessary administrative arrangements for people who will attend to these matters.

The new Article 118 (b) repeats the effect of the existing Article 118, Clause (5) of the Constitution that protects the government from any Court actions in respect of the abolition of traditional rulers and the confiscation of their assets and properties that were effected under the existing Article 118 of the Constitution.  When the government took the properties, it took care to protect itself and it provided that no action shall lie against government for confiscating the property that belonged to the traditional rules.  We want to continue with that protection.  What will happen in future, of course, when the properties are returned - but we want to make it clear that traditional rulers, when they have recovered their property, will now not come to sue the government and say, from 1967 to the present, you were enjoying our properties. That will not be. 

As Members are aware I have also caused to be introduced in this Council, a Bill to enable the Council to make its provision for the return of the traditional and cultural assets and properties of traditional rulers, in pursuance of the provisions of the present Bill and also in furtherance of the two Resolutions on the matter already referred to.  I would like to emphasise that when the present Bill comes into force, not only the people of Buganda, Ankole, Toro, Bunyoro and Busoga will be free to have traditional rulers if they so wish but also any other community in Uganda can have one if they so wish or desire. Further more, that these rulers will not be imposed on any community that does not desire to have them. 

Finally, Mr. Chairman, hon. Members, permit me to say in conclusion that we who are assembled here today should feel the great honour that history has called upon us to perform this supreme national duty of redressing serious wrongs done in the past in our name to sections of our populations, which wrongs have caused such serious divisions among us and brought so much misery to our people. After performing these duties we can move confidently into the future as one united people of Uganda.  Having said that, Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill now before this Council and entitled the Constitution Amendment Bill, be read a Second Time. I beg to move.

MR. WILLIAM W. KIWAGAMA (Bunya County, Iganga): Thank you very much Mr. Chairman.  I stand here to support the Bill. (Applause) I must congratulate the NRM Government for having struggled to enable the Minister to present this Bill this afternoon.  I must say that the dignity of Ugandans has been returned to them; because culture is a human behaviour which has evolved over many years and it is passed on from generation to generation.  It is such a valuable aspect of human behaviour that you cannot simply legislate against it by just a stroke of a pen. I do not know what the intentions of the then leaders, who legislated to abolish these traditional rulers that were of such value to the community, were.  So, any sensible person would not have dared to abolish them. Perhaps they were trying to solve problems that they thought cultural differences between Ugandans were the source of their political problems that they were having in administering this country.  

The problem is not different cultures, which Ugandans have rather than that, the cultures we have are assets to Ugandans because it makes the community of Uganda such a kitobero. A Kitobero is a mixture of different foods of different tastes.  You can imagine mixing piripiri with sugar and salt and everything and then the taste you get is a personal experience.  Our problem is ignorance.  Of course, ignorance is the source of our problems of poverty.  Poverty is the child of ignorance, the disease we talk about is the child of ignorance and instead of fighting against ignorance, and these leaders were fighting against cultures.  They abolished these traditional rulers, but did they solve any problem? We have had problems since then in fact.  As a result of the dissatisfaction of Ugandans, their cultures being legislated, were abolished. They would create a Uganda with no culture at all because it will take us a long time to evolve a Ugandan culture and that culture will come from the rite of cultures we have and we should allow these cultures to be practised and enjoyed by whoever decides to enjoy which culture.  

Over time, as Ugandans work together, they will evolve a common culture, which will have come from the rite of these different cultures that Ugandans enjoy. I think one’s identity is a pride for I am proud to be a Musoga. I was born in Busoga and of engabi clan and as such.  You cannot, whatever you want, whoever you are, you cannot legislate against me being a musoga or being an Acholi or being whatever we are, all of us are Ugandans.  It has been a source of conflict, especially, here in Buganda and, of course, in Busoga.  This move is also good in that the present trend going around or practised is to return things to the previous owners the Asians have got theirs, other people have got theirs and so the Basoga must get their culture back, and the Baganda must get their culture back, and the Acholi must also get theirs back.  Therefore, Mr. Chairman, I do not want to belabour this point, but I am very, very happy that this Bill has been moved and now Ugandans will start being proud while they are building their nation Uganda.  Thank you very much.

CAPT. GASATURA (Rushenyi County, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I was impressed the other day to hear hon. Nekyon defending the Federal State of Uganda, and I was impressed to hear another hon. Member from Bushenyi calling for return to the Kingdoms.  I was impressed to hear the reconciliatory remarks from different parts of Uganda favourable to the return to traditional rules and the properties “ebyaffe.”  In the corridors on the sides, when you talk to the different Members, particularly Members from Buganda - “tetwandibyagadde” -we would not have liked this, but you cannot speak out. (Laughter)  Obviously in the public there is what they will have to stand for an it would be inappropriate for me to call out two, three, four names of those who said so.  Mr. Chairman, once in a while, one has to bear more allegiance to one’s conscience.

I am a Republican; nevertheless, I do support culture.  In the recent past, debate has raged in the press and in the public as to whether this parliament has the right to amend the constitution.  Each one short off different directions, the Law Society with all the learned men disagreed with the custodian of the law, the Attorney General. Strange enough in my view, they were both right.  The Law Society and many Members in the public said, this Parliament has no right and the Attorney General saying “which law Madam,” as depicted in the cartoon was right in that the law does still permit us to amend a Constitution but, the right goes beyond the law, Mr. Chairman.  I wish to submit that Uganda’s troubles have never been the question of law or the Constitution but rather the question of legitimacy.   If we have agreed nationally, and indeed in this House, that to make sure that our new constitution is not tainted by colours, movements or parties, let us go for C.A. Then the same question remains valid, why at this time we should ‘mend two legs of the table and leave the others weak’.  

We may only be setting up Uganda and Buganda in particular, for another about 5, 10, 20 years hence, to question the validity, the legitimacy of why the Amendment at this time?  I do not oppose such moves, but I wish to withdraw my support.  I wish two things; one, that we would leave such question to the Commission to be elected by Constituent Assembly.  Two, I would wish to see some clear statement as to the intention of the use of such properties, the so called “Ebyaffe,” as the 360 square miles which is nearly 100 - square kilometres, how are we going to make sure that even the people of Buganda are to benefit from such entitlements? Mr. Chairman, I wish to withdraw myself from the debate until the Constituent Assembly.

MR. MBURA MUHINDO (Busongora County, Kasese): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The NRM’s deliberate policy of accommodation and broad based governance of the country and compromise to have everybody given a chance to participate in self rule, to create harmony which is a catalyst for development, and it is on this point, and in this spirit, that I will support this Bill Now, the role of the traditional rulers in keeping their society united and keeping culture, and culture which is a determinant of a people cannot be ignored, and culture also has its dynamics and also depends on the situations and environment. That culture must also be sustainable and if it is not sustainable, then these rulers may be in a problem; and I also want to submit that there is need for modern methods of managing society, and in modern methods of managing society, what I want to say is that these traditional rulers must have this in mind in the modern management of society.  If they begin where they left, it may be very bad news, because the society is no longer where they were at that time, because as I have said society is very dynamic.  

These traditional rulers must also be able to understand that they also derive their mandate from the people and not vice-versa -(Interjection)- yes, the people must accept you as a traditional ruler.  If they do not accept you, then you are not their ruler, and that is why I am saying that they must derive their mandate from the people; and they must plan for their societies and they must be able, also, to forecast what is coming and, they must also know how to control their own societies.  I know people are saying that is politics, but I want to submit that there is no way you can draw a line between this and politics, and if politics is management of society, are these ones managing cows, plants or what are they managing?  They are also managing people.  So, we must be very careful, even when we state that they are not going to be involved in politics, we must know what we are talking about.  And they must make proper and viable decisions on behalf of the people, because when you are leading people, your own decision can determine the course of direction that your people are going to take.

I also want to submit that education is a tool for development, and we need these leaders to be educated and learned people because they must have knowledge of managing their people.  They must have skills, and if they have these knowledge and skills, therefore, they will be in position to propel their subjects to development, and also they must understand modern society, so that the societies can be sustainable.  Any culture or any people that cannot survive the rigours of the environment, these will normally be - they will come to be extinct, and therefore, it is important that the leaders must know the dynamics of society and the laws of survival and competition. Economic development; we are not going to have leaders just for the sake of having leaders to sit down and grow big bellies.  They must be able to propel their people into economic development of this country in agriculture. They must show their role, because they are not going to sit there and they say they are not supposed to be involved in other things, the people must benefit, and they must develop their human resources, plus this culture.  It must be developed, in the spirit of self-help.  They must also mobilise their people so that their people can work; they must do that, if they cannot do that, then I am sorry I withdraw my support.

Now, in modern society we have all talked about human rights, and I want to emphasize that these leaders must ensure that they observe human rights.  It is unfortunate that at my age, I never experienced much of the ruling of these people, but form what I hear, some of their practices during their ceremonies, they were abusing human rights, because some of them used to sacrifice human beings, if I got wrong information, I need to be corrected.  Now at this material time, we are observing human rights, and if they cannot do this, I will withdraw my support.  

Now, I have a few questions to pose, Mr. Chairman. I am posing a question about their political role.  Now, I want to ask and I need the Attorney General to be able to clear my mind, that if these leaders are not going to be involved in politics, what measure and you going to use?  To say this is now politics, now this is that and this is that.  What measure are you going to use?  And supposing this traditional ruler is involved in politics, what punishment do you have for him?  You are quiet about it, can you tell us now, that if they are involved in politics, this is the punishment.  I need that.  

Also, I need to have my mind cleared that you can have a traditional ruler, but this traditional ruler is ruling in a sea of dictatorship from the Central and Local Government. Now, should he just sit and keep quiet that he is a cultural ruler, when the people he is ruling are being marginalised and then he keeps quiet that because he is a traditional ruler? I need clarification.  Also, some of these people have also been dictators, and in the modern world, dictators have no room.  So, some of them were known for taking sides on political matters, and it is likely to happen.  I also want to know if one of them or all of them take sides on political matters, what are we going to do?  What punishment do you give them? Some of them also created a lot of religious bias, and this is exemplified by what happened here in Buganda, these religious wars, I want also to ask, supposing one of them is found in that category, what do you do? Also I want to be cleared there are those people who did not have this traditional rulers and in this country there are people who can become very, very opportunistic, now supposing a community gets three or four people competing to become a traditional ruler, because eating has come; how will the Government come in?  I want that one also to be cleared.

On the issue of taxation, I am really wondering how my own father who cannot afford to buy a pair of shoes can be taxed and a man who is swimming in a sea of wealth is not taxed, is this fair? And yet we are saying we must tax people so that we can raise revenue to run our affairs, and these are the people who are even looking for free things; some of them, and why can they not be taxed, If my own father who cannot afford to war shoes can be taxed? 

On a very, very serious note, what is the position of Kasese in as far as this matter is concerned? This is the position; the people of Kasese, have been victims of these traditional rulers and as you are aware hat for quite a number of years, the people of Kasese and Bundibugyo, they made a very big resistance and fought for their own freedom.  And it was during the rule of Dictator Idi Amin that the people of Kasese were given their own district and those of Bundibugyo.  Kasese, Bundibugyo and the present Kabarole were one kingdom. I am telling you that the people of Kasese are saying, ‘enough is enough; they belong to Kasese and there is no way, I am telling you, this Bill is going to put them back under that bondage.’  (Laughter)  They are saying it.  They are also saying that whatever properties are in Kasese, are theirs.  Because there are many assets that are in Kabarole, built using money from the taxpayers of Kasese; they are not asking for compensation.  They have also said, you can take as they take what is in Kasese.  

So, I hope the Attorney General, the Mover of this Motion should be able to say something on this.  Because unless it is said in broad daylight, we may have a problem where people must think that they must gang up a resistance in case something happens.  I hope the Mover of this Motion will say something because I have really told you in a broad daylight and the whole world is listening.  

Now, even when these districts were given, their boundaries are still very, very fragile the issue of the boundaries at this material time becomes very, very crucial; we want to know where these boundaries are.

In conclusion, to create harmony and unity, dictatorial tendencies must be stopped. The cultural leaders must understand the present dynamics of society and know that culture evolves for the better of the society’s development.  They must be highly politicised so that they will understand where Uganda has come from, where we are now and where we would like to go for a modern Uganda.  With these, I support the Motion, Mr. Chairman.

MR. MARWAS PAULINO (Dodoth County, Kotido): Mr. Chairman, I stand to support the Motion.  In supporting the Motion, I wish to be educated on the Bill because there are things that I personally do not understand.  In Article 118, Sub-section (8); they talk of a traditional leader meaning a king or ruler, whatever name they call it, of a kingdom or a territory.  But when we go back to 118(2), we go and say, he should not indulge himself in politics or exercise administrative, legislative or executive or judicial powers.  To my understanding, a ruler rules; nothing short of that.  What kind of a king are we going to create what is going to be sitting duck and whatever happens in his kingdom is being executed by somebody else? I fail to understand. My feeling is; I hope we are not trying to play on the emotions of Ugandans.  Why should a spoon be called a spade while it is a spoon? I feel that if the king has to be given powers, let him have the powers.  What happens if his subordinate goes against him and he has nothing to do about him?  He has to go to the police. Where does he go for redress? Where does he go?  (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please. Order, please.

MR. MARWAS:  Mr. Chairman, one aspect is that we seem to be playing on the emotions of Ugandans, when we talk of these executive powers of the Central or Local Government - City minus where he is supposed to rule or within where he is ruling since all these powers are going to be executed by Local Government or Central Government.

The Minister has just given us an example of a corporation and so on; he has given us an example of a Bishop - but I wish to tell the hon. Minister that the Bishop has full powers to rule a Diocese.  When a priest makes a mistake or a sister, he takes action or fires.  So, I do not see the relevance of these corporations and so on and corporations he has given us an example.  I fail to understand.

My other submission is that, kings are kings; they do not derive powers from anybody else.  But then our kings are going to have privileges arising from the legislature or government.  What happens if another mad man comes in again and he is supposed to be given those powers through government and legislature?  What takes place? Because all he thinks is redress must be either by government or the legislative House. Let us do things the way we should.  I do not see how the law now we are enacting is not going to be called repugnant by somebody else who comes tomorrow.  Because unless the Attorney General is going to advise me this time and convince me this time because he has never convinced me anytime; I hope this time he will convince me that he is doing the right job today. 

Lastly, Mr. Chairman, there has been a lot of talk since the Budget was read and a cross-section of Ugandans say, it has been a budget of raising taxes and looking for money and nothing else.  But just as one member has just said - my old father is going to be paying 80,000/-

AN HON. MEMBER: What?

MR. MARWAS: Graduated tax plus all other taxes.  But looking at Uganda as it is today, looking for money, can’t there be some rule for these rulers, rich as they may be, to contribute for the sake of this country?

Lastly, I support this Motion on the Principle of culture, because people without culture have no sense of the future.  That is the only principle I have.  But as far as the Bill is concerned, unless I am convinced by the Attorney General.

Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your indulgence.

DR. HIGIRO (Lwemiyaga, Masaka): Mr. Chairman I stand to support this Bill. I would like to join those who are congratulating the government and Minister for Justice for having done such a good job at such a short time.  We know that there are certain times when we have asked for some Bills and took months and even a year before we got them here.  But when you consider the time we were discussing this issue in a closed session and the time we have seen this Bill, really the job has been done very well. (Laughter)  Mr. Chairman, I support this Bill, and my support is based on the following principles.  One, cultural value.  It has already been said that a people without culture is just like a car without ‘gasoline.’ The car will not move properly if it is removed at all; it will not move, and a culture makes people move, it makes people have a spirit, and a culture is developed after very, very many centuries for people to feel it, they do not even write it down, it is not a written down constitution, they have it in their minds. 

This Law that is being amended condoned acts of injustice.  Properties and assets of cultural values were confiscated, others were destroyed, and this Law that we are amending endorsed that.  The Law was repressive it denied peoples and communities from maintaining their own institutions, and from carrying out their own culture something that should not be in Law.  The law was discriminative as certain persons were denied the right of playing their own rightful parts in developing this country. The cultural institutions which were abolished had been useful to the country for very many centuries we know that one of the institutions had foresight to invite Christians here, it had foresight to invite modern civilisation into Uganda.  That was the foresight of an institution we are restoring, these acts were performed when none of us was here.

The proposals as are made by this amendment, are plauisible the cultural leader is not going to interfere in political activities. Political activities are going to be left to us who can play our part, and if the people feel that we are not fit, they elect others. The provision removes historical problems of confusion where traditional leaders were suspected by the central governments of trying to usurp their powers and vice-versa.  If we leave the provisions here today we are going to establish away whereby this kind of confusion is not there, the amendments spell out who does that, clearly.  There will not be any confusion, and the cultural leaders are going to spearhead the development of our culture and also they will forge unity.  In fact, I am convinced that if in 1966/1967, the legislature then if they had foresight and the leaders had vision as leaders of NRM, and they had proposed this amendment so that this amendment was approved, then Uganda would have escaped from the bloodshed that we have had all these years.  Because then there would have been no confusion; culture would have been continued, political adventurers would have continued, but Uganda would have been peaceful.  

This law that we are amending is a foundation of freedom; this amendment establishes justice and genuine freedom.  No force is going to be used to persons or communities to re-establish or to re-instituted a traditional ruler, it spells out clearly if a community does not want it is not going to be forced but if a community is interested then it will have their traditional ruler. What I know and is known nearly by everybody in Buganda - it is clear without the institute of Kabaka - the society is not balanced, they do not feel balanced at all but with it, there is total balance and movement forward.  Mr. Chairman that is why I support this amendment.  Thank you. (Applause)

BRIG. KYALIGONZA (Historical Member): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand here to add my voice to all those who have spoken and I have some few observations I would like to make before I give my feelings towards this Bill.  It is true culture has got its own significant in life and culture must be adhered to by subjects of those people who like it.  It is true no human being has no culture. Everybody has culture but the magnitude and implementation of this culture differs. This situation, induced me to believe that in all honesty when we are talking of returning “Ebyaffe” it must be total and therefore, my own conscious does not convince me to say that we are talking about returning “Ebyaffe” when actually on one had we are saying, on the other hand we are saying you should not move beyond this border.  The culture that we are talking about is the Kabaka, with all his regalia and traditions.  Now, if Mutebi has to be re-instated as a cultural head not as a kind, or a ruler, we are actually not returning the “Ebyaffe.” Therefore, the moment we encourage the idea of saying we are returning ‘ebyaffe’ we are either saying that we are returning ‘ebyaffe’ half way or in totality. 

In my situation, having observed the trait of development, I have this to say; that the Ssabataka whom we are talking about as a King now, is in contradiction with our own constitution.  But if we have got to return him as a traditional head, then we are not returning the king, we are returning a cultural leader who is going to look after the Mubyasi, the Mubito, and so on that is in Bunyoro.  But if we have got to return the kind, then we are going to return him with all his power.  Now, I also pause another question; if we are talking about unity, peace, tranquillity and so on, and at the same time we expect this ruler to behave the way we expect him to behave, we are actually trying his hands he is a king who is coming with no power, he is a king who is supposed to rule over the traditions.  Now, some tradition may go amok as it has always happened in our tradition, and the kings have come about as a result of revolutions.  In Bunyoro, a king had to fight against another to become a king.  Here, we are legislating it which is peaceful but at the same time many of these fellows have revolted and gone and established their own kingdoms in areas of leadership in their own places where they are of course, being supported.  Now, we talk of Toro, Toro will be claimed by Bunyoro because they will ask for the ebyaffe; the Banyoro for the Babito in Busoga, because they are also people who have ran away and so on and so forth form Bunyoro. (Laughter) So, when we talk of ebyaffe, we are opening an avenue of claims.   Bunyoro as we speak today, we shall have to come up to claim ebyaffe because in Buruli and in Mubende we still had that referendum that was not supported. 

So, if we are talking about returning ebyaffe, the Ssabataka came in we were talking about him, he was exercising his traditional cultures and he had not come in as a legislation; the details the Attorney General, may be, will advise us.  But when we go into the depth of the discussion, we might have to reiterate the question and I am inclined to believe that the NRM Government, as transparent as it may be, as much as we love peace, as much as we love accommodation, there is also a need to clarify some of the issues which I think should not be questioned afterwards.  The legalities are questions whether we have or we are doing this out of context, out of appeasing a society is another question because as hon. Gasatura put it, we are talking about the constitution which is in the offing, and it is one of the issues which is to be discussed; but at the sametime, we are pre-emptying the making of this constitution.  But at the same time, we also want to have the rights of these people who want their cultural heads.  

So, I am inclined to think that the bringing in of this Bill is timely, but at the same time, we are rushing too fast.  We could rush, if you driving your car at a speed of 80 is fast enough, when you go a hundred, it could be dangerous you could crash your car but at the same time, we have the Yoruba, we have the Tzars, we have Rajas and some others who have been referred to from Japan.  These people are cultural leaders who have got no borders, they Yuuba in Malawi has and pays his own allegiance to his cultural head.  Here we are limiting our cultural leaders in areas, we are limiting our Buganda king to Buganda region; similarly, we are limiting our Omukama to Bukama region Bunyoro region whereas we may have some people in Karagwe, we may have some people in Zaire.  This is the question to be addressed by the author of this Bill.  

So, I wish to put to his that that Bill in its own context is not total; already some areas have disintegrated when we talk of culture, all must accommodate the culture. I am wondering what may happen to the Mutoro vs. the Mukonjo that is culture and then to my Friend in Bushenyi and down in Mbarara, my friend in Hoima and sometimes to Kibale. Because Kibale is another question they are either saying we go back to Ssabataka or we remain in Bunyoro or we remain here or we form our own ebyaffe because all these are issues which I thought will be discussed in our Constitution.  

I sound reactionary, to say that this matter should have been properly discussed and enacted by the Constituent Assembly which embodies these issues of Ssabatakas and the cultural leaders.  But if we talk, we are going to have the cultural leader with no authority, I am also inclined to say that its gimmick where this cultural leader will be put in a cross -road where he cannot administer his people, a dictator is somewhere doing something wrong, he is not supposed to interfere and at the same time, he is only supposed to talk about ‘Okwabya ennyimbe,’ and so on, but you cannot really head or lead a certain group when you have got no jurisdiction, when you have no power.  

So, in my view, I would propose that maybe somebody would bring an amendment that some of these provisions are either amended, to say that the cultural leader shall either be a king and we know now we are reinstating a king, or we accept that we should sit over this until the constituent Assembly discusses it in detail, so that we do not get the accusation to say that we were pre-emptying the Constituent Assembly for the sake of getting  -(Interruption) 	

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, as the House is really involved or getting involved, it is the most fundamental matter Constitutionally speaking, the heart of Article 118, is directly not on tradition.  So, therefore, the House when it is debating this, it should give the hon. Member holding the Floor of the House that we are debating it, he should do it honestly in the honesty, to amend an institution.  The word is ‘institution’ not ‘traditionalism’.  So, as the Bill is being misguided - because it is clear here; the law is clear - Article 118 we are on institutions not traditionalism, not culture, nobody in Uganda since we got Independence, if anything I am relating culture like Ikarebo - my culture - Ikarebo.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA: So, with that, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Wind up, wind up, please.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  With that, Mr. Chairman, I am inclined to think that this Bill should have been given time to be discussed in our Constituent Assembly, and at the same time, the legal implication should also be looked into, Mr. Chairman. Thank you very much.

MR. ASIKU (Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Chairman.  In practical terms, this particular Bill does not really affect me; in practically terms it does not affect me but my worry is, it will disturb the people of Uganda if you are not very, very careful.  First of all, I wanted to ask the Mover of the Motion to tell the history as to why the Institutions were removed?  Some of the Members of this House were so young they did not know the cause, they need to be educated as to why at one stage, institutions in Uganda that were accepted came to be abolished by the same House? Now, if we are going to reinstate the same institutions, why don’t we reinstate them fully? That is the point of fact why don’t we reinstate them fully?  What is the fear?  This thing must be seriously answered.  Going around the circle, today we please may be a ground, or please a part of Uganda surely for temporary measures and tomorrow the whole nation is brought to square one. (Applause) It took this Government time to abolish institutions in 1967 -(Interjection.) Okay, 66-67, okay, we shall fix 67, that means we lived without kingdoms for 26 good years. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order, please.

MR. ASIKU: Whether they were good or not, we are now involved to throw out the whole constitution which was abrogated in 1967, we are now in peace to write a new constitution which will be convenient to this country, it will take a period of time we all agreed.  Why is NRM in a hurry for only six (6) months when actually the new Constitution is now going to be debated, promulgated.  We want this part of the constitution to be amended before six months.  What is that urgency?  I need to be convinced.  Now, I need to be convinced because tomorrow I will be blamed for wrong decisions we have taken.  

Now I want to go back to a few of the remarks our friends have made; ‘ebyaffe’ did not know this language I knew it from here - it means our things, which things; of which year!  The things of 1967 is it true, let the Muganda tell me in this House, was it Bulange that was taken and is making you more annoyed?  To be sincere is it the House that is making you more annoyed or the institution as a complete entity?  An answer must also be honestly given to this House.  If it is all the Institution as complete, we are not satisfying anything at all, I know I am not a Muganda.  But then some of them are saying, let us ask small, small until we ask all.  (Laughter and Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please. Proceed.

MR. ASIKU:  Now my second honest question goes together with what hon. Gadi said, we are here a good number of the honourables of this region are representatives in Parliament, are you sure you are going to behave like your father behaved in 1967?  At this particular time are you all going to behave the same and be happy?  If you are not, why don’t you tell us openly that the time has gone and let us adopt new systems so that we live well?  That is the question.  It does not help you it does not help me to move around the circle and come to say let us give him the hair and we have the legs we think we have done anything; which in fact will annoy these people more and they will be aggressive.  Now, Mr. Mover, tell, Mr. Chairman. (Laughter) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Asiku address the Chair, please.

MR. ASIKU: Mr. Chairman, I appeal to the Mover of this Motion to tell me exactly what provisions he has made to stop the powers of the ruler, it is like me stopping tell me that my mature son who would have built a house, he would have had his wife, have his children but he would have no power to discipline the children inside that house and until me, his old grandfather comes and say, this is the way.  How do you guarantee this order?  What about if, I am an old man here and my son with his children and new wife maybe, becomes so powerful and comes in and murders me outside here because I am a weak man and I disagree with him?  How do you guarantee this in that Constitution? And how do you actually punish when somebody is to rise up? You have made these provisions.   

I, for one, want peace for this country.  I am looking forward to development but I am not prepared to have cheap politics, so that we are back to square one of the blood-shed and destroy in this country.  Thank you very much.

MRS. MPANGA (Women Representative, Mubende): Thank you very much Mr. Chairman.  I would like to join those people who are congratulating NRA/NRM for bringing the Bill.  When these institutions were abolished, there followed a period when so many people were being killed, so much injustice was done, and at every occasion the government stood up and said we shall leave no stone unturned until justice is done.  But nothing was done at all; this is why I am congratulating NRM because they are leaving no stone unturned until justice is done to everybody in this country. (Applause)

Those of us who are old enough in the sixties (1960s) did see the state turn against its own people and abolishing institutions that are quite central around which our society ticks, without reference to us.  Somebody is asking why were they abolished.  I would like to say they were being abolished because some people wanted to reach certain positions that they could not reach unless they had removed those institutions and, secondly, they were being removed in 1967 enshrined in the Constitution just to legitimise the illegal actions that had already taken place.  I am not a lawyer and I am not going into that but I would like, to tell this House that there is legitimacy, that there is justice but there is also political wisdom. 

Where I come from in Mubende, we are farmers, and because we are good farmers we normally prepare before the planting season. Right now everybody is very busy preparing for the planting season.  If you do not prepare, then you may miss the season and you won’t get good crops.  So, if we say that we shall wait for the CA to begin to do justice we may go into the Constituent Assembly with some people not happy, with some people being left behind and with harps that are not going to pave way for a perfect and a lasting peace.  I think it is political wisdom, Sir, if today we corrected all the past mistakes.  I like this Bill because it is not saying to anybody everybody should have an institution.  They are only saying that those who want and revere them can have them.  Those who do not want do not have to take.  So, you only take if you are willing and you are prepared to have it.  If something belongs to me you do not ask me what are you going to do with it so that you give it back to me because it is mine and if it is mine I will do with it the way I see I want to use it but this touches the whole state.  It touches the whole state because it is in the Constitution.  If we take it without the other people looking then we might not get a lasting peace.  

We have suffered so much, we have suffered oppression, people say there are human rights that will be on tension because of the return of these institutions.  I would like to allay their fears and say that all of us today revere those same human rights and the Constitution we are amending give human rights to everybody alike, men and women, and whatever or wherever you come from but if a part of that Constitution is making me apologise for being what I am, I think, it is right that you remove it so that we begin the next phase with all of us being equal.  The indignity of being told you do not profess to be such and such is bad and I think that should go.  I am surprised, when we were in the closed Session, I thought we all agreed in principle and we passed a resolution and a resolution said; okay, let us have a law to put it in place so that we do things right but I am surprised that after some time some people are confused, others are expressing their confusion, others are saying, ‘let us wait,’ while others are saying, ‘tetwandyagadde naye...’ 

I do not think there is anybody forcing me to want what I want but I want to be who I am and that must be with the institution that heads my own culture.  It is surprising that this Constitution did not abolish the Ministry of Culture and even went as far as taking some cultural sites which legitimately belong to some of us and when they know they were not going to look after them.  This is our cultural heritage and I think if one part of Uganda is not happy the whole of Uganda is not happy.  

We have been able to move along because we have had a very good government that reveres unity; we have been able to wait because we want to usher in a period when we shall discuss peacefully and let everybody respect each other.  People are talking about democracy but I think the central part of democracy to me - I think to me centre or the essence of democracy is to live and let live, live your life and let others live theirs, you must have tolerance that will lead to accommodation of other people’s opinions, we must have mutual respect otherwise we are going to perish.  Listening to each other is very important and I think all of us should be sensitive to other peoples feelings and if we are I think it is right that before we go into the Constituent Assembly we should put right what went wrong.  NRM promised us that they will put right what went wrong and when you do, we shall all sit at this Constituent Assembly table very happy because I will know that I will be listened to as my friend hon. Member from Karamoja will be and that I do not any longer have to be shy to say that I was born a Muganda.  At one time during the 70s my sister was told, she is married to an Englishmen, she was told that you have the worst combination being a Muganda married to a British as if being a Muganda is a six.   This is the type of thing we want to root out of this so that we all respect each other, so that I move from Kabale to Kotido without having ill feelings that others are getting their own way of life when mine has been denied to me.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. MAUMBE MUKWANA (Bungohoko County, Mbale): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In retrospect to her contribution, I support the Motion.  (Applause) The reason being, as it has been highlighted by many speakers because a people without cultural heritage, a people without culture, is like a people without a nation or nationhood.  Because nations evolve as a result of an interaction of various societies at a lower level to create what is a nation.  But as you know, when you study the history of Uganda, obviously we know very well that we derive our statehood, our nationhood from Buganda.  It is a fact.  It was their independent wish, independent of the wishes of the British, the Baganda had evolved themselves into a high level of model production to nationhood. So when we had nationhood as Buganda we became what is Uganda now.  

It could be hypothetical for me to say, okay, for instance, if the Baganda did not have a kingdom would Uganda be there? You can fill the gap.  If Baganda did not fight for ‘ebyaffe’ under the colonial administration would Uganda have got independence as a united country?  I think we as a republican and as Africans can peacefully co-exist with Baganda irrespective of the differences that might arise between us.  We can simply co-exist, Abaganda with ‘ebyaabwe’ and we Bagisu with our ‘imbalu.’ (Laughter) And we know what transpired between the Kingdom of Buganda and the former Government.  It was a conflict, a contradiction as she said, a fight possibly with the President. So, it was a coup de’ tat that took place, a palace coup de’ tat that took place, it was not forces of revolution, it was a coup de’ tat that brought in this new Constitution.  So if we discuss to have meant the previous constitution brought in by the previous government, we are trying to undo what was wrong by then such that the whole nation will come up as united as before, the Baganda have theirs and we have ours.   

Of course there will be some despondency here and there, people will try to say that, you see, Baganda are cultural peoples, I have lived with Baganda, they are not a force of confusion, they are not aggressive, they are very peaceful people that is why you find so many Bagisu live in Buganda, Bugerere, as free people of Uganda.  Then you get other societies, other tribes - I would not say ‘Ensonyi nazifuula obusungu’ but I would say, I think, if they were given time to evolve themselves, they would have also come up as nations like the nation of Buganda. Maybe, Bugisu would have got a king if the British did not come to interrupt and impede the forces of progress in my country.  We would have also got a king who would be at per with the King of Buganda but because there was an interruption, an intervention from abroad, the forces of change were put at a stop, therefore, we create ourselves as a nation.

We should not antagonize these Baganda, we should mould remould and change the system and bring the Kingdom of Buganda to a modern type of society that will be conducive to every Ugandan.  In fact there are areas where this kingdom or the ‘ebyaffe’ where the ruler, the traditional ruler had no right to sue, I mean he has no right on other things, he cannot vote, may be he is above - he cannot get involved in politics, he can be sued in the court of law and he can also sue.  I personally feel that, we have to be a bit modest.  How do I feel if I see the ‘Omugabe’ of Ankole being commanded to the streets of Kampala to be taken to a court of law with no shoes in his feet? I think there has to be some modesty or respect to our cultural heads and cultural leaders.  I think as we come to the Committee Stage, I will have to move certain amendments to the Bill so that it conforms to the modern system of governance because tradition itself is governance, and cultural heritage itself is governance; it is history, governance, and democracy; you cannot divide the two.  You can never have a king if you are not democratic because to be democratic you must be cultured and if you are uncultured you cannot have a king and you cannot have a government.  You would not have that respectability to relish because you are uncounted and uncultured.  Therefore, I personally believe that we have to support this Bill and approve it such that there is a harmonious trans-history forces in this country where there is respect for every Ugandan irrespective of his tribe, irrespective of his religion and irrespective of his non-partisan approach.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
		                    
MR. AKURE: Mr. Chairman, i thank you for giving me this time to contribute on this Bill.  I am worried of this Bill as Members are debating. Recalling what happened sometime, when I see and I think our administrators of that time were acting, it was really against human rights.  Sometime in those days, you would find these fellows called kings, they were too big and the way the population can line up when they come, some of them lie down, you see the man walk on the people -(Laughter)- I do not know whether the same method is going to be followed because we must really be very honest and this House must be legible enough to debate these things very thoroughly because having such things again coming back then we are creating a loophole.  (Interjection)- Although I am reminded that it is their culture but how do you practice that one on human beings?

Now, giving these people power, I am not really worried about it, but how do you differentiate these rulers with the other political leaders because once you are in a position of a ruler it means, therefore, you need to get the next power because you cannot rule out to say that these fellows will be far away from politics, it is not correct, it must happen and it will happen by the way and, therefore, if you want to say we give the Baganda their ‘ebyaffe’ we must be honest rather than saying we shall give them this small power and then we leave the other one.  It is not realistic at all.  We are just only deceiving this House and we are deceiving the people of this country but let us call a spade a spade, when we say we do this we must all move forward and say let us do it whether it is worse or good because we do not want to experience the same problem of what happened in the 60s.  What happened in 60s? The law was put in place and it was debated by this House and it was passed but I do not see the reason why the Minister has become too fast.  For the first time he is very fast with this Bill  -(Laughter)- other Bills, this man has been dragging around.  There are Bills which we should have debated which have not come but why is the very fast with this one; because this is a constitutional matter and it must be handled by the Constituent Assembly.  Why are we amending the Constitution so fast?  What is the reason? Where is the logic, why are we in a hurry?  Therefore, Mr. Chairman, we I feel we should really take this thing very systematically rather than rushing because when we rush we are bound to make mistakes which mistakes we have experienced. (Interruption)

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that if I read the proceedings of the debates in the closed Session properly that is why this Bill is here.  It was requested by this very House on the other end that is why the Bill is here on the request of this House.

MR. AKURE:  Mr. Chairman, although I did not get you very well but the fact remains the same -(Laughter)- that we should really not be in a hurry.  These things done in a hurry will bring us trouble. Some of us are not ready to witness what may happen in future and we shall be questionable that so and so you were there why did you allow it.  We will be asked.  So the issue of doing things behind the doors - me, I really feel it is a very uncomfortable way or unhealthy way of handling matters because we must handle this matter in such a way that it embraces everybody.  Now, we are restricting these people within a certain region.  Now, we are restricting these people within a certain region.  Now, what about the Basoga, what will they say?  The Batoro, the Banyankole, the Karimojong, the Acholis, what will they say?  We shall all demand whatever we want -(Interjection)- but will it be possible that we shall all get what we want?  Gentlemen, let us not take this House for a ride. We would like here to say that when this thing is done, we must do things that can remain on record so that tomorrow somebody else cannot turn around and say no, this was done by a few groups of people.

I understand that some time when we were debating the Constituent Assembly Bill, some other person said that this House was not competent to debate some of these things but why are we debating it now?  Has this House become so important when the other time it was marginalised? Are we becoming important now?  Why couldn’t we wait for the Constituent Assembly to pass the Amendment Bill?  It is just a matter of really dodging questions, trying to blow eyes of others, there is this light somewhere, some other places are dark but I think we must see this thing at a very light point of view rather than saying we must do this one and then tomorrow we turn round and say it was not done rightly.  

I think for the benefit of this country really, we have had problems, we all know, but we do not want to make the same mistake so that tomorrow we go back to square one and then we begin to say “I wish I knew” and yet you left things just happening during the broad day light.  Whatever we do here must be transparent and we must really make it a point that whatever is done by this House, it must be well understood.  The population must understand our position.  It is not a matter of saying we do this and then tomorrow we forget.  I feel the Minister should address these issues because he has not explained to us really fully why we want to pass this Motion. He was just trying to dodge us and then leave us in dilemma as usual. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. SEKITOLEKO: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Sir, I support the Motion.   In supporting the Motion, Mr. Chairman, I wish, first of all, to make sincere thanks for mainly the people of Buganda for choosing to solve this matter the way we are solving it.  (Applause) Mr. Chairman, I do not that quite a number of people in Buganda area were annoyed, were discontented buy they chose to solve this matter on a table.  This is quite a mature way of solving problems of this kind and I wish quite a number of our citizens in this country could chose to solve problems on a table instead of flexing our muscles.  

Having said that, may I also say that the case of culture, is so much in our hearts, it is so much deep rooted that it is something that we cannot even make a law against, we cannot change.  As hon. Kiwagama said actually, that a person, for instance, is born by a certain tribe, he cannot move from that tribe so it is so important that we should really give some respect to our culture.  Unity for a country is very important but it is not wrong at all to unite with our cultures, it is not wrong at all to unite with the Baganda when women have to kneel down when they are greeting elders.  It is not wrong.  I think we should accept to unite but with our cultures.  Unless we do that, unless we put emphasis in our cultures in our society, our society will not make any progress or any headway.  

You will recall, in the past, people we looked at as people to bring developments in our area, the people that we went to advise us, the people that were advising us and their advices were taken seriously were the traditional ruler; the Kabaka, the Bakama gave an advice to this people say to grow cotton everybody would do that.  If a Kabaka gave advice to his people to plant coffee everybody would go in and plant coffee. Their advice was taken very seriously and many of us were just almost sentimental, we just thought that probably the man has spoken to God and many people still believe that the Kabaka does not make a mistake.  It is very important that we do not kill these cultures.  We should only encourage and make sure that we advise these people correctly, give them proper advice, show them that in the Uganda of today a Kabaka or a Mukama, this is where you sit but let us have him.  Many Ugandans today in places of leadership got their education paid for by the Kabaka or by the Bakama and this money was being collected from their subjects because it was easy for them to collect this money from the people.  So, I think if we are singing of development we should also think of accommodating our kinds.  I thank you.

MR. KAMURWON (Kongasis County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much Mr. Chairman.  I stand to support the Motion. (Laughter) I support the Motion because firstly it was agreed in principle during the closed Session.  Secondly, I support it because of historical reasons.  Before the colonialists came here and conquered the people of this country, in Uganda there were two societies.  One was a centralised society or a stratified society and these are the society of Buganda, the society of Bunyoro Kitara, the society of Toro and the society of Ankole and also included the principality of Busoga.  These societies were symbols of African civilization in East Africa.  Mr. Chairman, when the colonialists came in, they decided to undermine these societies and this saw the fights, that were fought by Kabalega and Kabaka Muwanga and these leaders ended up in a very miserable situation.  I am told that they died in very bad conditions.  The other societies were unstratified societies, societies that were not centralised.  Societies like we find in Kigezi such as the Bakonjo, the Bamba, the Japadhola, the Bagisu, the Sebei, the Karimojong and the societies in the northern region, the people of West Nile, Lango and Acholi. 

Now, I want to make this submission.  It is very difficult for people who grew in an unstratified society, in societies that were not centralised to understand the feeling of the people who were brought up in centralised societies. (Applause) This is a fundamental question.  So in as much as we are here as republicans, we must understand the feeling of people who were to come through stratified societies and the attachment they have in those societies, and also those people who were brought up in stratified societies should also be able to understand the position of the people who were brought up in unstratified societies.  (Applause) 

Now, this Bill is intended to harmonize those societies, that is why I support it very much. Now, the problem in the Government is that the Government has not been consistent in its policies, this is a problem which has been in Elwawo, the place I represent in Kapchorwa and also here.  The problem is, the Government decided to say that issues concerning the Constitution of this country must be handled by a separate body and we said; ‘Hishala’ and this august House decided to agree to constitute a new body to handle constitutional matters; this is the problem.  

The Government again comes around after we have taken that very important decision and says NRC, was not constituted properly; there are historical Members, several nominated Members, the others from the electoral areas who were elected indirectly, should now amend part of the constitution.  Now, as much as I understand the Government’s position I think the Government is having some problems -(Laughter)- Mr. Chairman, we have been here as representatives I have been personally in pain to explain this inconsistent situation in Government. The other day the Government says this, another time it is saying this one  -(Interruption)

MR. ABU MAYANJA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I am grateful to the hon. Member who is contributing extremely well for giving way for me to give him this information.  I want to give two bits of information; one that when we pass this Bill, this will not prevent the Constituent Assembly, eventually when it is constituted, from discussing the matter -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR. ABU MAYANJA: Every Constitutional problem, Mr. Chairman, I am surprised, every Constitutional matter will be discussed by the Constituent Assembly and whatever is agreed will be put in the new Constitution.  Now, therefore, the question is why do you discuss it now?  Some people have tried to give an answer - but I hope Members will listen.  This House agreed on the 30th of April to return certain confiscated properties to the people or to the culture people of Buganda - that was agreed you passed a resolution -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MR. ABU MAYANJA:  The House went further and said, let this be done in accordance with the Law.  Now, there is no way you are going to have the Law, this is the manner in which the Law is being enacted, you are enacting this constitution to create or bring back cultural or traditional rulers to whom we shall be returning their properties in the next Bill, so I do not understand why we say, why not wait for the Constituent Assembly, these are the reasons and we are not in confusion.

MR. KAMURWON:  Mr. Chairman, I wish the Attorney General well.  Now, -(Laughter)- I have said that I wish the attorney General well because we are intending to solve a problem now once this Bill goes through we make this Law, now we do not know what type of people are going to the Constituent Assembly these delegates may come and say, whatever, you have done we do not accept.  Now, in that situation I am not saying that they are going to do it but in case that one happens, do you not think the Attorney General will have created another problem?

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the hon. Member for the opportunity to give him information on this subject.  If the hon. Member and the House remember, Section 18 of the constituent Assembly Statute excluded from the jurisdiction and arm-pit of the Constituent Assembly - anything that had a local content would not be allowed to be discussed by the Constituent Assembly in that Section this matter, therefore, if it is solved will not be allowed to be discussed in the Constituent Assembly, in as far as it touches on local issues. Therefore, I think that this matter, although the Attorney General thinks that it can be brought and although he was advising that the same matter can be resurrected and brought in the Constituent Assembly, this House has tied the hands of the Members of the Constituent Assembly from discussing local issues under Section 18 -(Interruption) 

MR. ONGOM:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think the Member who thought he informed us has just mis-informed us.  What that Section refers to is in reference to a referendum not to do with a discussion of matters of local interest.  He says, matters of local affairs will be dealt with by the local people and will be referred to a referendum locally.

MR. KAMURWON:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the hon. Member for giving me information.  I would like, in supporting this Motion, to appeal to hon. Members here who seem to be looking at - there are Members here who are scared to their spinal cords.  I have heard Members saying, that if we pass this Bill I think there is going to be a problem after the coronation and handing over properties.  But I want to assure Members that I have also been in contact with some enlighten groups in Buganda here, the team that is surrounding the Sabataka now is not a type of group that surrounded the Kabaka in 1966 -(Laughter)

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the Member for allowing me to give this information, but only to strengthen his statement has been just made and that is to remind him and some Members listening.  Precipitation of what happened which we are trying and do now was as a result of the advice given then by those people to the Kabaka which resulted into a resolution by the Lukiiko to the effect that the central government must leave the soil of Buganda.  So, I am just strengthening his point that those people who advised them accordingly are not the very people today  -(Laughter.)

MR. KAMURWON: Mr. Chairman, I brought that point because, although Members laughed, I know that even if there are Members who were in 1966 who advised the then Kabaka of Buganda, these Members even if they are here today have also undergone reformation -(Laughter)- and they have been reinforced by an enlightened group and I hope this group is not going to make mistakes which were made about 23 years ago.  

So, I would like to assure Members that the team is very civilised and will understand the relationship between central government and traditional leadership.  I would also like to caution our Members for whom we are trying to restore this monarchical institution today that they should be very honest, Ugandans from the peripheral areas are very, very sensitive about traditional institutions and it is only for their own goodness sake that they co-exist with other societies outside the monarchical institutions and we develop our nationalism from that position until we create a nationalism where we can have a society like that one of Japan which the Attorney General has told us about.  Now, the Members should not worry because if these traditional leaders are going to be oppressive because some Members are saying that they infringe on the human rights of their subjects that is not our problem the problem is that these traditional leaders will create necessary conditions for their people to overthrow them, there is no problem it is just a question of time these fellows will be swept by the people our society develops. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

DR. LUYOMBYA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, just to enhance what he has said, if that happens at least in Buganda it will not be the first time that a king who tried to go against the wish of his subject can be over-thrown, there are many kings who were over-thrown when they tried to go.  People like Mwanga were even exiled -(Interjection) There is Kabaka Semakokiro who was thrown out by his people, so what the Member is saying is quite true.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KAMURWON: Mr. Chairman, with those remarks I wish the coronation of the Kabaka well.  Thank you very much.

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that we have come to the end of today’s Sitting. We adjourn until Tuesday at 2.30 p.m. Thank you.

(The Council rose at 4.47 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday 13th July 1993 at 2.30 p.m.)

