Tuesday, 08 July 2008 

Parliament met at 3.11 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting and I am hoping that the ministries, as we indicated last week, have by now presented their policy statements because today we shall close the plenary and the committees will begin working tomorrow. So if there are still any ministries that have not done the needful – are they any? [Hon. Members: “Many.”] If there are still ministries that haven’t done so, please do so quickly because tomorrow the committees will start sitting. Thank you.  

3.13 
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Going on today is a workshop on Uganda’s petroleum – I think the workshop I going on in Munyonyo - and very pertinent issues related to that petroleum are being discussed. Unfortunately, apart from Members of the Opposition who are in the committees like the Budget Committee that are attending by virtue of that position; and besides the fact that last week hon. Chrispus Kiyonga had asked me whether we would be attending this particular workshop or the Opposition would be attending and I said I as not even aware; and he even said that he would check with the Ministry of Finance on whether the invitations had not been closed yet, we are very amazed that such an important workshop goes on and the invitation to those who should attend is not reflective of the reality of Uganda where we have the government side and the Opposition side. 

Last year, in response to the President, we did indicate that we find difficulties when we just hear that there are prayers for oil, there is a breakfast meeting for oil, and we do not participate as if we are not Ugandans. So, I thought it was important to bring this matter before this House because oil is such a central element in the country’s expectations and we really want to see that whatever we develop in regard to oil are policies and programmes that we agree on nationally and without any political bias. Maybe my colleague, the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister may have some good reasons why we never got invited?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No; maybe you should ask hon. D’Ujanga. What is going on at Munyonyo on oil and why haven’t you invited the honourable members?

3.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The workshop that is at Munyonyo at the moment has been organised by the government and UADB. Invitations were sent out and not even everybody from government was invited. I am aware that some Opposition members have been there with me this morning, like hon. Cecilia Ogwal. The invitations came from the Ministry of Finance but as I said, not everybody from the government was invited. So people concerned with the oil industry, like those on the committees are the only ones that were invited. I must say that this is not the end of such workshops but I think in that wisdom, it was thought that those who were immediately concerned with the oil industry were to have the first shot. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will there be any opportunity for this House to discuss it? 

MR D’UJANGA: As I said, Madam Speaker, we have just begun preparing for many such consultations. What we are doing today is revenue management of the funds coming from oil proceeds and a small number of people from government and a small number of people from the Opposition were invited; but this is the beginning of many such workshops. So, this House will certainly have a chance. After all, there are already two laws on the way to this House related to oil. So this House will certainly have the chance to discuss this in detail. Thank you. 

3.18
THE MINISTER OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT IN CHARGE OF SECURITY (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and since I have not been here since you resumed duty, may I use this opportunity to very warmly welcome you back. This Chamber really missed you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MR MBABAZI: Secondly, I have been asked by the Leader of Government Business to say in addition to what the minister has said that that was the plan but we think the Leader of the Opposition has a point; this is a major policy issue and all Ugandans, especially the other opinion in the Opposition ought to be heard. This was of course organised by the Ministry of Finance. The Ministry of Energy is a very active participant because it is on issues of energy but it was organised by the Ministry of Finance. So, in case there was that oversight, can we take this opportunity to correct it and invite the Leader of the Opposition to fully participate? Thank you. (Mr Okello-Okello rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are we going to discuss oil? Why don’t we wait until Mr D’Ujanga comes back? Okay, let me finish with you.

3.19 
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on two matters of national importance. We have discussed the Hepatitis disease in my district in this House twice. It is Hepatitis E but yesterday, on page 3 of The New Vision newspaper, they highlighted this problem but with a number of inaccuracies, which I stand here to correct.

One; I have already mentioned that it is not Hepatitis B but Hepatitis E. I have been informed that Hepatitis B is more deadly than Hepatitis E. So I do not know why there is this kind of reporting.

The recorded number of deaths as of last Friday was 69 and not 67, although they are very close.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, in one paragraph here, a statement is attributed to the Minister of State for Health that in Kitgum Hepatitis has been prevalent since 2003 when Ebola occurred there. If this is true, then the minister does not know what is actually going on. There was no Ebola in Kitgum or anywhere in the Acholi sub-region in 2003. Ebola broke out in Gulu in 2000 and we all know what happened. So, I would not like to believe that the minister said what is reported to have been said by him.  

Madam Speaker, Hepatitis E has now spread to about ten sub-counties out of 19. It is spreading and there is very little control. I would like to appeal to government, particularly the Ministry of Health, it is doing some work already but we want the ministry and the government to do more because people are dying; the recorded cases are already over 4,000.  

Madam Speaker, again on the front page of The New Vision of Friday, the main subject was “LDU shoots six dead over woman”. This incident took place at Omiya Anyima sub-county in my constituency. The LDU is now under the UPDF. This man who committed this crime walked alone with his gun for about six miles to go to another place where there was another detach. He left the gun in the house of a certain woman and went for a dance. In the dancing hall he picked up a quarrel and he was badly beaten up. He picked his gun and went back to the dancing hall and started spraying people who were dancing. 

Even more sadly, in the same dancing hall, there were a number of soldiers with AK 47s, dancing. One of them was a Special Police Constable, who also started shooting. However, he was shot at and his gun was removed by a civilian. The civilian, for fear, went and threw the gun into a pit latrine; but it has been recovered. Now the culprit just disappeared with his gun. The gun was only recovered yesterday, miles away; he had abandoned it somewhere. The concern here is that the manner in which those who control the guns in this country are behaving is appalling. If soldiers on duty are allowed to enter dancing halls with their guns, then where are we going? I think the people concerned should take very serious note of this. A country cannot be run like this. I think we are seeing a lot of failure in running the nation. So, I call upon the ministries concerned to improve and make sure that the guns that we buy to protect us do not take our lives. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okello-Okello, is the government the organiser of the dances? Does the government organise these discos?  

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, what I am saying here is that the gun is the property of the state and when it is given to someone, it is given for a purpose. So, the people who are in charge of that someone must make sure that the gunman does not use it to take the lives of our citizens because the gun is supposed to protect us and not to take our lives. That is all I am saying.

In the past, an armed soldier could not walk alone -(Interruptions)- all of them except this one. In all the regimes except this one, an armed soldier, whether in the Police or the Army, was not supposed to walk alone. They would be three or four so that when a crime were committed, someone would be responsible. But sometimes I get so scared: I am driving and I find one lonely gunman walking. That person can do anything, particularly where we have ill-trained, ill-resourced and ill-motivated gunmen like we have here. It is very dangerous to allow them to go loose. I thank you.

3.28
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am extremely pleased to hear that hon. Okello-Okello is at last concerned regarding the outbreak of Hepatitis E in Kitgum. I have been to Kitgum –(Interruptions)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, last time we discussed this matter here. I had to talk to the District Director of Medical Services in Kitgum, who faxed the latest position, which I came and mentioned on the Floor of this Parliament. I believe the minister was around. I do not know - maybe he was meditating seriously and not in a position to follow what was going on, so is the honourable minister in order to say that at long last I am expressing concern, when I have been following this matter right from the beginning? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, I do not know what the minister has listened to and not. So, I do not know whether he heard you speak or not. Therefore, I cannot rule on that.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for such wise judgment. Hon. Okello-Okello knows that I went to Kitgum and visited his constituency - Okoro, is in your constituency. The information I got there first of all, when I was going to Kitgum, I wrote to hon. Okello-Okello and informed him that as the Chairperson of the Acholi Parliamentary Group, he should pass the message to honourable members from that area about my going there because they had been very vocal on the issue of Hepatitis E here. When I got to Kitgum, the only Member of Parliament who was around was the Leader of the Opposition who comes from Pader. Hon. Okello-Okello and hon. Anywar were nowhere, but we went around. And as we went around, the people told me that hon. Okello-Okello had been there only once since the outbreak of Hepatitis E. (Laughter) And that when he was there, he appeared on a radio show but that did not mention Hepatitis E at all. According to the people –(Interjections)- hon. Anywar was in Kitgum when the Vice-President visited, that was in February. That was the last time hon. Anywar was in Kitgum –(Laughter)- yet she has been very vocal here on the issue of Hepatitis E –(Interjections)- that is what I was told. 

Anyhow, I was also disappointed when I saw the article in the New Vision discussing the outbreak of Hepatitis B in Kitgum instead of Hepatitis E. The two are transmitted differently. Hepatitis B is transmitted through blood products. It can also be transmitted sexually and affects babies during birth, if a baby swallows blood; it gets a very serious infection. Those people who get it are in danger of developing chronic Hepatitis B, which usually ends up in cirrhosis of the liver. Those people are also at risk of developing hepatomas, thus cancer of the liver. 

Hepatitis E, on the other hand is transmitted like Hepatitis A, by faecal contamination of either water or food.

When I was in Kitgum, we now have eight international associations working with us in Kitgum to try and combat this disease. The index case, I think it was in 2006, was of a pregnant lady from the Sudan who came to the constituency, which the hon. Minister of Agriculture, Hilary Onek represents –(Interjections)- Lamwo, yes. That lady came to attend ante-natal care and from that time cases have been spreading. 

Unfortunately a lot of people in this area are in camps where good sanitation and hygiene is missing. I was at Madi-Opei; I was at Okoro; I was at Paloga and I was also at Kalongo in Pader. I subsequently visited a sub-county, which I forget, but I know that the late Okonga came from there; it starts with letter P –[Hon. Member: “Pakistan.”] (Laughter)-  anyhow, it is not important but I went to another one called Muchwini. At that time we had about 2,500 cases but now we have over 4,000 cases. Also at that time, only 40 people had died. In Pader we had only nine cases and no deaths, but as I explained last time, Hepatitis E is a very difficult disease to control and the presence of camps and poor sanitation in camps is just the right condition for the spread of this disease. 

Anyway, I appealed to the people there, the RDC and the other teams I met, to dig more latrines. I would like to report that the NGOs, which operate in those areas, have supplied 5-litre jerricans and soap for hand washing. Unfortunately, in Okoro, the people have given out the soap to the children to go with it to school. In Paloga, there were between 12,000 and 15,000 people in the camp, but with only one pit latrine at one end of it with six stances. When I asked the young men why they did not want to participate in digging latrines, they said: “Nobody has asked us to dig latrines.” Not even hon. Okello-Okello, when he appeared on the radio had the courage to tell the people that this was a disease, which could be prevented by good sanitation. So, as long as we do not improve the sanitation in the area – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think what the honourable member wanted you to confirm was whether you are aware that what is in Kitgum is Hepatitis E not B. I think that was his problem and it is clear you are aware as a ministry.

DR MALLINGA: Yes, and we are making every effort and we appeal to the Members of Parliament from the area to work with us to improve sanitation and hygiene in order to control the disease. Thank you very much.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Madam Speaker, I thank the minister for his explanation, but I think the picture is not complete because the minister has been very concerned about how many times hon. Okello-Okello and hon. Anywar went home. But Kitgum has two ministers, hon. Onek, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and hon. Okello Oryem, the minister –(Interjection)- I agree with you. I am also very national as the Leader of Opposition, but I still went home. Just complete the picture; the minister would have been very fair since he wanted to play a little bit of politics on a matter that had nothing to do with politics; he should tell the House also how many times hon. Onek went on Hepatitis E, and how many time hon. Okello Oryem went home on an Hepatitis E visit.  

Otherwise, I would like to strongly suggest to the honourable minister that matters of health have no political faces; and I know that hon. Okello-Okello was at one time your party vice-president and that you would want to cover your nakedness in leaving them. But please, you can do that outside.

DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the issues of whether people go back or not, they will be judged by their electorate. It is not for me to decide. 

3.39
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT IN CHARGE OF SECURITY (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me begin with very short information. This House may know that hon. Hillary Onek broke his leg and for the last six months has in fact been on leave even from his ministry undergoing treatment, including treatment outside. So for my dear friend the Leader of the Opposition to really try and play on that politically is uncharacteristic of him.  

Secondly, all of us know that hon. Henry Oryem Okello, together with hon. Rugunda have been ensconced in negotiations with Kony in Juba; he is in and out, they are there permanently. And I think the minister was talking about the area Member of Parliament not about Members in general.  

Anyway, I am rising on an issue which hon. Okello-Okello raised about the unfortunate death of Ugandans that he talked about. First and foremost, I would like on behalf of government to express our deepest sorrow and condolences at the loss of these Ugandan lives. It should not have happened and we are sorry that it happened. I do not yet have full information but government is carrying out investigations and as usual, it is our job to carry out investigations and we do so thoroughly. We will take all the measures necessary to bring the culprits in this crime to book. The circumstances under which this gentleman happened to have a gun at his disposal will also be established and if it was not in accordance with the rules, which as you know have been applying in this government regarding the handling of weapons, then obviously we will take all the necessary measures to bring him to book. Thank you.

MR KUBEKETERYA: I just have a brief procedural point. We have this Bat Valley petition report and wherever we go through the corridors of this House, so many people wonder what happened with the report. Madam Speaker, you remember that you had said that it should appear last week but it did not appear and neither has it appeared today. And since we are going to committee meetings, morning and afternoon, I am wondering when this report will come so that we conclude it once and for all.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To the best of my knowledge, I was approached by a Member of the Legal – no the adhoc legal committee who said they needed to take another look at their report before they come to this House. That is the position.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I welcome you back just like my colleague the Minister for Security has done. It is my first time after a long time to be in this House and I am here only to lay the paper on the Table. 

I beg to lay on the Table a brief to Parliament on the proposal by government to borrow US $55 million from the World Bank for the Local Government Management and Service Delivery Program. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, it will be sent to the relevant committee.

PRESENTATION OF PETITIONS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have been told that this one is not yet ready, we shall differ item (a) and go to item (b) of hon. Mary Karooro Okurut. 

3.45
MRS MARY OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker, under rule 27, I beg to present the humble petition of the various human rights associations in Uganda and the petition is on violence against women: 

“BY THIS PETITION, Madam Speaker, your humble petitioners seek your indulgence and that of the august House in the matter and pray that the government prioritizes the elimination of violence against women in our society and protects them from cruel and degrading treatment, preserving their health, dignity, self-worth and respect;  

THAT the government passes all pending Bills that address violence against women and girls including the Bills on domestic violence, on sexual offences, on trafficking of women and on domestic relations;  

THAT the government ratifies the protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa;

THAT government funds programmes that prevent violence and respond to the various types of abuse that is: physical, sexual and emotional, of women and girls;  

THAT the government helps survivors of violence recover their dignity, health, livelihood and families. And that the Uganda Aids Commission and other related organisations address gender-based violence in their HIV/AIDS programming messages and service delivery.

And your humble petitioners, in duty bound, will ever pray.”

And hereto your humble petitioners have appended their signatures. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The petition will be sent to the relevant committee.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION ON THE SALE OF IGANGA TOWN COUNCIL PRIMARY SCHOOL

3.48
MRS BEATRICE MAGOOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Madam Speaker, I beg that we present this paper later. It is not ready. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. We will defer it for the time being.  

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION ON THE RE-DEVELOPMENT OF NAGURU AND NAKAWA HOUSING ESTATES

3.49
MRS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): I beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MRS SEMPALA: I am moving this petition under rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. It is the humble petition of the sitting tenants of Naguru and Nakawa housing estates. 

The petition shows that in 1999, Kampala City Council in liaison with the Ministry of Local Government conceived a plan to re-develop Nakawa and Naguru housing estates into satellite towns.

In a bid to pave way for re-development, KCC issued the sitting tenants with eviction notices to which the tenants protested and took up the matter with the President of the Republic of Uganda. 

In a meeting in the President’s Office with the Minister of Local Government, the then State Minister for Works, the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Local Government, Member of Parliament for Nakawa, the then Mayor of Kampala, members of the LC III executive and the tenants association, it was resolved that the sitting tenants should not be evicted and appropriate action should be taken to clear the dilapidated houses by providing appropriate accommodation to the sitting tenants among others. 

KCC then contracted the consultancy services of International Development Consultants (IDC) and BKS Global Limited, to prepare suitable development plans to act as a guide for the establishment of the two – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you do not have to read the entire petition; read the heading and the prayers. 

MRS SEMPALA: Okay. The prayers: 

“WHEREFORE, by this petition your humble petitioners seek your indulgence and that of the august House in the matter and pray that the matter be fully investigated;

THAT the recommendations made by the consultants be adopted and implemented for the development of the Nakawa-Naguru estates vis-à-vis the petitioners destiny;

THAT the alleged developer, OPEC Prime Properties UK, be investigated to ascertain its due diligence and compliance with the PPDA requirements in handling the said re-development project;

THAT an investigation be carried out to ascertain whether the registration, enumeration exercise of the sitting tenants conducted by the Ministry of Local Government and the Uganda Bureau of Statistics was not flawed;

THAT Parliament ensures that a tripartite agreement is reached between the three parties, namely, the government of the Republic of Uganda, the registered tenants, and the would-be developer;

ALTERNATIVELY, the tenants be given the land upon which they can source their own developer;

And your humble petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.”

And hereto, your humble petitioners have appended their signatures. I beg to lay this petition and all the necessary documents on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The petition is committed to the relevant committee.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO APPROVE THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE (SCHEDULE No.2) FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2007/08

3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable Members, last week the Budget Committee did make its statement here on Supplementary Schedule No.2 and also did combine this with the Supplementary Schedule No.1, which you appropriately authorised in March this year. 

The report of the committee was very clear and we totally agree with it. In the report, inadvertently my ministry did spend in excess of three percent, which is authorised by the Budget Act, and this was in excess by about 0.8 percent, for which we apologies. We shall ensure that this is not repeated. (Applause) I beg this House to forgive us and to support the position that has been clearly articulated by the Budget Committee, and we go into Committee of Supply. I thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I put the question that this House do resolve into a Committee of Supply.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY
SUPPLEMENTARY RECCURRENT EXPENDITURE

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose that the total sum of Shs 76,361,555,800 be approved as recurrent supplementary expenditure, Schedule No.2, for the Financial Year 2007/08.

(Question put and agreed to.)

SUPPLEMENTARY DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose that the total sum of Shs 25,575,356,540 be approved as development supplementary expenditure (Schedule No.2) for the Financial Year 2007/2008. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

STATUTORY SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose that the total sum of Shs 5,549,058,080 be approved as statutory supplementary expenditure (Schedule No.2) for the Financial Year 2007/2008. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

3.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the Bill entitled the Supplementary Expenditure (Schedule No.2) and passed it without amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

3.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Committee of Supply has supplied under Supplementary Expenditure (Schedule No.2) recurrent expenditure  the amount of Shs 76,361, 555,800; development supplementary of Shs 25, 575,356,540; and statutory  of Shs 5, 549,058,080 for Financial Year 2007/08. I beg to move and I beg that the report be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of this committee as proposed by the Minister of Finance be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE BUDGET COMMITTEE ON THE MEDIUM TERM FRAMEWORK

4.01
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Mr William Okecho): Madam Speaker and honourable members, you will recall that the Budget Committee presented to you the response to the government’s Macro-economic and Indicative Framework for 2008/09 on the 14th of May as per section 7(3) of the Budget Act 2002. 

On the 15th of May 2008, the Budget Committee also laid on the Table of Parliament the same report and promised to present it as required by Section 8 of the Budget Act. Members were also invited to their e-mail addresses where the whole document was sent. 

I now have the pleasure to present to the House a summary of the report of Parliament on the Medium Term Macro-economic Plan and Budget Framework for five years and an indicative preliminary revenue and expenditure framework for the next fiscal year, 2008/09, for your adoption.

This summary report is in six main parts: the introduction, the macro-economic framework, strategies for efficient resource application, indicative revenue and expenditure framework, sector policy recommendations and recommended resource re-allocations. 

Introduction

In the report, Parliament made recommendations on the submission of the government made in compliance with Section 4(1) and (2) of the Budget Act, 2001. This report was then submitted by the Rt Hon. Speaker to His Excellency the President as per Section 7(3) of the Budget Act. 

In the report the Budget Committee submitted, it outlined key principles and proposals for effective budgetary allocations and implementation. This was expected to form a basis for subsequent budgetary realignment of the budget proposals of June 2008. Some inter and intra-sectoral resource re-allocations were also made in line with national objectives and as per Section 11 of the Budget Act. 

The committee noted that the government’s macro-economic policies and expenditure programmes are based on the PEAP, as rolled over for one additional year, and the NRMO election manifesto. The committee was, however, concerned that the submission of a five year budget framework was not only contrary to the provisions of Section 4(1) of the Budget Act but also premised on a five year development plan, which was yet to be prepared. The committee recommended that this anomaly be urgently addressed by fast tracking the preparation of the National Development Plan, incorporating the manifesto upon which the next medium-term budget framework will be derived.   

The committee noted that the government had prioritised the following areas for this financial year:

1. 	Rural development, where there was emphasis on agriculture. 
2. 	Infrastructure development including energy, roads, railways, water transport to the sea.
3. 	Industrialisation including agro-processing and industrial parks.
4. 	Human capital, where education and health featured prominently.

The committee was concerned that while the private sector is said to be the engine of economic growth, the growth of the private sector credit is projected to drop from 24.1 percent this financial year 2007/08, to 12.9 percent next financial year, 2008/09. Government interventions for promoting private sector growth should be clear, transparent and widely publicised to avoid selective support to some sections of the private sector.

The macro-economic framework

Events shaping the macro-economic environment

The committee noted that a number of economic and political developments locally, regionally and internationally will play a major role in the macro-economic environment. These included, but are not limited to:

1.	Petroleum price hikes, 
2.	Regional economic and political factors, for example the recent Kenya elections crisis, the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in Southern Sudan, the LRA peace initiatives, regional integration and so on.
3.	Discovery of oil and other mineral deposits.
4.	Regional recovery programmes like Northern Uganda, Luwero and Karamoja. 
5.	The global food crisis.
6.	The energy crisis.  
7.	The natural and artificial disasters for example floods, disease outbreaks, fire outbreaks. 

There was no evidence that these events were a basis of the current fiscal strategy yet they have vital implications on the overall micro-economic environment. These events should have been taken care of if there was a plan. The committee recommended that these factors be considered in the forthcoming National Development Plan.

The committee noted the following medium term macro-economic objectives of the Government:

1. 	Maintenance of low and stable inflation.
2. 	Maintenance of a competitive real exchange rate.
3. 	Accelerated private sector investment.
4. 	Promoting domestic savings

While these macro-economic objectives are necessary for the private sector to flourish, they are not sufficient to propel the economy into prosperity and sustainable development. Promotion of savings requires a relatively high savings interest rate that is not provided by the banks due to shortage of competition in the industry. There are no incentives for banks to open in rural areas to tap the savings. The committee recommended that the entry requirements into the banking industry be made more attractive to new actors and incentives be provided for rural access.

The committee noted that accelerated private sector investment cannot occur due to the current high unaffordable lending rates and inaccessible commercial credit. This is due to the domination of the government as a player in the financial market through its treasury instruments. This is a consequence of a large part of the monetary policy being borne by the budget. The committee recommended that the government should control the excessive use of Treasury Bills for liquidity management.

The committee was not persuaded by the fallacy that instituting a credit guarantee scheme to commercial banks will lead to higher private sector borrowing and investment. Banks will just not pay attention to the quality of lending to increase investment.

Madam Speaker, the committee was concerned that money supply was growing faster than the growth of the economy. The GDP growth rate is constant at seven percent per annum from 2007/08 while the growth rate of money supply is 10.5 percent per annum, rising to 11.6 percent in 2008/09 and to 14.4 percent thereafter. This has a potential inflationary effect, which is only dampened by active liquidity management. As noted above, this has the effect of crowding out the private sector and increasing the interest cost to the budget. This policy is one of the causes of widespread poverty contrary to the intentions of Bonna Baggagawale programme. The committee, therefore, recommended that the government pays attention to the growth of money supply in tandem with the growth of the economy. 

Strategies for efficient resource application

Government office accommodation
 
Madam Speaker, renting of accommodation for public offices has been found not only to be expensive but also a source of arrears and fraud during rental negotiations. The committee advises government to acquire at least one building annually, which should be accompanied with adequate provisions for outsourcing maintenance of the property. Annual provisions of Shs 20 billion should be set aside for this purpose. 

Salaries and wages of public officers

The committee is wary of requests for supplementary expenditure in salaries and wages of public officers who are in place. While the committee is aware that the public service payroll is centrally managed, some wage and salary shortfalls were noted in the Budget Framework Paper (BFP). The committee recommended that government pays immediate attention to this problem. The committee will also not consider salary and wage supplementary requests as has been previously warned.

Management of government properties abroad

The committee was concerned about the poor performance of the Uganda Property Holdings Company. The committee recommended termination of services of the said company and revert the function to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Non-compliance will attract severe sanctions.

Security and governance

The committee noted that there is a reduction in combat activities of the security sector as a result of cessation of hostilities in Northern Uganda. The government should ensure the continuation of the cessation until the final peace agreement is reached. More resources in the sector need to be devoted to the wellbeing of the combatants in terms of housing, training and medical care. The committee would like to see a visible impact of the re-alignment of the defence outlays in line with this principle.

Feasibility appraisals of government programmes

Madam Speaker, the committee was concerned that most infrastructural programmes are not taken through feasibility appraisal/study prior to implementation. Where studies are carried out, the approved designs are not adhered to. This has caused problems of poor absorption of funds and shoddy works. The committee recommended that prior to implementation of infrastructural programmes, appropriate technical and financial studies should be carried out and adhered to.

Legal framework for implementation of government policy

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the committee noted that a number of government policies have no legal framework for implementation. This situation has resulted in many conflicts among some implementing agencies and duplication of activities in other cases. The committee recommended that all policies of government should be backed by an appropriate legal framework or law; examples to mention are the Energy Fund and AGOA factory.  

ICT revolution

The benefits of ICT in creating employment and increasing economic growth cannot be overstated. The committee recommended that government explores measures of using the Uganda Communications Commission funds as a means of accelerating investment in the ICT revolution.  

Indicative revenue and expenditure framework

The committee noted that the total resource envelope is projected to rise from a projected outturn of Shs 5,024.6 billion last financial year 2007/2008, to Shs 5,683.8 billion in the year 2008/2009. This figure has been exceeded as was seen in the budget and it is now plus Shs 6 trillion. However, the previous figures included Shs 300 billion set aside for domestic arrears. Interest payments are Shs 342 billion of which domestic interest is Shs 303 billion and external interest is Shs 39 billion. It is noted that these resources include Shs 1,177.6 billion of donor funded projects. The committee noted that these resource projections include interest payments and arrears repayments, which will take a first call on the resources.

The committee noted that government’s domestic interest bill of Shs 303 billion is a reflection of a high and unsustainable debt situation. This situation serves to crowd out the private sector that is considered as the engine of economic growth. The committee, therefore, recommended that government reduces public borrowing by utilising resources more efficiently and transparently.

The committee noted that resources for additional spending during 2008/2009 amount to Shs 667.1 billion. The committee re-examined these proposals in the light of the principles of priority-based resource allocations and made general and specific recommendations throughout this report.

Sector policy recommendations

Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries

The main issues in the agriculture sector requiring public interventions include:

1. 	Persistent food shortages.
2. Over-dependency on subsistence farming, including pastoralism.
3. 	Inadequate coverage of NAADS.
4. 	Uncoordinated agricultural interventions.
5. 	Shortage of scientists.
6.	Wage shortfalls in some agricultural sub-sectors.

The committee recommended that urgent interventions to address food shortage like providing quick and high yielding crops to the people should be undertaken by the Ministry of Agriculture in liaison with the Ministry of Local Government and the Office of the Prime Minister. The interventions should support the rural poor farmers to ensure their food self sufficiency and exit from subsistence farming.

The committee recommended that the process of restructuring the NAADS programme should involve all stakeholders to ensure public participation and ownership of the programme. In addition, the relationship between NAADS extension workers and the traditional agricultural extension workers should be harmonised to build synergy.

The committee recommended further that the National Animal Genetic Resources Centre and Data Bank (NAGRIC&DB) be made a self accounting (autonomous) entity, that is, with its own vote, to improve on its responsibility and funding. The committee further recommended that the two bodies, that is, National Agricultural Improvement Project and NAGRIC be harmonised and integrated in order to focus synergies on restocking and rehabilitation of NAGRIC farms. This will improve livestock productivity.  

The committee recommended that the retirement age for the highly trained scientists be revised to 70 years.  

The committee directs that NARO, NAADS, UCDA and CDO should indicate the non tax revenue as well as other sources of funding that accrue to them in the next financial year. We heard that they make a lot of money which ends up not being declared in full.

Intra-sectoral re-allocations
The committee recommended the following intra-sectoral re-allocations to ensure that the sector objectives are in line with PEAP objectives:  

1. 	NARO: 40 percent deduction should be made on proposed expenditure for workshops, and for training and travel inland. This will yield Shs 229.6 million, which should fund the wage shortfall of NARO.

2. 	MAAIF: Shs 1 billion be deducted from the proposed expenditure on review of the ministry’s Development and Strategic Investment Plan to be invested in irrigation.  

Tourism, Trade and Industry

The main issues in the sector are:

1. 	Stripping the ministry of its mandate by misplacing its functions.
2. 	Lack of funding for the Hotel and Tourism Training Institute (HTTI).
3. 	Shortage of funds for UNBS.

The committee observed that the HTTI had been transferred from the Ministry of Education and Sports to the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry but no funds had been provided for its activities. The committee recommended that the budget line for the institute hitherto be housed in the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry.

The committee recommended that some funds are provided to UNBS to effectively monitor all the 52 border points to protect the general public from counterfeit goods. The committee further recommended that synergies with customs and immigration offices be explored to strengthen checks on the importation of counterfeit goods -(Interruption)

MR OTTO ISHAA: Madam Speaker, I rise here on a point of procedure. I had been trying to peruse through this report - it is a nice one - but unfortunately I do not see the signatures of the committee members attached to it. I think our Rules of Procedure are very clear: before any report is presented to this House, the committee members should append their signatures. I do not know whether this report is for hon. Okecho or for the committee.  

MR OKECHO: Madam Speaker, I stated at the beginning that we had actually -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The presentation of this report is a new innovation we agreed upon to assist Members be better informed in their committees. It is a report on what was sent to the President by the Parliament on the preliminary estimates. It is not a result of investigation. It is meant to arm you as you go to the committees, just for your information. It is not for debate. 

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: While the concern of my colleague is genuine, I think this report is actually a summary of the report of the Parliamentary Budget Committee; it is not the actual report. I do not know whether procedurally you would want to append signatures to the summary. If it were a full report, we would ask for the signatures, but this is a summary and the title is clear. (Applause)

MR OKECHO: There is a big report here, which was sent to all your e-mail addressees and has got all the required signatures that you would want.

The committee recommended that UIA, UNCST and AGOA be placed under the direct supervision of the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. This means that the Ministry of Investment consequentially be moved from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry.

Social services sector

The main issues included:

•	Delay in transmission of funds to referral hospitals
•	Difficulty of attracting consultants to districts especially health workers.
•	Shortage of housing for health workers.
•	Inadequate equipment for health centres III and IV.
•	Inadequate coverage of health centre IIs.
•	Under funding of health and teaching service commissions.
•	Inadequate funding for the sports sub-sector.
•	Delays in UPE capitation grants.
•	Under funding of the USE programme.
•	Irregular inspections of schools. 

Health sector

The committee recommended that the Ministry of Finance should from now onwards remit development funds for referral hospitals directly to their accounts upon receipt of their development plans.

The committee recommended that government explores the possibility of recentralising recruitment of some categories of staff like consultants in light of the fact that some districts were finding it difficult to attract consultants.

The committee further recommended that out of the development budget for referral hospitals, a fraction of it should go for construction or rehabilitation of the housing facilities for health workers.

The committee recommended that health centre IIIs and IVs be operationalised. To this end, the allocation to procurement of medical equipment in these health centres should be increased. A further provision of Shs 1.4 billion should be provided to maternity wings of the health centre IIIs. (Applause)

The committee recommended additional funding of Shs 0.4 billion to the Health Service Commission to enable it to carry out its mandate of recruiting staff.

The committee recommended that health centre IIs should be completed and operationalised next financial year, 2008/09. To actualise this, a total of Shs 2 billion should be re-allocated for the activity.

Education and sports sector

The sports sub-sector

The committee recommended that Shs 700 be re-allocated from Vote 013, Programme Headquarters, to boost the budget of the sports sub-sector to at least Shs 2 billion to cater for the so many local and international sports events and activities slated for this financial year. 

The education sub-sector: The committee recommended that the Ministry of Finance should remit UPE capitation grants directly to the schools accounts rather than through the districts to avoid persistent delays and possible misuse.

The committee recommended that the funding gap of Shs 19 billion be provided to ensure smooth implementation of the USE programme. 

The Education Service Commission should be funded to a tune of Shs 4 billion to take care of its activities in recruiting teachers. 

The committee recommended a time-tabled inspection of all schools around the country. This is more urgent in view of the fires.

Gender, Labour and Social Development sectors

The main issues that we identified included: 

•	Inadequate facilitation to cultural institutions.
•	Lack of accommodation to the national library.
•	Inadequate attention to the industrial court.
•	Absence of the regulatory framework for labour externalisation.
•	Inadequate provision for the Equal Opportunities Commission.
•	Persistent problem of street children.
•	Operationalisation of labour laws.

The committee recommended therefore that government comes up with a comprehensive policy on support to cultural and traditional leaders including facilitation, institutional support and royal wellbeing.

The committee recommended that UNESCO should be contacted to kick-start the construction of the national library which they had promised to do. The ministry should ensure that the title deed for the land is secured and construction commenced with the funding from UNESCO.

The committee recommended that the Industrial Court be operationalised and further recommended that it be transferred to the Justice, Law and Order sector for budgeting purposes.

Now that employment is a key objective of the current development strategy, the committee strongly recommends that the Government prioritises the implementation of all labour laws, which were enacted way back in 2006. Passing of the ministry’s budget will be contingent on concrete steps to operationalise all the labour laws. 

The committee recommended that an appropriate legal/regulatory and institutional framework for the externalisation of labour be prepared.

The committee is concerned that the Ministry of Finance had allocated only Shs 0.546 billion out of the required Shs 2.6 billion to operationalise the Equal Opportunities Commission. The ministry committed itself to provide the additional Shs 2.1 billion. 

The committee recommended that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development carries out a detailed study to establish the underlying cause of the problem of street children and recommend to Government and Parliament a sustainable solution. 

Information and Communications Technology

The main issues that we identified in the Information, Technology and Communications sector included: 

•	Prioritisation of national business outsourcing strategy, the national data backbone programme and business information centres. 
•	The use of UCC funds to implement ICT programmes. I understand their law does not require this. 

The committee recommended that the required funds for the implementation of the business outsourcing strategy be provided. 

The committee further recommended that the legislative process be expedited to enable the implementation of the National Data Backbone Project unit. 

The committee also recommended that Shs 500 million be provided to establish 20 District Business Information Centres (DBICs) in the Financial Year 2008/09. 

The committee recommended that possibilities be explored to have some of the resources collected by UCC utilised in the promotion of ICT projects being implemented under the Ministry of ICT. 

The committee finally recommended the following intra-sectoral re-allocations within the given ICT Ministry to facilitate the start of critical activities:

1.	Shs 0.3 billion be deducted from e-government policy implementation.
2.	Shs 0.3 billion be deducted from Strengthening ICT programme.
3.	A total of Shs 0.6 billion be allocated to the two unfunded priorities, that is, implementation of Business Process Outsourcing and the National Data Transmission Backbone and the establishment of District Business Information Centres.

Foreign Affairs

The main issues in the foreign affairs sector included: 

•	Funding for the CHOGM Secretariat, the Organisation of the Islamic Conference, the ministry’s strategic plans and the Ministry of East African Community Affairs.
•	Facilitation of Foreign Service officers. 
•	Persistent problems of contributions and subscriptions to international organisations.

The committee recommended that Shs 303 million be provided to facilitate the CHOGM Secretariat. 

The committee recommended that Shs 120 million be provided for the cost of hosting Organisation of Islamic Conference to take place in June; it has taken place already. 

The committee recommended that Shs 75 million from within the ministry’s ceiling be utilised for developing the ministry’s strategic plan, which they said lacked funding.

Missions Abroad

The committee recommended that allowances of Foreign Service officers be revised and also reinstate education allowance for four children of the officers posted abroad. 

The committee recommended that Shs 1.418 billion be provided for the opening of Abu Dhabi mission and a consulate in Dubai. 

Ministry of East African Community Affairs

The committee recommended that government provides Shs 0.63 billion for contribution to the East African Community Secretariat and Shs 0.3 billion, Shs 0.4 billion and Shs 0.36 billion to cover implementation of the Customs Union, the East African Community protocol and the balance of the East African Community monetary union negotiations respectively. 

The committee recommended that the funding gap of Shs 1.5 billion be provided for publicity and sensitisation on the East African Community integration. 

Finally, the committee recommended that Shs 2.8 billion be provided for the provision of office space, equipment and facilities.

Physical Infrastructure Sector

Here, we equally had many issues that we identified but the main ones included: 

•	Unpaid certificates of completed works. 
•	Protection of road maintenance funds. 
•	The Kampala Master Plan. 
•	Breach of the concessionaire agreement by RVR 
•	Efficient and transparent application of land fund. 
•	Efficient inland record centres
•	Persistent problems of lack of counterpart funds.

The Ministry of Works and Transport

The committee noted that many roads have been constructed with too much money but no routine maintenance has been undertaken as recommended and indicated in the designs. As a result, maintenance costs have increased over time. The committee therefore recommended that Shs 30.18 billion be provided for unpaid certificates of completed road maintenance works. 

Further, the committee recommended the need to expedite the Road Fund Bill, which we have done. 

The committee recommended that road maintenance should be given greater attention and government should endeavour to earmark and strictly ring fence road maintenance funds to avoid further deterioration of the roads. 

The committee recommended that the funding for bridge repairs and construction be sought to enable urgent work on bridges. 

The committee also recommended that the issue of constructing a second bridge at Jinja be given the priority it deserves to avoid the likely catastrophe that will result in the event of the old bridge collapsing. 

The committee further recommended that Shs 22.48 billion, outstanding for unpaid certificates under the Road Agency Formation Unit, be paid. 

The committee recommended also that debts and other liabilities currently held by RAFU and Ministry of Works and Transport be taken over by the Ministry of Finance for verification and clearance. 

It was recommended again that the future negotiations for external funding to the road sector should be based on 100 percent grant or loan agreements to avoid perpetual problems of lack of counterpart funds. 

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that all illegal structures erected within road reserves should immediately be demolished forthwith. Government should desist from compensating encroachers who deliberately erect structures within road reserves. A legal framework should be put in place to protect road reserves and government land in general. 

The committee recommended that the Greater Kampala Transport Master Plan be expedited and stages for omnibuses be demarcated clearly to curb over crowding and traffic jams. Police should vigorously implement traffic laws on the road to completely eliminate bad driving and stem road carnage. 

The committee recommended that the replacement of MV Kabalega, which sank in 2004, be expedited and that the government should ensure that it is securely operated and insured to avoid the scenario of MV Kabalega where government lost a lot of money. 

The committee reiterated its earlier recommendation that due to the similarities of the two functions - building and housing - they should not be separated but instead be housed in the same ministry for proper coordination and supervision. 

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that government should seriously consider earmarking funds to the rail sub-sector to provide for passenger services that were never considered under the concessionaire agreement. 

The committee strongly recommended that government takes keen interest in the activities of RVR to avoid likely slippage. The government should urgently seek redress (including but not limited to recourse to the performance bond) for the breach of contract, which has already occurred. 

The committee strongly recommended that Shs 24.5 billion be provided to clear a long standing debt for the construction of State House, Entebbe, which has culminated into the contractor abandoning the rectification of effects and some outstanding works. 

Madam Speaker, regarding the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, the committee recommended that the ministry gives greater priority to the establishment of a comprehensive land policy to curb the rampant land wrangles and conflict that keep cropping up every time. 

The committee also recommended that Shs 22.8 billion needed by the Uganda Land Commission for the compensation of absentee landlords be provided in the Financial Year 2008/2009. 

The committee further recommended in this regard that the Land Fund should benefit all cases that suffered from colonial injustices of land allocations. The legal framework on how Land Fund resources are accessed should be developed. These guidelines should be transparent, and widely and clearly publicised. 

The committee recommended that the ministry should be availed the resources to expedite the process to ensure that the National Land Policy is developed without any further delay.

The committee also recommended that funds be provided for the acquisition of land titles for road reserves and public land within the sector’s budget ceiling for this Financial Year 2008/2009. 

The committee further recommended that all government departments and ministries should take keen interest in the public land under their jurisdiction and provide adequate protection to avoid encroachment. 

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that adequate funds be voted to the ministry to facilitate the establishment of land record centres in all districts to quicken the processes relating to land registry. 

The committee finally recommended with respect to this ministry that the ministry expedites the process of amending the Bill for the Town and Country Planning, and table it in Parliament for legislation without any further delay. 

Regarding the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs sector, the main issues identified in this sector included the following:

1.	Low salaries and wages and lack of own-operated office accommodation for institutions under the JLOs. 
2.	Inadequate funding for the DPP, LDC and UHRC. These are abbreviations which you all know about. 
3.	Operationalisation of the Uganda Registration Services Bureau.
4.	Conducting elections of lower administrative units, which were halted by court. 
5.	Inadequate funding for the parliamentary oversight activities. 

The committee recommended a comprehensive review of salaries and wages across the entire public service in light of the escalating costs of living. Selective pay awards are also a source of industrial unrest that has been widespread in the recent past, we noted. 

The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs

The committee recommended that Shs 1.08 billion be provided to the DPP to facilitate state witnesses in the Financial Year 2008/2009. They complained that state witnesses are not appearing. 

The committee also recommended that the Schedule of Emolument of Specified Officers Act be amended to regularise the enhanced payment to judges. 

The committee further recommended that Shs 8.37 billion be provided to LDC for staff and student infrastructure development and government liberalises the bar course to enable other institutions that have the means to teach legal practice, and not to confine it to LDC only.

The committee also recommended that government funding to Uganda Human Rights Commission be increased to ensure sustainability and independence of the commission. 

The committee recommended that the Electoral Commission accounts for Shs 15.038 billion that was advanced to it for the early elections of lower administrative units as these elections were halted at the last minute by a petition to court. 

The committee recommended that EC details out its work plan and sequences off its activities to fit and be funded within the medium term expenditure framework. They had requested for partial funding over time. 

The committee recommended that the budget of the Parliamentary Commission be approved as submitted in accordance with the law and to ensure that Parliament carries out its indicated activities. The funding for the Parliamentary Commission oversight activities should receive greater attention in this regard. 

The Public Service and Local Government

The main issues in the Public Service and Local Government sector included the following:

1.	Low salaries and wages across the entire Public Service in light of escalating costs of living.
2.	Need to restructure and liberalise the social security sector.
3.	Lack of official residence for the Vice-President.
4.	Conditioning the GT compensation.
5.	Review of the formula for equalisation grant and increase its mount and effectiveness. 

Regarding the Public Service sub-sector, Madam Speaker, the committee recommended that in order to handle once and for all the problem of pension, government should earmark resources to clear all the pension arrears and immediately come up with a comprehensive strategy to address, inter alia, the liberalisation of the social security sector, as well as the adoption of the contributory pension scheme. 

The committee also recommended that the Ministry of Finance allocate Shs 7 billion for the construction of the official residence of the Vice-President as a matter of priority. In the alternative, the Nakasero State Lodge should be availed to the Vice-President and the President shifts to the renovated State House in Entebbe. Shs 4 billion should be provided next financial year to commence this activity. 

Local Government sub-sector

Madam Speaker, the committee recommended that GT compensation of Shs 45 billion should continue to be availed to local governments to be utilised or shared amongst the various levels of local governments without preconditions. Local governments in turn should ensure that their workers are paid on time. 

The committee reiterated its earlier recommendation to increase equalisation grant from Shs 3.5 billion to Shs 6.5 billion that is by Shs 3 billion. 

The committee finally observed that provisions of the equalisation grant is not only a technical matter but also a constitutional matter aiming at reducing inequality among different areas of Uganda and between the rural and urban areas. 

In light of the above, therefore, the committee recommended that equalisation grants to worse-off areas should be increased in response to the growth of other parts of the economy or the country. 

Natural Resources

The main issues identified in the Natural Resources sector identified include the following:

1.	The absence of a legal framework for the Energy Fund.  
2.	The legal status of Amber House.
3.	The management and maintenance of strategic oil reserves.
4.	VAT exemptions for water.
5.	Environmental matters as related to buveera – plastic bags. 

The committee recommended that government should come up with a clear legal framework detailing out parameters for the utilisation of the Energy Fund.

The committee further recommended in this regard that these accumulated funds should be deployed to other critical sectors of the economy since the original strategic concerns of setting aside these funds, like the construction of the Bujagali dam, have already been taken care of.

The committee reiterates its previous recommendation that Amber House be availed to government departments as office space. This will free resources to other critical activities of government. It was also recommended that funds be provided for the operation, maintenance and periodic recycling of petroleum products for the strategic reserves. 

The committee recommended that provision be made to cater for the wage requirements for NEMA from domestic funding since donor support had stopped.

The committee recommended that VAT be exempted on water in order to make it affordable. In addition, the government should provide Shs 15.5 billion to cater for the water and sanitation in water stressed areas to improve the living conditions of masses in those areas, especially in view of the Cholera epidemic.

The committee also observed that since the policy pronouncement banning the specified kaveera, its ban has not been felt on the ground. The committee, therefore, recommended that the ban of the kaveera of up to 100 microns like Rwanda, be done. 

The committee finally recommended that funds be provided to a tune of US $2.4 million in order to purchase a radar system for the Meteorology Department at Entebbe.

Presidential Affairs

Madam Speaker, the main issues in the Presidential Affairs sector included: 

•	Maintenance of State House;
•	Facilitation of RDCs;
•	Legal status of the Media Centre;
•	Monitoring of the manifesto and National Development Plan;
•	Resettlement of IDPs, mine detection and settlement of war claims.

State House

Regarding State House, the committee was informed that maintaining State House, Entebbe at the level of a 5-star hotel, had a funding gap of Shs 3.9 billion. The committee recommended that upkeep of the magnificent national facility be prioritised in future.

Office of the President

The committee recommended that a funding gap of Shs 7.6 billion be availed to facilitate RDCs to enable them to effectively monitor government programmes. 

The committee recommended further that the National Honours and Awards Chancery Secretariat be provided with Shs 1 billion for it to be operational. 

The committee also recommended that the legal status of the Uganda Media Centre be regularised in order to have its funding requirements provided.

The committee recommended that the funding gap for ESO of Shs 3.5 billion to effectively monitor PRDP implementation be availed. 

The committee also recommended that the funding gap of Shs 1.82 billion be provided to enable ESO execute its mandate effectively. Also, Shs 150 million for purchase of field equipment should be considered.

The committee noted that the manifesto of the ruling party has been integrated with the national plan and hence the Budget. Therefore, government should determine the extent of the monitoring work to be vested in the Office of the Prime Minister vis-à-vis the Manifesto Monitoring Unit.

Office of the Prime Minister

The committee recommended that the allocations of Shs 100 million for de-mining be transferred to disaster management where the Mine Action Project is. The committee further recommended that sufficient budget resources be put in place to enable the establishment of a Mine Detection Dog Component for quality assurance on de-mined land before handing it over to the community.

The committee recommended that considering the plight of the IDPs, adequate budgetary provisions of Shs 4 billion be made to fully address humanitarian assistance. 

The committee finally recommended that given that the affected claimants have been waiting for more than 20 years for their claims, Shs 4.6 billion be provided to clear the war claims of Luweero Triangle once and for all.

Defence and Internal Affairs

Ministry of internal Affairs

The main issues in the Defence and Internal affairs sector included:

•	Inadequate funding for the Directorate of Citizenship and Passport Control, Government Analytical Laboratory, regional centre for small arms and light weapons and the NGO board;
•	Absence of a legal framework for citizens’ registration and national ID;
•	Congestion in prisons;
•	Inadequate staffing and housing for Police Force;
•	Deficient legal and policy framework for fire management;
•	Inadequate pay for members of the security service;
•	Well being of security personnel in UPDF, Police and Prisons services.

The committee recommended that government provides Shs 5.6 billion to facilitate the Directorate of Citizenship and Passport Control operationalise its news structures.

The committee recommended that government provide funding of Shs 389 million to procure the required chemicals for the Government Analytical Laboratory and Shs 600 million for its accreditation. It has not been accredited.

The committee recommended further that government provide Shs 200 million to facilitate and operationalise the Personal Identification Secure Comparison Evaluation System (PISCES) to at least 6 more border posts during the FY 2008/2009.

The committee recommended that government should honour its commitments to contribute US $70,000 yearly to the Regional Centre on Small Arms and Light Weapons.

The committee recommended also that the ministry should establish the manpower requirements of the NGO Board and take up the matter with the Ministry of Public Service. 

We finally recommended that synergies be built, the national data bank and ID project and an appropriate legal framework be put in place to clearly define the form of citizens’ registration and the roles and the responsibilities of the actors. 

Uganda Prisons Service

The committee recommended that community sentencing of minor offenders should be used to reduce congestion in prisons.

The committee further recommended that the presidential clemency to the deserving cases be actively applied. 

The committee also recommended that government provides Shs 1.76 billion in the Financial Year 2008/2009 to purchase beddings for prisoners. 

The committee finally recommended that the government should seek funding of Shs 4.3 billion to provide for adequate meals for prisoners in the Financial Year 2008/2009.

Uganda Police Force

The committee recommended that government should fund the recruitment of 4,000 probationary Police Constables and 500 cadets police personnel and funding of Shs 11.139 billion be provided in a phased manner starting with the next financial year, or this financial year. 

The committee recommended that funds totalling 132 million be provided for the compensation of the residents of Kyokwanga in Masindi for the land, which was donated to the Police Force for the construction of a training school. This has not been done. 

The committee recommended that Shs 10 billion be provided to enable the Police provide low cost accommodation to its police officers. 

The committee recommended also that government should overhaul the legal framework for dealing with fire outbreaks to make it more responsive. The new law should provide for private actors and strengthen the requirement for prevention, preparedness, recovery, response safety and security of public buildings and installations. 

The committee finally recommended that the salary of the lowest rank in the Police, prisons and UPDF services be increased to Shs 200,000 per month as the minimum. 

The Ministry of Defence

The committee observed that whereas combat operations in the country had subsided, there were no indicated corresponding reductions in the budget estimate for the Ministry of Defence. 

The committee observed the reduction of the military operations in the North. Logically this meant a saving on the budget.

The committee, therefore, recommended that the savings made as a result of reduced combat operations be utilized to improve the well-being of combatants and build army barracks and so forth.

Regarding the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the main issues in that ministry sector included:

•	Unrealistic assumptions underlying economic projections; 
•	Low PAYE threshold;
•	Inadequate funding for UBOS;
•	Operationalisation of the contingency fund; and
•	Declaration of unspent balances.

The committee, therefore, recommended that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development pays more attention to the assumptions underlying the micro-economic projections in order to make them more realistic given the high interest rates and the world trend of commodity prices.

The committee also recommended that the PAYE threshold should be revised from Shs 130, 000 to Shs 235,000 in order to enable the lowest paid worker to afford the basic needs.

The committee also recommended that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development abolishes boat vessel licenses, as was the case with road licenses, for equity and fairness.

The committee recommended that only Shs 4 billion be allocated for a pilot regional industrial park and release the tied up scarce resources to be utilised in other urgent critical sectors of the economy. A lot of money had been indicated to have been spent in respect of that.

The committee recommended that Shs 10 billion be allocated to UBOS to meet some of the needs for the forthcoming population and housing census.

The committee strongly recommended that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development declare the unspent balances as part of the available resources for the next budget every time.

Finally, the committee recommended that a total of funds equivalent to 3 percent of the total appropriated budget be put under the Contingency Fund and the guidelines to operationalise the fund as established under the Public Finance and Accountability Act, be expedited in any case not later than 30 June 2008. Some progress has been made in this regard, but the Constitution requires that this is operationalised as soon as possible.

The committee went further to recommend some inter-sectoral re-allocations. And after re-examining the proposed MTEF and budget framework of the government, the committee recommended the following inter-sectoral re-allocations and that compliance will be actively enforced by Parliament. 

There is a table divided into two parts. The left hand side talks about the re-allocations from the following activities: the Energy Fund, regional industrial parks, industrialization bond, scheme underwriting commercial banks and State House Presidential pledges. The total amount there was Shs 81.27 billion. This is out of the additional resources of Shs 667.1 billion, which we had talked about earlier in the report. 

We felt that the various areas where funds should now be spent are as outlined on the right-hand side of that table. They include: Rural Electrification Programme, which we wanted to receive Shs 19.27 billion. We had actually recommended this in the last financial year, but it was re-allocated, I think, for other purposes.

We also wanted water for rural development to get an additional Shs 6 billion and support to cultural institutions for development purposes to take Shs 3 billion. 

We also recommended the following re-allocations: Export Promotions Board, that is export strategy should take Shs 2.71 billion; national health centre IIs and maternities for health centre IIIs to take Shs 3.4 billion; Equal Opportunities Commission should take 2.1 billion to make it operational; women, youth and children councils all over the country should have additional Shs 1 billion; Uganda Bureau of Statistics should take Shs 10 billion. 

We further recommended that additional allocations to the Land Fund to be Shs 5 billion more; Local Government Equalization Grant to take Shs 3 billion; purchase of Simba Manyo House and plot - in view of our recommendation we had earlier said that government should begin thinking of purchasing its own real estate property for offices - to take Shs 14.5 billion. 

We also recommended that the Government Analytical Laboratory should take Shs 0.99 billion; operationalisation of the labour laws should take Shs 1.5 billion; Kampala International University Teaching Hospital was recommended to take Shs 4 billion, Vice-President’s House to take Shs 4 billion and Health and the Education Service Commissions to take Shs 0.8 billion. The total re-allocations equalled to the funds that had been allocated to the various other spending agencies and it totalled to Shs 81.27 billion. 

Madam Speaker, I now beg to move that the House adopts this report. I also wish to state, before I sit down, that I very much thank the sessional committees that took the work very seriously from 1st April and managed to come up with very comprehensive recommendations regarding each of the various issues that we have been battling with. I also wish to thank the Budget Committee Members and the Parliamentary Budgets Office, for assisting us in this process. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I indicated earlier, this is really the position of the Parliament collectively from the sessional committees and the Budget Committee to the Parliament. So, it is intended to assist you while working in your sessional committees; it is not really for debate now but of course you are armed with the up-to-date position of the House –(Interjections)– no, honourable members, no debate; you will debate the recommendations in your committees.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do really concur with you but what I would like to comment on is that what they are reading in respect of the Budget Speech should have come earlier for us to adopt them and merge them with the Budget Speech. I am saying this because already some events have taken place. So next time, recommendations of this nature should come to the House before the Budget is read because when you look at some of the recommendations like 63, you wonder because IOSC has already taken place. So, it is better to have this information before the Budget is read so that we get armed to make analysis of the Budget Speech.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yeah! Honourable members, this is the first time we are doing this; it is intended to assist the Members. So, do not hit them too hard. We will take note, but I think they have done a good job.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The chairman of the committee, in bringing the report before Parliament concluded by asking Parliament to adopt it; I do not know whether procedurally they are right or we delete that element, or –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said this is the first time we are doing this; this is actually Parliament’s position. So we do not really have to pronounce ourselves on it; we will use it as an Aid Memoire in our meetings. Okay, thank you honourable members. 

I now want to know if the movers of the petitions are ready, the petition of Iganga Primary school and the petition of the cost of essential commodities. Hon. Magoola, is your petition ready now?

MRS MAGOOLA: Madam Speaker, it has not yet come. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE ON THE BRIBERY ALLEGATIONS BY HON. ODONGA OTTO (JR)

5.13
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Asuman Kiyingi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker –(Interjections)– the report is available, I do not know why it has not been distributed; there are even copies in this corner. Can I proceed as they are being distributed?

Madam Speaker and honourable members, on 20 February 2008, hon. Odonga Otto submitted to this House allegations of bribery against some Members of Parliament. The Rt Hon. Speaker to whom this complaint was addressed referred this matter to the Standing Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline.  A copy of the letter to the committee is attached to the report. On the 23rd day –(Interruptions)

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Madam Speaker, the letter of the Speaker to the committee is very important in guiding our understanding of what the instructions to the committee were. Unless this is just an exception, the letter of the Speaker – the statement he just made that it is attached - it is actually not attached, unless others have it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether you have looked at every page and established that it is not there. 

MR KIYINGI: Madam Speaker, I am not sure what happened to the people who did the photocopying, but my copy has the letter of the Speaker and with your indulgence I can read it to the House. 

The letter is dated 25 February 2008. It is addressed to the Chairperson, Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, Parliament of Uganda. 

“RE: Hon. Samuel Odonga Otto’s claim against Hon. Kaddunabbi Lubega Ibrahim. 

Please find enclosed a copy of a letter dated 22 February 2008 in which hon. Odonga Otto accused hon. Kaddunabbi and other undisclosed honourable members of having been corrupted with a sum of over Shs 150 million so as to influence their performance of their Parliamentary duties; in particular their handling of supplementary funds for government activities. It is claimed they offended rule 71 appendix (f), sub-rule (6) of the Rules of Procedure. 

In the circumstances, under rule 149(1)(b), I request the committee to promptly investigate the claim by hon. Odonga Otto and make appropriate recommendations to the House for consideration. 

Signed: Edward Ssekandi, Speaker.” 

It is copied to Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, Government Chief Whip, Opposition Chief Whip, hon. Odonga Otto, hon. Kaddunabbi and the Clerk to Parliament. I can lay it on the Table for the information of Members.

On the 23 day of April 2008, hon. Odonga Otto, MP for Aruu County appeared before the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to substantiate his allegations. Hon. Otto informed the committee that in his letter to the Speaker, he made two bribery allegations against hon. Ibrahim Kaddunabbi, MP for Butambala. One was in respect of a Shs 170 million bribe, which was obtained on the eve of CHOGM and the second was in respect of the management of the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme, which was given by the proprietors of Stanbic Bank. 

The committee has duly investigated the allegations made by hon. Odongo Otto and I beg to report its findings. 

The mandate of the committee

The Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline derives its mandate from rule 149 of the Rules of Procedure governing this Parliament. It reads in part as follows: Rule 149(1): “It shall be the duty of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline by order of the House- 
(a) 	To inquire into any complaint of contempt of Parliament or breach of privilege, which may be referred to it, and to recommend to the House such action as the committee may consider appropriate;
(b) 	To consider any matter of discipline referred to it by the Speaker or the House, including attendance of Members at sittings of committees and to report its findings to the House." 

Methodology

In conducting its investigations, the committee held public hearings and examined the witnesses on oath. With lead counsel, hon. Niwagaba Wilfred, assisting the committee in the examination of witnesses, parties were also informed and allowed to engage advocates to represent them before the committee;

Review the relevant laws and rules, the daily Hansard, previous committee reports, decided court cases, Commonwealth Parliamentary practice and all other literature relevant to the matter.

The committee dealt with the matters in the following sequence: 

a) 	Hon. Otto was allowed to state his case against the various Members of Parliament, that is, hon. Kaddunabbi Lubega, MP Butambala; hon. Okecho William, MP Tororo; hon. Hashaka Kabahweza, MP Kamwenge; Hon. Wopuwa William, MP Bubulo; hon. Nsubuga William, MP Buvuma; hon. Rose Akol Okullu, MP Bukedea. 

b) 	Witnesses presented by hon. Otto were examined and cross-examined. 

c) 	A preliminary ruling on the finding of a prima facie case was made.
 
d) 	The affected Members of Parliament were put on their defence. 

e) 	Defence witnesses were examined and re-examined on oath. 

f) 	A report was then written for presentation to this House, which I hereby present.

The investigations

Hon. Odonga Otto’s case against named Members of Parliament

He started by adducing evidence in relation to the CHOGM bribery as below. 

He stated that hon. Kaddunabbi received Shs 170 million from Ambassador Mugume, the Permanent Secretary to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, to influence the passing of Shs 55 billion supplementary budget for CHOGM. 

He said that it was hon. Okecho who was supposed to pick the money, but being a senior civil servant, he opted to leave hon. Kaddunabbi to get into the trap. (Laughter)

He said that the money was supposed to be received by all members of the select committee that sat to reconsider the supplementary budget but some of them did not get the money. He named hon. Okecho William, MP Tororo; hon. Hashaka Kabahweza, MP Kamwenge; Hon. Wopuwa William, MP Bubulo; hon. Nsubuga William, MP Buvuma; hon. Rose Akol Okullu, MP Bukedea, as the Members who received the share of the bribe from hon. Kaddunabbi. 

He further alleged that hon. Kaddunabbi instantly got Shs 150 million with the promise that he would receive a balance of US $10,000 on passing of the supplementary budget. 

Regarding his second allegation, he informed the committee that a law regulating the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme had been passed by Parliament and that an advert had already run in the print media for qualified persons to manage the scheme. He informed the committee that hon. Kaddunabbi is one of the influential persons on the pension’s board scheme.

He informed the committee that Stanbic Bank had corruptly organised a trip for the MPs on the pension’s board to South Africa, footing all costs including the air tickets and per diem, which directly contravenes paragraph six of appendix (f) of the Rules of Procedure of this House.

In this regard, he stated that Members found US $2,000 in their bank accounts. This money, he submitted, was not remitted by Parliament but by Stanbic Bank.

He submitted that hon. Alaso and hon. Oduman rejected the trip and the money, citing conflict of interest. 

He said that hon. Kaddunabbi and hon. James Kakooza went to South Africa. He said hon. Alice Alaso and hon. Oduman would corroborate his testimony.

The witnesses presented by hon. Odonga Otto to prove his allegations

Hon. Otto’s first witness was Hon. Pereza Ahabwe, who was supposed to corroborate the testimony that hon. Kaddunabbi was harassing Ambassador Mugume for the outstanding balance of US $10,000 on the promised Shs 170 million. Instead of so doing, hon. Pereza Ahabwe categorically denied ever telephoning or meeting Ambassador Mugume over the CHOGM bribery allegations. In a nutshell, this witness was not at all helpful to hon. Odonga Otto’s case.

The second witness was hon. James Kakooza who denied ever having any knowledge that hon. Kaddunabbi arranged for the South African trip with the intention of corrupting the minds of the Members of the pension’s board into awarding the administration of the Parliamentary Pension Scheme to Stanbic Bank. On the contrary, he testified that the trip was organised by Parliament, which gave the per diem totalling to Shs 3,110,000 and paid for the air tickets. 

The third witness was hon. Okumu Reagan who testified that as Vice-Chairperson of a sub-committee to PAC, he had earlier been approached by hon. William Nsubuga with a request to investigate an allegation that chairpersons and vice-chairpersons had been bribed. He informed the committee that the only name mentioned was that of the Chairman of the Committee on National Economy, hon. Kaddunabbi Lubega.

The fourth witness was hon. Kassiano Wadri, who testified that he had seen hon. Kaddunabbi in the company of hon. Norman Muwulize and hon. Hashaka Kabahweza in Stanbic Bank, IPS branch. He stated that he saw hon. Kaddunabbi withdrawing a huge sum of money, which they shared. On cross examination he stated that he could not differentiate whether it was hon. Kabahweza or hon. Mariam Nalubega, who was with hon. Kaddunabbi in the bank. (Laughter)

On further cross-examination, he stated that he did not know how much the money was, and for what reason the money withdrawn and shared. 

The fifth witness was hon. Owori Otada Amooti who stated that while he was having lunch with hon. Otto and hon. Wopuwa, the latter on seeing hon. Kaddunabbi, remarked that, “You see that man, he is not a good man.” (Laughter) “Some of us were treated unfairly”. He stated that hon. Wopuwa had told them that while on his way home, he received a phone call requiring him to pass by Parliament for a message upon which he was given Shs 2 million only. Hon. Otada further stated that hon. Wopuwa told him that on receiving the money, he was happy and went home. 

He informed the committee that on asking him how he felt about receiving money he had not worked for, hon. Wopuwa replied by saying, “Some of you are still young. I have been a CAO for many years. There are many young CAO’s who have built houses in senior quarters. So I am happy to get any money that can solve my problems”. (Laughter)

He informed the committee that he did not follow up the matter. On cross examination, he reiterated his evidence and said that MPs sign for every money they receive unless the same was remitted by EFT, but hon. Wopuwa had told him and hon. Otto that he did not sign for the said Shs 2 million. He also stated that hon. Wopuwa did not state who had given him the money.

The other witness was hon. Alice Alaso. She testified that she is a Member of the Parliamentary Pensions Board by virtue of her office as a Parliamentary Commissioner. She said that the board had several meetings in trying to map out a way to kick-start the process of administering the Parliamentary Pension Scheme. 

She stated that during the commission meeting on the 10 January 2008, hon. Kakooza wrote in her notebook informing her that they had a trip to South Africa. She informed the committee that she found an estimated sum of Shs 3 million on her account whose source she could not ascertain. She was then shocked to hear hon. Kaddunabbi say that for insurance purposes, Alexander Forbes should be the ideal provider while Stanbic would be the ideal banker. 

She further stated that she was shocked to see her passport and other related documents being returned in a Stanbic Bank envelope. She stated that she was shocked to be informed of the details of the trip in a letter on a Stanbic Bank letter head. She noted that this was a very unusual way of organising a Parliamentary trip and thus she declined to take the trip. She also worked out an arrangement with the chief accountant for the strange money to be recovered from her emoluments. She then tendered documents to back up her claims.

The last witness in support of hon. Otto’s case was hon. Okello Oduman, who essentially corroborated the earlier testimony given by hon. Alice Alaso in relation to the conflict of interest that the South African trip caused. Hon. Otto then closed his case.

Preliminary ruling

The committee, basing on the evidence adduced by hon. Odonga Otto and his witnesses, did not find a prima facie case to have been made against hon. Okecho William, hon. Rose Akol Okullu and hon. Kabahweza Hashaka, since no evidence was adduced to incriminate the said Members of Parliament. None of the required ingredients of the offence were proved against any of the three aforementioned Members of Parliament as there was no evidence adduced by hon. Otto to connect the three said hon. Members of Parliament to any of the allegations, and accordingly they were discharged.

However, as regards to hon. Kaddunabbi, the evidence led by hon. Otto and hon. Alice Alaso required him to give an explanation about the Parliamentary Pension Scheme and the involvement of Stanbic Bank in the matter. He was also required to explain himself on the CHOGM allegation in view of the testimony of hon. Otto, hon. Otada and hon. Okumu. He was, therefore, put on his defence as it were.

In light of the evidence adduced by hon. Otto and hon. Otada, hon. Wopuwa was also required to respond to the allegations before the committee.

As regards hon. Nsubuga William, his failure to cross-examine hon. Okumu Reagan, made his evidence unchallenged and since it pointed to information on wrong doing in respect of CHOGM, the dictates of justice required that he be given an opportunity to explain what and why he wanted PAC to investigate. 

The committee felt that hon. Nsubuga, having complained to hon. Okumu, could have useful information. He was, therefore, called upon to give his version of the story notwithstanding the fact that no prima facie case had been established against him.

The Defence

Hon. Kaddunabbi Lubega

In his defence, hon. Kaddunabbi denied all the allegations as made by hon. Otto. He stated that he had earlier been nominated by the Rt Hon. Speaker to attend an African Sovereign Pension Scheme Summit in Johannesburg whereupon Parliament of Uganda paid his per diem, top up and his accommodation expenses. In this regard, he submitted a payment voucher, which transferred money to his account from the Clerk to Parliament and an authorisation letter from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to buy foreign exchange. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay these documents on the Table.

Hon. Kaddunabbi submitted that it was at this summit that the organisers of the earlier stated summit agreed to organise a tailor-made workshop for the Board of Trustees of the Parliamentary Pensions Board. He testified that on his return, he briefed the other board members in a meeting held on the 8th day of November 2007, under minute BOT/2. He tendered copies of the minutes in this regard, which I beg to lay on the Table.

Hon. Kaddunabbi also testified that the Clerk did all communications regarding this trip to Parliament and requisitions for the money for per diem, air tickets, were all done by the Clerk to Parliament who was communicating to all members of the board of trustees. 

He further testified that this was done on the direction of the Rt Hon. Speaker. He stated that the Prime Minister authorised the payment of per diem at a rate of US $300 per MP for six days while giving officers of Parliament US $180 for the six days. The air tickets were Club Class for MPs and Economy Class for the staff of Parliament. He stated that all the air tickets were secured by the Clerk’s office. The visa fees were also paid by the Clerk’s office and actually the letters to secure the visas was written by protocol officers of Parliament and so was the passport handling. 

He concluded by reiterating that the South African trip was organised and funded by the Parliament of Uganda.  He then tendered letters, which authorized the release of funds for per diem and air tickets, which I have already laid on the Table.

Regarding the Parliamentary scheme, he stated that the consideration of any party offering consultancy services to advise the board of trustees on the operationalisation of the Parliamentary scheme and fund was done by the contracts committee, which does all procurement and awarding of tenders of Parliament.  

He stated that he had no role whatsoever in the workings of the Parliamentary Contracts Committee.  He submitted that hon. Otto lied on the disqualification of Stanbic Bank because he never submitted any bids. Only four companies tendered, namely: AH Consulting, Alexander Forbes, PricewaterhouseCoopers and UNISEX Investments Uganda Limited. 

The CHOGM Bribe

In this regard it was hon. Kaddunabbi’s defence that he never received a letter or requested for any money from Ambassador Mugume as alleged by hon. Otto. He also denied ever being tasked or given the duty to get money from Ambassador Mugume by either hon. Wopuwa or anybody else. He also denied ever putting Ambassador Mugume under any other pressure for a US $10,000 balance.  

Regarding the money exchanged in the bank, he testified that hon. Norman Muwulize, hon. Nalubega Mariam Patience and himself went to the bank to withdraw money from the Parliamentary Moslem Caucus account for purposes of the loan advancements they had applied for. He stated that the money he put in his pocket belonged to hon. Hood Katuramu who had applied for a similar loan facility from the Moslem caucus but was not in the bank to receive the money.  

He informed the committee that hon. Nalubega Mariam Patience applied for a soft loan of Shs 5 million, while hon. Norman Muwulize applied for Shs 2 million and hon. Hood Katuramu asked for Shs 3 million. He then tendered copies of the cheque folios to corroborate the loan applications referred to, which I beg to lay on the Table. He testified that all loan application forms were duly endorsed by the accountant who is then mandated to deduct from the monthly emoluments of the borrower.  He also testified that hon. Bintu Jalia and himself are the signatories to the Parliamentary Moslem caucus account.  

Hon. William Wopuwa

He stated that he sometimes has lunch at the Parliamentary canteen; he then denied ever having lunch let alone sitting at the same table with either hon. Otada or hon. Otto before or after CHOGM. He also denied ever discussing anything related to CHOGM with hon. Kaddunabbi. He also stated that despite being colleagues in Parliament, they are not friends. He also denied ever receiving any money. He concluded by branding hon. Otto’s allegations as malicious lies. In conclusion, it was a total denial of everything alleged by hon. Otto.
  
Hon. William Nsubuga

He simply stated that in the course of having a chat with hon. Okumu Reagan, he told him that he had heard a rumour in the corridors of Parliament that committee chairpersons had been bribed to pass the supplementary budget for CHOGM. He stated that by putting him on the list, hon. Otto thought he would get more information from him, which actually he did not have. On cross-examination he said he could not remember from whom he heard the bribery rumours. (Laughter)  

Hon. Nalubega Mariam Patience

She basically corroborated the evidence of hon. Kaddunabbi Lubega. She stated that she had indeed applied for a Shs 5 million soft loan from the Moslem Parliamentary Caucus, which she received from hon. Kaddunabbi Lubega at Stanbic Bank, IPS branch.

Final submission

Senior counsel Dusman Kabega appeared for hon. Wopuwa. He challenged the veracity of the evidence adduced by hon. Otto saying that no evidence had been laid to show or to prove that hon. Wopuwa was a member of the select committee that was put in place to consider or pass the supplementary budget for CHOGM. He stated that there was no certainty in hon. Otto’s evidence as to whether hon. Wopuwa received the money alleged, neither was there evidence to show that hon. Kaddunabbi Lubega gave hon. Wopuwa any money. He cited Article 28(3) of the Constitution and sections 101 and 102 of the Evidence Act, which lays the burden of proof on the accuser. He submitted that hon. Otto should have adduced admissible evidence to prove each and every ingredient of the offence or the misconduct under the Rules of Procedure.  

In this regard, the committee was referred to a complaint against Mr George Galloway in the House of Commons where it was found that the test of proof to be applied was on the balance of probabilities. He quoted an extract in the said case on the standard proof to it. 

“The courts have interpreted the concept of balance of probabilities to require a higher standard of proof in serious cases. A case such as this has serious implications for holders of a public office. Accordingly, we have concluded that we need to be persuaded that these allegations were significantly more likely to be true than not to be true before we could probably uphold them.” He submitted that the allegations by hon. Otto are serious to require a standard proof higher than a balance of probabilities because if proved they could amount to criminal offences for which a member could be charged for abuse of office under the Penal Code Act, or corruption under the Prevention of Corruption Act. 

To this end, he submitted that no evidence of an eye witness to the receipt of the cash allegedly received was adduced, no documentary evidence was adduced; no evidence was led to show that hon. Wopuwa was a member of the sub committee which passed the supplementary budget. There was, therefore, no motive for giving of the money given that hon. Wopuwa did not do any work that could have motivated the giver since he was not a member of the Select Committee on CHOGM and also in view of the fact that the giver of the Shs 2 million was never disclosed to the committee. 

He concluded by saying that none of the witnesses proved any of the ingredients cited. He relied on the case of Efrance Ayakwa & 2 others v Uganda Criminal Appeal No. 2 of 1997 where court said that the veracity of the witness must be assessed on his evidence as a whole. His consistency or inconsistency is a very relevant consideration. Grave inconsistencies, unless satisfactorily explained, will usually result in the evidence being rejected. Minor inconsistencies will not, unless the judge thinks they point to deliberate untruthfulness, have the same effect. 

He also referred to a decision in Okale v Republic 1965 EA 555 where the former East African Court stated, “A conviction can only be based on admissible and credible evidence. Suspicion however strong cannot be the basis of a conviction.” He then submitted that the evidence of the hon. Otada and hon. Otto is merely evidence of suspicion, suspicion that has not been proved by admissible evidence.

On the criminality of the offence of bribery, he submitted that the standard of proof that will be required is beyond reasonable doubt. He cited the celebrated case of Woolington v DPP 1935 Ac 462 where it was said that, “In any criminal offence the State has to prove the offence against the accused beyond reasonable doubt and any slightest doubt must be resolved in favour of the accused. The accused has no duty to prove his innocence.”

He concluded that the allegation by hon. Otto is incredulously credulous and must be dismissed with the contempt it deserves, as it was merely an attempt by him to throw a stone in the bush to see what would come out. That it is improper for hon. Otto to impute criminality on a fellow member on a matter he has no credible evidence. He prayed that his client deserved an apology from hon. Otto and so did the people of Bubulo East.

The law on bribery

Bribery is the offer or acceptance of anything of value in exchange for influence on a government or public official or employee. Bribes can take the form of gifts or payments of money in exchange for favourable treatment such as awards of government contracts. In most situations, both the person offering the bribe and the person accepting can be charged with bribery.

In the Parliamentary context, the Rules of Procedure in paragraph six of appendix (f) state that: “The acceptance by a Member of a bribe to influence his or her conduct as a Member, including any fee, compensation or reward in connection with the promotion of, or opposition to, to any Bill, motion, or other matter submitted, or intended to be submitted to the House, or to any committee of the House is contrary to the Code of Conduct.” 

In the Ugandan law, the Penal Code Act is silent on bribery. However, provisions relating to bribery are found in the Prevention of Corruption Act Chapter 121 of the laws of Uganda. Section 5 of the said Act provides: 
“A person-
a)	Who offers any gratification to any Member of a public body as an inducement or reward for -
i) The Member’s voting or abstaining from voting at any meeting of that public body in favour of or against any measure or resolution or question submitted to that public body;  
ii) The Member’s performing, or abstaining from performing, or his or her aid in procuring, expediting, delaying, hindering or preventing the performance of any official act; or 
iii) The Member’s aid in procuring, or preventing the passing of any vote, or the granting of any contract or advantage in favour of any person; or 

b) Who, being such Member as referred to in paragraph (a) of this section, solicits or accepts any gratification as an inducement or reward for any such act when such abstaining, as referred to in sub-paragraph (i), (ii) and (ii) of that paragraph commits an offence.”

A “public body” is defined in Section 1 of the POCA to include the government, any department, services or undertaking of government, the East African Community, its institutions and corporations, the Cabinet and Parliament. It is clear from the provision that Parliament qualifies as a public body and, therefore, its Members are subject to the provisions relating to bribery.

In light of the above, for one to successfully prove bribery, he needs to satisfy the following ingredients or prove that -

1.	A gratification was offered to a Member of a public body as an inducement.
2.	 The inducement must be aimed at obtaining a favour. In the case of Akbaralik Jetha v.  Republic 14 EACA 122 court, among other things, held that the essence of the offence is the motive, which animates the giver and the offence is complete if he gives either on account of some past act or omission in his favour or with the hope and expectation that his gift may so influence the recipient that something may thereafter be done or omitted in his favour. 
3.	The inducement must be accepted by the accused person.

In our case, Madam Speaker, hon. Otto needed to prove that hon. Kaddunabbi Lubega and hon. William Wopuwa were offered a gratification to influence the passing of the supplementary budget and that they accepted the said gratification and were influenced in passing the said budget. As matters stand, the fact that hon. Kaddunabbi and his correspondent are members of a public body is not in dispute. The issue to be proved is whether the Members accused were offered gratification to induce their acts in the plenary. 

Also related to the offence of bribery is the offence of corruption. It is provided for under Section 2 of the Prevention of the Corruption Act as follows:
“Any person who shall, by himself or herself or by or in conjunction with any other person -
a) Corruptly solicits or receive, or agree to receive for himself or herself, or for another person; or 
b) Corruptly give, promise or offer to any person whether for the benefit of that person or another person, any gratification as an inducement to, or reward for, or otherwise on account of any Member, officer or servant of the public body doing or forbearing to do anything in respect of any matter or transaction, actual or proposed, in which that public body is concerned, commits an offence.” 

Here, the ingredients to be proved are that –

1.	A person solicited or received gratification as an inducement.
2.	A person must have corruptly given, promised or offered to another a gratification with the motive of inducing or reward him or her. This was aptly brought out in the cases of R v Akbarali Jetha and Makumbi v R 1968 EA 667 where it was held that the essence of official corruption is the motive which animates the giver. If he gives either an account of some past act or omission in his favour or with the hope and expectation that his gift may so influence the donee that something may thereafter be done or omitted in his favour, the offence is complete. 

In this regard, reference was also made to the Bradford Election Petition (No. 2) (1869) 19 LT 723, which considered the meaning of the word, “corruptly” by stating thus: “It is difficult to tell but I am satisfied that it means a thing done with an evil mind or an evil intention; and except there be an evil mind or intention accompanying the act, it is corruptly done.” 

It should also be noted that motive is also important in proving corruption as observed in the case Sewa Singh Mandia V.R 1966 EA 315 where it was held that state of mind, which includes motive and intention, is an essential and material factor in determining whether one is acting corruptly or not. It should indeed be noted that failure by a complainant to prove any ingredient of an offence leads to an acquittal. 

The burden of proof

Under our law, a person accused of anything is presumed innocent until proved guilty or until that person has pleaded guilty. This principle is enshrined in Article 28(3) of the Constitution. An accused person has no duty to prove his innocence. The accuser must adduce evidence against the accused so as to prove that the accused person committed the offence. That is to say the burden of proof lies on the accuser as enshrined in Sections 101 and 102 of the Evidence Act. Where an accused person raises a defence, then he is not required to prove it beyond reasonable doubt but it is merely on a balance of probabilities. It is the duty of the accuser, in this case hon. Otto, to prove every ingredient of the offence beyond reasonable doubt. After the prosecution has presented their defence, the accused must be acquitted unless the judge, in our case the Committee on Rules, privileges and Discipline, is fully satisfied that the accused has a case to answer. This is the stage or proof of a prima-facie case. 

A prima-facie case was given legal interpretation in the case of Bhatti v R (1957) EA 532 where it was held that: “A prima-facie case is made out where the prosecution has adduced evidence on which a reasonable tribunal properly directing its mind to the law and evidence could convict if the defence offers no explanation. The evidence must be of the type that can sustain a conviction.”

In light of the above, hon. Otto needed to adduce evidence on which the committee would convict the accused persons if it properly directed itself on the law.

Conclusion

To reach a logical conclusion, the question to be answered is, did hon. Otto discharge the burden of proof required of him? The committee has reviewed the evidence and came to the conclusion that the allegations of bribery as stated by hon. Otto were not supported by any credible evidence. In reaching its conclusion, the committee considered the differing amounts of money supposedly exchanged as stated by hon. Otto: At first, Shs 150 million, then Shs 170 million and lastly Shs 3 billion, and also changing the allegations. 

At the beginning of his testimony, hon. Otto stated on oath that hon. Nsubuga received Shs 500,000 bribe and had fought with hon. Kaddunabbi in the Parliamentary lift allegedly complaining that the money was too little. He later said that all this was not true. In the committee’s view, this inconsistency could only suggest that hon. Otto was not sure of his allegations hence the constant shifting of positions and changing statements. These statements could not, therefore, be based on by the committee to find the accused persons complained against culpable. 

As counsel for hon. Wopuwa rightly pointed out, hon. Otto was driven by mere suspicion and rumours. No evidence was adduced to prove solicitation of the bribe. This allegation was definitely dealt a death blow by hon. Ahabwe Pereza’s denial; no evidence documentary or otherwise was laid to prove receipt of the bribe and indeed, no evidence was made to prove the sharing of any money among the persons complained against. 

It is important to note as can be revealed from the committee’s analysis of the evidence given by hon. Otto’s witnesses that no credible evidence was adduced to incriminate hon. Kaddunabbi Lubega and hon. Wopuwa. All allegations of the South African trip are negatived by the fact that the Clerk to Parliament, the Rt Hon. Speaker and the Rt hon. Prime Minister were privy to the organisation of the trip as proved by the documentary evidence tendered by hon. Kaddunabbi and laid before this august House. 

In a nutshell, none of the required ingredients of the misconduct alleged under our rules were proved against any of the two aforementioned Members of Parliament. There is no scent of evidence led by the prosecution to connect the two said hon. Members of Parliament to any of the allegations made by hon. Otto and accordingly, the two must be acquitted forthwith. 

Observations and recommendations

Madam Speaker, this case has been instructive in many ways. The character and conduct of Members of Parliament should be beyond reproach. Where there is wrong doing, such wrong doing should be investigated and if established, appropriate sanctions should follow. The allegations made against Members not only affected them as individuals but also affected the integrity of the House as a whole. It is the duty and responsibility of every Member to conduct him or herself honourably. 

It is also the duty of every Member who has a complaint against another to take necessary steps to make proper investigations before going public or coming to the Floor of the House to impute criminality or wrong doing on others. 

It is an abuse of parliamentary privilege to accuse honourable colleagues wrongly without evidence to support the accusations. The committee noted with concern the ease and casual manner in which hon. Otto made serious allegations against others, both in the committee and in the media, in total disregard of the grave injury he was inflicting to their image and possibly political future. While it is laudable to fight corruption at all levels including this House, this cause cannot be helped by an approach that borders on irresponsibility and lack of seriousness. 

Hon. Otto failed to adduce any credible evidence to implicate the accused honourable members. The committee found that the statements made against the Members by hon. Otto were unfounded, baseless and irresponsible. The committee, therefore, recommends that hon. Otto should withdraw the statements. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable Chair of the Rules Committee and the members of the committee. Hon. Otto, I believe that you have heard the report. What do you have to say about it? [Hon. Ogenga Latigo: “Procedure”.] That is the procedure. Hon. Leader of the Opposition, the House commissioned this committee to make this report and they have. First of all, we must hear from the person who made the allegations before we say anything else.

6.10
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to inform you that this is the first time I am addressing the House while you are chairing and when I am a lawyer. (Laughter) I saw the committee recommendations on page 26, which is virtually the last sentence and before I state my position as to the committee’s recommendations, allow me to state the following:

At a point of law, I hold that the committee erred. The burden of proof – Article 28(3) of the Constitution presumes everyone innocent until proven guilty. True. All those I accused were innocent and also in the case of Woolington v. DPP, the burden of proof is on the prosecution that must prove beyond reasonable doubt so if there was any doubt on my role it was still the duty of the committee to ensure that any reasonable person would not cast doubt. 

Having said that, it is unfortunate that the committee gave me a role, which is enshrined under Article 120(3) of the Constitution; this Article gives the role, which the committee left to the Director of Public Prosecutions, and I want to state it clearly that this is a criminal and not a civil case. If it were a civil case, it would be me to prove based on balance of probability but corruption being a criminal case, it should have been the onus of the committee to fully investigate the matter and aid me to prove my case. The committee opted not to investigate, not to summon Ambassador Mugume in Parliament, not to get any bank statements, not to get any print out of a telephone conversation, which I requested should be printed from MTN between hon. Perez Ahabwe and Ambassador Mugume. 

The reply the committee gave me was that they were not going to help me prove my case. So what happened is that hon. Otto was to go to MTN, get the telephone print out on his own because I am now the prosecution. Hon. Otto was to go to all the banks and get the relevant print outs and not the committee. Hon. Otto was to do everything it takes so that the constitutional role under Article 120, given to the DPP should have come before the committee. I failed to do that. So at the point of law, it is challengeable and the chairman knows this. I would still say that the committee took a quasi-judicial stand instead of turning into an investigative body. I respect your decision. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I want to make some corrections on page 24 and 25. On page 24, the first paragraph, the chairman said: “The committee considered the differing amounts of money that supposedly exchanged hands as stated by hon. Otto.” The chairman stated that on the first ground, I stated Shs 150 million, then Shs 170 million and then Shs 3.0 billion. Just for the record, after I started testifying before the committee on the Shs 150 million, I wrote to the Speaker of Parliament and copied the letter to the chairman that I have got more incriminating evidence amounting to Shs 3.0 billion. So, this is a different thing and you received the letter, Mr Chairman, and the Speaker also received the letter. No one replied to my letter; no one acknowledged receipt of my letter. I was bringing fresh grounds and different charges that the members of the public were giving to me. So, they were not differing statements; it was different information I got and I want to clean the House once and for all. 

Two, on the issue of hon. William Nsubuga, I did not say it is not true. I withdrew my statement before the committee. I remember you pushed me hard three times that “Is it true or false that hon. Nsubuga received Shs 500,000?” The recordings are there. I told you that I had withdrawn my statements and it is not my duty to state whether it is true or false. So, I just want to make those corrections before I come to the last aspect.

In the middle of the hearings, I wrote to the Speaker of Parliament that all chairpersons of all committees received money and I got additional information that implicated all of them during the CHOGM period. The Speaker did not acknowledge my letter; he did not even reply it. Hon. Asuman Kiyingi received my letter. I had written to him several times and he would copy all the correspondences to the committee members. In this case, he did not copy it to them because he was on the frontline. He did not copy the letter where I accused him, the chairman, of also collecting the money -(Laughter)- and the principle of law says you cannot be a better judge in your own case and you have deliberately not talked to this House about that letter that I wrote implicating you. (Laughter)

Informally when I met the chairman in the Parliamentary Gardens during the State of the Nation Address party I told him, “You have received my letters but the committee Members are complaining that you did not give them the letter implicating you.” So, you are now a judge in a case where you are also implicated and you know this is challengeable even in a grade one magistrate’s court. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, I think we are dealing with the matters which were referred to this committee by the Speaker in his letter. Confine yourself to that. 

Secondly, I would like to know; ever since you made this report to the House, I want you to let me know whether you reported to the DPP yourself independently about these matters. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Article 123(b) says “The functions of the Director of Public Prosecutions shall include the following…” and (c) says, “To take over and continue any criminal proceedings instituted by any other person or any other authority.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What move did you make yourself to draw it to the attention of the DPP? That is what I am asking. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: The Constitution allows the DPP to take over the case even without my invitation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You needed to move him.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. Lastly, this is my position on the request of the committee that I withdraw the statement. I am an ex-seminarian and I have a very strong conscience. I have been quiet on this side of the House battling with my conscience whether to subject myself to the dictates of the society or whether to follow my conscience. I have come to realise that going before that select committee was like asking mosquitoes whether to spray DDT or Icon. (Laughter) It is a choice in which the mosquitoes wouldn’t have any option. 

I have also realised that today, we are making work difficult for whistle blowers. We are frustrating the efforts of the IGG. I make an allegation; they say, “Prove your case”. If hon. Otto can be subjected to this, what about an ordinary man in Kanungu? Leaders should take responsibility for their actions. If I had taken a bribe, I would personally resign. Now that they are alleging I made false statements and I should withdraw, I am not withdrawing it and I am ready to pay the ultimate price. Thank you so much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, are you aware of the provisions of rule 77, especially (b) and (c)?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I may read the rule with your permission. This is rule 77: “Defamatory statements to be investigated by the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline –
(1) Whenever in the opinion of the Speaker or person presiding in a committee a statement made by a Member is prima facie defamatory of any person, the person presiding shall refer the matter for inquiry to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline which shall report its findings to the House….” 

Madam Speaker, I am aware of the implications of your statement but I have all reasons to believe that these people took the bribe and I am not withdrawing my statements whatsoever. Even if it means losing my seat, I will walk out a free man. 

6.21
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have read and internalised our Rules of Procedure especially the mandate of the Rules, Privileges and Discipline Committee. I have listened to the chairperson and gone through the report of the committee. I don’t want to comment about the substance of the committee. However, I would like to raise the following, which I think are unfortunate:

Reading through the committee report, it is as if today –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, honourable member for giving way, and Madam Speaker, for allowing me. This matter was investigated pursuant to a reference made to us under rule 149 and in accordance with rule 149 sub-rule (3). I have a feeling that before the matter could be put to debate as my honourable colleague intends to begin, regard must first be given to the parties affected to see whether they agree with the report or disagree. It is good, one of the Members has already disagreed but I believe before all of us can be given an opportunity, the affected parties must first be heard and then debate would ensue. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, hon. Katuntu, I do not know whether you are appearing as counsel. I think let us wait for the Members affected to speak. Yes, we allowed hon. Otto to respond to the report because he is mentioned. Let us allow the other Members to say something. Okay, hon. Kaddunabbi first.

6.24
MR IBRAHIM KADDUNABBI (NRM, Butambala County, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have heard the committee report and I have noted with concern that the committee realised that the allegations made by hon. Otto were grave and inflicted injury upon us personally, on our families, our constituencies and the institution of Parliament. I am, however, concerned with the recommendation of the committee to merely withdraw or retract these statements because it will not have addressed the injury it has inflicted on us for the last six or so months. I would, therefore, request this august House to move for a harsher punishment to hon. Otto. I will be happy.  (Mr Abdu Katuntu rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think let us hear from the Members who were mentioned first. 

6.25
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Madam Speaker, thank you for this opportunity to enable me respond finally to this saga in which hon. Otto has been involving my name for the last six months. I wish to thank the committee for its report. I note, on page 10, that they did not find a prima facie case against me, as an individual and I feel, however, like my colleague has stated, that a mere withdrawal of this statement is not enough for me. 

The allegations have injured my impeccable reputation built over forty years of public - (Interjections)- this is understood and this allegation has caused a lot of anxiety in my family, in my constituency, among friends and relatives, in-laws -(Laughter)- and everybody else. I feel that it has also injured my status in my own constituency as well, and very unfairly. 

The allegations, finally found to be baseless, have caused discomfort among my children who are possibly doing a lot of work in the financial sectors in this world. They feel that this was extremely unfortunate for me to be in a Parliament where any person can come up against me and make unfounded allegations about me. So, please -(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, I am still of the view that the affected Members can only stand up to say whether they agree or do not agree with the findings and recommendations and not to make political or whatever statements. If you read the rule critically, interpret it strictly so that we move as per the requirements of the rule. So, what hon. William Okecho should stand up to say is whether he agrees or disagrees and then he sits and we ask others.

MR OKECHO: Madam Speaker, I have not made such a statement before in this Parliament. I am particularly aggrieved and the way I look at hon. Otto makes me feel that perhaps it is unfortunate I am here to be subjected to his kind of diatribe. I am not in a position to merely stand up and say, “I agree”, or “I disagree”. I definitely disagree; that is known. I have already said the report is okay except as I have indicated I wanted a harsher punishment meted out to hon. Otto. If he cannot retract his statement publicly, let him be punished for it in a more serious manner. Thank you very much. (Prof. Ogenga Latigo rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, please allow the Members whose names have been mentioned in that report to have the first opportunity to speak.

6.30
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Female Youth Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My name appeared in the report arising out of the allegations of hon. Wadri and hon. Otto that he did not see hon. Hashaka but saw me getting money from hon. Kaddunabbi, which was a bribe. When I appeared before the committee he was not present and yet I wanted him to put it clearly that he saw me taking a bribe, which he has not mentioned anywhere. And quoting his case, the lawyer, and giving us the case of Woolington v DPP, which says that he who alleges must prove beyond reasonable doubt and he has not proved that and the committee has found out that his allegations are baseless and purely lies, I would also not be comfortable with the apology because it has tainted our names. When my name appeared in this report, all the press and the radios were talking about a youth taking a bribe for CHOGM. I have never taken any bribe; my hands are clean; so I cannot accept an apology. I want something higher and heavier than that. I thank you.

6.32
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand as one of those whose names were mentioned in the report as having received a bribe. I want to concur with the findings of the committee that there was no bribe whatsoever that any of the Members mentioned received -(Interruptions)– yes, I talk for myself. I do not need a bribe to do my work especially as a Back Bencher on the ruling side and that is the government. To imply that being a Back Bencher I need motivation to do my work, I think is beyond limits. 

So, the recommendation made that he simply withdraws his statement is not up to level of the damage, which this report has done to us. We have been in the news for over six months and in my case, I started hearing of these things in my constituency even before Otto put that matter before this House. I believe it was political, that is why it started in the constituency before he said it here in Parliament. We cannot rule out political connotations especially now that the allegations cannot be substantiated. Apart from just putting there my name, he could not adduce any evidence or even just a narration to prove that I had been seen with so and so receiving this money, nothing! He just put my name there without having anything to say even by his own testimony. 

So, Madam Speaker, it is my wish that, other than just withdrawing the allegation for the benefit of this Parliament, for the integrity of this institution, which we serve as Members of Parliament and as a deterrent to such allegations, which are baseless by any Member in future, hon. Otto should be suspended for six months as a lesson to others who may wish to make such mere allegations without any evidence. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we hear from hon. Hashaka? She is not around? Okay, let us hear from hon. Wopuwa. Both are absent? Okay, we can have hon. Nsubuga.

6.35
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have just been disturbed this afternoon, when hon. Otto, when asked why he withdrew my name, he said he just withdrew it. He did not confirm whether I should be in the bracket or not.

I would like to say that actually in the initial stages, hon. Otto alleged that I had received a bribe, but later on he got a second thought because he knew the truth and withdrew my name. But I would like to add that since the allegation was that the chairpersons and their vices got the money, it was not proper for that committee to investigate this matter. What I am saying is that – I was exonerated by the person who alleged! So, I would like to say that really as Parliament, before we pass a harsh punishment to hon. Otto, we should have a small committee to investigate this matter to its radical conclusion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Mwesigye.

6.37
MRS HOPE MWESIGYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have carefully listened to the report –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She is handling procedure – no, he was not an accused; he was merely a witness.

MRS MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, I also rose on a point of procedure because hon. Otto, on the Floor of Parliament, seemed not repentant whatsoever –(Interjections)– yes, adding more and fresh allegations. So, I would like to suggest that we look at rule 77(1), (2) and (3). Rule 77(1) provides as follows: “Defamatory statements to be investigated by Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. 

(1) Whenever, in the opinion of the Speaker or a person presiding in a committee, a statement made by a Member is prima facie defamatory of any person, the person presiding shall refer the matter for inquiry to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, which shall report its findings to the House not later than 21 days after the matter is referred to it.”

Rule 77(2) provides thus: “Where the committee reports to the House that the statement made by the Member is defamatory of any person, the Members who made the statement shall, within seven days after that report, render an apology at the bar of the House, the terms of which shall be approved by the committee and communicated to the person who was defamed.”

Rule 77(3) provides as follows: “Where a Member refuses to render an apology in accordance with sub-rule (2), the Speaker, upon the circumstances of the matter being reported to him or her by the Chairperson of the Rules, Privileges and Discipline Committee shall suspend that Member for the duration of the session.”

Madam Speaker, in light of the fact that hon. Otto has stood on the Floor of Parliament and refused to withdraw the allegations, but instead added fresh allegations against so many other people, we need your guidance on how to proceed. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had already drawn the attention of hon. Otto to rule 77. I did that because under that rule he has an option to give an apology within seven days, failure of which the Speaker resorts to rule 77(3), which deals with suspension. That is why I invited him to look at rule 77.

6.42
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Madam Speaker, I think we need to be very careful. Whatever we do should be according to our Rules of Procedure. The matter before the House was referred to the committee, clearly as stated by hon. Kiyingi, under rule 149(1)(a) and (b). And the report is about an allegation referred to the committee under this rule. There is no matter in the House now, which was referred to the committee under rule 77, because this rule is very clear and it says: “Whenever in the opinion of the Speaker or a person presiding in a committee a statement made by a Member is prima facie defamatory of any person, the person presiding shall refer the matter for inquiry to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline.” 

What was referred to the committee, and the Hansard is clear, was to investigate the allegations of corruption, and not the defamatory case, which is envisaged under rule 77. 

Madam Speaker, this is not a matter of voting; it is a matter of appreciation of our rules. This House cannot invoke rule 77 when the matter was referred to the committee under rule 149!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Katuntu, what is the import of false and baseless allegations? What does it import?

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I will answer that. In the committee, hon. Otto was not being accused to defend himself for making defamatory allegations. It is even clear in the report. If in the committee hon. Otto were the one accused of having made defamatory allegations, then you would invoke rule 77. So, please, this is not about mob justice; it is about the rules. 

Who was an accused in the committee? It was hon. Kaddunabbi; it was hon. Wopuwa and the others. You cannot now shift against somebody who was a witness and you convict him without him going through the trial of having made a defamatory statement. You do that, you will be making a big mistake, and I would like the Attorney-General to interpret this rule before anybody proceeds and he gives me a different opinion.

6.44
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I feel that this matter has raised people’s emotions and we may go off focus. We are dealing with a case of bribery, which is very important. It is a matter that touches on the image of Parliament as an institution; it is a matter, which should not raise anybody’s emotions and Parliament is supreme and above individuals. I can take the blame as an individual, but would want Parliament, as an institution to be clean.

There are a few of us in this Parliament who have gone through two or three terms. I have had the privilege to read reports of committee investigations on issues of this nature. And, Madam Speaker, you yourself have had the privilege of reading such reports. As far as I am concerned - I am not criticising the committee - the method of investigation was not as we expected. The committee should have investigated, in detail, whether Members who were alleged to have received bribes actually did or not. But now the way things are turning out to be, it is as if hon. Otto is the one being investigated!  

I feel lost, Madam Speaker. I think you better guide us. We need a thorough investigation. I can produce some of the reports that we received and which helped us to censure some ministers. We did that because there was evidence; there were thorough investigations and Parliament was empowered to take decisions based on facts and well investigated matters. But this report is just a way of recording what the witnesses said and so on. This is not what we wanted! We wanted proper investigations!  

I would not mind whatever harsh disciplinary actions can be taken against Otto; it will discipline all of us so that when you stand in Parliament and make a statement, you must own it and be responsible for it. But what we want is, the committee having been empowered and I believe even financially, they should have done thorough investigations and come to this Parliament to give us information as to whether these people were innocent or not.  

So, Madam Speaker, if I may offer my advice, I have had the opportunity of looking at some of the reports privately, and I feel as Parliament, we should take a position. If some of those documents and information are released here, it may not be good for some of us. It is important we allow this committee either to go back and do thorough investigations or we set up another committee to help us do investigation –(Interjections)- you can say “aye”; you can do mob justice and you can shout, but I know that whatever might have been done, we hold the responsibility as Parliament.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members -

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I am standing on a point of order because I am really worried. I have been here for sometime and the level of indiscipline is rising day-by-day –(Interjections)- I can substantiate. For example, when the Deputy Speaker is talking, somebody who is on the Floor is supposed to resume his or her seat. Some Members do not do that and we end up shouting.  

I have heard statements referring to mob justice in this House where I sit. I feel uncomfortable to continue listening to such statements from dignified, hon. Members of Parliament. Is it therefore, in order for hon. Members of Parliament, who cherish being referred to as honourable members to continue saying that the Members in this House are capable of exercising mob justice? Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, they are out of order. Members, please speak one by one. If you want to speak, stand up, press the button and we shall see you. But do not shout all of you at the same time.

6.50
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the committee chairman for presenting the report to the House. I had hoped to be heard from the beginning for a very simple reason; that we are being confronted with the situation where I think none of us has the benefit of the precedent. Therefore, in my opinion, the most appropriate thing would have been for us leaders in this House, we go and consider how to proceed with the debate.  

Secondly, even if we were to go back to the normal practice of debating reports, we have had even less important national reports, which upon presentation Members are told to go and consider it and you set a day for the debate. 

I can illustrate a number of things. For example, if the report says that the cheque stamps were used to conclude that the money was drawn; first of all, I want to convince myself that there is a cheque stamp. I would also want to inquire as to whether a cheque written on a particular day cannot be drawn on another day, and whether a cheque stamp is evidence that money was actually drawn from that account. 

Madam Speaker, you were in that Parliamentary Commission meeting where we considered the matter of parliamentary pensions. There was nothing in the commission’s position about the trip to South Africa. Hon. Alaso then got a ticket and money and –(Mr Kakooza rose_)- let me just finish because you gave evidence – please, can you allow me to proceed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Ogenga, you are now debating the report.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Okay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Either you say you want a deferment or not. You cannot say we defer and then you continue to debate because now you are entering into the substance.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: All I am saying is that as Parliament we gave the committee time to do their work. If we want to do justice to ourselves – I would want, for example, to have an opportunity to sit with my group, with hon. Otto to review all these things in the report. But if you want to debate the report and conclude it now, out there the eye of the public does not believe that you are doing justice because even the judgement of a judge is subject to challenge. 

Therefore, give it ample time; we debate this report in a systematic way. But we would also want to consider certain things because the letter of the Speaker instructed the committee to investigate. Was this an investigation or a trial? So, some of these things, we want to discuss outside the House, it will help us a lot.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, honourable members, I think the Leader of the Opposition is only looking at one side of the problem. What do you do about a witness who says, “I cannot recognize the person I saw in the bank?” What do you do about both hon. Hashaka and hon. Mariam Nalubega? Should they continue suffering because you want time to go and discuss how the matter was handled? You must also consider the people who have been named as corrupt in this report.

Secondly, honourable members, we are closing the plenary today. We are unlikely to resume until probably September or October. Is it your desire that this allegation should continue in the constituents of these Members until October?

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, you tell me.

6.56
MR CHARLES OLENY (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want also to start from a point of regret that the matter before us, as the Leader of the Opposition did hint, may not have had precedents in this Parliament. But also most importantly, the matter in consideration affects all of us. The first point that I seem to read about the report is that, while I agree with the presentation of the report by the committee, I think there is where it is not in tandem with our Rules of Procedure. 

I agree with, for example the definition made by the committee on page 19 on what a public body is. Among the bodies named, it is only Parliament, which has its own Rules of Procedure. So, it would be erroneous for us to invoke the general law into the matters of the House. I can go further to indicate to you that there is a book here on, “How Parliament Works”, Sixth Edition by Robert Rogers and Walter. It defines a privilege. So as Members of Parliament, we also enjoy certain privileges. 

According to this book, there are two elements in modern parliamentary privilege. The first is freedom of speech. The classic statement of this in Article 9 of the Bill of Rights of 1688 to 1689 is that debates or proceedings in Parliament should not be impeached or questioned in any court or place out of Parliament. This means that no MP can be sued or prosecuted for anything he/she says as part of the proceedings of Parliament either in the committee or in the plenary. 

I do recall that on that particular day, hon. Otto made reference to this because then we were debating the CHOGM budget. He made the statement in Parliament. 

The secondly, Madam Speaker, if you can just bear with me, it goes further to say, “Freedom includes the freedom to make mistakes -” (Laughter) It goes further to say, “There would be no freedom of speech if everything had to be proved to be true before it is uttered.” 

I beg your indulgence from the point of view that if you look at the reference that the committee used for making judgment, they gave reference to outside cases that have been tried by other courts and not parliamentary precedents. So, on that basis, I share the sympathy with colleagues who have been pained by this entire process but I would like to agree with the committee on its recommendations. 

Some Members have indicated here that the punishment should be six months but if you refer to our Rules of Procedure, you could even solve this matter by just a word of caution -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you are really jumping the gun, hon. Oleny.

MR OLENY: If you could allow me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Oleny, you are jumping the gun. I have not come to the end of this debate, now you are putting words in my mouth.

MR OLENY: Okay, let me come back from where I had gone. Madam Speaker, if you look at our code of conduct as Members of Parliament, you would need to read it together with the privilege definition. Unfortunately, in our own Rules of Procedure, we did not even define the privileges we enjoy. So this particular case has exposed the fact that we have gaps in our own Rules of Procedure. 

When you look at our Rules of Procedure, appendix F where corruption is mentioned, bullet 6 simply says: “The acceptance by a Member of a bribe to influence his or her conduct as a Member, including any fee, compensation or reward in connection with the promotion of, or opposition to, any Bill, motion, or other matter submitted, or intended to be submitted to the House, or to any committee of the House, is contrary to this Code of Conduct.” It stops there. It is merely contrary to the code.

Finally, under bullet 12, like now this seems to be a new situation, it says: “For any matter, which is not provided for, Members may seek advice of the Speaker or of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline.”

My final appeal, Madam Speaker, is that you have such an amount of powers: you can suspend the House; you can recall the House; you can discipline a Member by way of naming; you can allow us to speak if we have caught your eye. I believe that by the use of your discretion, it would be adequate for you at your discretion, to see the best way in which you want to conclude this matter in this House while saving the image of Parliament. Because the question of allowing us individually to point out what we would like to happen is not consistent with our Rules of Procedure. So, I beg that my honourable colleagues who have been wounded in whatever way by this whole saga bear with us that we also are constrained by our own Rules of Procedure. And it will be erroneous for us to use the cases cited in this report, which are not matters of Parliament. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS NALUBEGA: I thank you so much. Much as the honourable has left the Floor, I wanted to inform him that in this Parliament there is already a precedent. In the Sixth Parliament, hon. Kutesa alleged that hon. Nathan Byanyima had taken a bribe. The matter went through the same procedure as we have done today and there was a position taken by this House. So, it is not a matter of cautioning; there is already a procedure set for us to follow as a Parliament.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a person who was mentioned in this report. I want to say that we should learn to accept mistakes that we have committed. This is a reality and really if you are an honourable member, the injury and the damage to the integrity of this Parliament affects you. We should accept our mistakes with apology. 

Two weeks ago, a Member who was accusing the Members went on Capital Gang radio programme and said, “I sympathise with Kakooza who supports corrupt people.” I can imagine how many people listened to that statement. How can that statement be withdrawn from the public? That is already defamation of somebody’s name; that is already damage to somebody’s name and it requires a sanction. If this House makes a precedent today, somebody makes an irresponsible statement and he goes away without a sanction, it will be a problem to this House and even the integrity of this institution. 

If we are to take a sanction, we should first know the person who made this statement and he agrees and then we take a precaution. If he does not, I request this Parliament to take a serious precaution such that no other Member of Parliament will make this Parliament’s integrity to be infringed upon. That is my submission.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I will now open up the matter for debate. Let us now debate the report of the committee. We have been giving opinions.

7.09
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The report of the committee, while trying to reach to the root of the matter, it looks like it was actually very difficult for the committee to even get some substantial information they required. Hon. Otto, who made the allegation, could not also get that kind of information that the committee required. 

Given the circumstances and the challenges that the committee faced and hon. Otto with the Members who were being accused that they took a bribe and given the fact that the committee had come up to say that hon. Otto withdraws his statement, mine is simple. I want to passionately appeal to my comrade, hon. Otto - he is my comrade. We are of the same generation -(Applause)- and for that matter, hon. Otto, I appeal to you; you said it all, facts are known, they cannot be erased -(Laughter)- whoever ate, ate; whoever did not eat was exonerated like those you exonerated, just withdraw. (Laughter) 

And probably there are some other organs, which can take up this matter appropriately, like the IGG. There are many times we have made a debate and it has become so difficult for the Speaker to make a ruling and he says, “The Constitutional Court is some few metres away.” Just withdraw your statement; move to the IGG, she will be there and life will continue here.

Meanwhile, the struggle against corruption will not stop here, hon. Otto. The struggle to fight corruption will continue. Today in the statement, the President says he has been hearing, but now he is owning up. He has even put a probe in his office; take it there. He is our President for both the opposition and the ruling party. Just take them to a probe committee before the President. (Applause) Hon. Otto, please I appeal to you. I beg to move. That is my submission.  

7.12
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): I thank you, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank the committee for having come out with this report. First of all, let me start by stating my own position on the issues referred to regarding the accusations mentioned.

First of all, what was the scope of investigation of the committee? It is stated on page 3, Madam Speaker. I would not want to quote but we are all people who can understand and the scope of reference did not ask that the committee passes a ruling. I would want us to note that. (Laughter)
 
Madam Speaker, I would like to bring up three fundamental issues that I think the committee due to error or omission left out. One of the key people mentioned was Ambassador Mugume who was the permanent secretary in question and who was supposed to have dished out the money. He was never invited and his submission to the committee was never recorded if at all he was summoned to the committee.  

Hon. Otto passionately failed to get printouts from MTN and printouts of bank statements which I think should have been the jurisdiction because they were to investigate -(Interjection)– Madam Speaker, in my opinion, if the House had investigated properly and reported to this august House that there was no inkling of evidence which I hope and pray is true, thereafter I think your honourable office or chair should then have submitted for him to be tried or punished in the Rules and Discipline Committee as per our Rules of Procedure. 

Madam Speaker, the scope of this committee was to determine and if we read the heading was, “…Allegations made against hon. Kaddunabbi Lubega, hon. William Okecho, hon. William Nsubuga, hon. Kabahweza Hashaka, and hon. Rose Akol Okullu.” So, I think they either say they are clean or - in this case they have said they are clean. I think the next stage is to determine what happens next. But in my own opinion there are three fundamental issues that need to be revisited in this report.

As I wind up, this was a book that was given to all of us at initiation at Hotel Africana when we were trained on what our privileges as Members of Parliament are and what our roles in society are. All of us here did not come to make a living out of this Parliament but we came to give the society that we serve today. 

Allow me to quote: “The privilege of Parliament allows the houses and their Members to perform their duties without outside threat or interference. Rights absolutely necessary for the due execution of Parliament’s powers are drawn as far as the 18th Century in the House of Commons as Sir John Haxell described them: ‘Privilege is an unfortunate term as it implies a special advantage rather than a special protection’.” 

In order for us to perform our duty if we set a precedent that is not balanced in nature today, then posterity shall judge us otherwise. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you are clouding the issue. First, the matter was raised in this House; it was followed by written allegations to the Speaker. You know, it was not a matter just said on the Floor of this House, it was followed by a written allegation to the Speaker, who then instructed that it should be investigated. Yes, I do not know why you do not want to read Rule 149(1). Why don’t you want to read that part?

7.19
MR STEVEN MUGABI (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank you so much for the opportunity. I beg for your protection since this is my maiden presentation in this House. (Applause) I wish to thank the committee for the effort they took to investigate these allegations. 

In my view, hon. Otto, although he has been found to have made unsubstantiated allegations, he was not mad and I do not think he is mad, and I want this House to look at it in this way. That although he has been found to have made unsubstantiated allegations, remember something he said, “If I can be treated like this, an hon. Member of Parliament, what will happen to a peasant from Kanungu?” You know, we have a problem of fighting corruption in this country and hon. Otto could have been really enthusiastic in that line. But again remember that integrity is very important. 

I only worked for six years in government before I came to Parliament but I treasure my integrity. And it was upon that integrity that the people of Bukooli managed to see substance in me. If we have honourable colleagues in this House who have worked for a very long time, they have their integrity intact, one is a Hajji, hon. Okecho has a very long track record, hon. Rose Akol is an auditor and then you have a case but you put it in such a way that in a minute you have washed away the integrity of these people, I think the House should also look at that.

I think this House should consider handling this issue not with kid gloves but hon. Otto should be reprimanded. However, at the same time we should reserve room for some others who might have information to bring it to this House and say it freely.

As I wind up, Madam Speaker, I want to borrow the idea of hon. Banyenzaki. He has appealed to hon. Otto because he is a member of the generation; I also got touched when he mentioned that, as a young man I do not think he should be squeezed too much. I really think hon. Otto you should consider retracting your position. It is not helpful to say you are ready to face the outcome of the decision of the House. I do not think it is right. Suspending you for the rest of the session might have your conscience settled but it is not good for us, we need to move together. So, I think you should consider standing in this House and withdrawing your statements. And if you do not withdraw, then I beg this House takes serious steps against you because we must protect the integrity of the House, we must protect the integrity of the honourable members. I thank you.

7.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the work they have done. They have tried their best. I envy some of you who have not suffered defamatory. Some of us have gone through it and we know how if feels. Therefore, as I sat here and listened to Members of Parliament, I remembered a statement I once made that I do not think there is a suitable punishment for defamatory cases. If your name has been defamed, papers have written about it, radios have sent messages out, whether you are given a death sentence or not, that will not absolutely bring back or compensate the damage that has been caused or made against your name, your family, your friends. 

Therefore, I pity the Members of Parliament who have been asking for a harsher punishment to my friend Odonga Otto. I do not know which harsher punishment that will bring back your image. It is not there! We are here we do not have the whole truth. There are few of us here in this House who know what exactly happened. Probably some people ate money and the mistake was that they lumped others who did not eat in that category. Probably there is a plot to defame the image of NRM. So, there are a few who can stand out and give the truth and the whole truth.

I am sincerely appealing to this House that much as there are voices for a harsher punishment that will not save your names that have been damaged. Therefore, I want to request hon. Odonga Otto who is my long time friend –(Laughter)- we have been mobilising together. At your wedding I spoke on behalf of your friends. I witnessed it and I am following it up. Please, the rules are there; we have enough rules. To agree or to move forward and recommend a harsher punishment, the rules are there - because what is defamatory? If you stand up and you say that I ate a bribe, that is defamatory and especially if I did not do it. So hon. Otto Odonga, without wasting time of this Parliament I think the report has said it. I know the committee of Parliament has judicial powers. 

This is information to some Member of Parliament who was saying that we quote rules which are outside this august House, yet we have judicial powers. How do you exercise judicial powers minus making reference to the rules that have been used by the judicial system? We have judicial powers. So, hon. Odonga Otto, take advice from your true friends, withdraw the statement. We pray to God to help those who have been defamed so that it does not work against them in the future and socially. I thank you.

7.25
MR MICHAEL OCULA (FDC, Kilak County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me chance. When we are debating the report of this committee, I will implore Members not to be emotional. Because if we are carried by emotions, we are going to lose focus yet we are not in a closed session and whatever we are debating here is going to the public and with emotions you know what may happen. 

I am getting up to mention that whereas people may say that hon. Otto defamed others, I must say that it was on the Floor of this House that hon. Otto got up and requested the Speaker to have a closed session on this matter. In other words, I do not think hon. Otto had any intention to defame anybody and the sitting Speaker said, “No, we cannot have a closed session on the matter, it can only be referred to the Discipline Committee” and in the process, the Discipline Committee with the pressmen present said out everything. In all fairness, hon. Otto did not want to have defamatory matters. 

The truth of the matter also is that, the rumours about this case which was finally whistle blown by hon. Otto were in the corridors of Parliament except that none of us could have the courage the way he had to come up openly. But you would hear about it in the canteen, in the corridors, but since it was rumour mongering, we could not have the courage the way Otto did to come up openly to talk about it. 

Proving a bribery case is not a simple matter; you know what happens in the courts of law during election petitions. Bribery is consent between two individuals and can only be comparable to adultery. Proving an adultery case is very difficult. Unless you get people in the act, you cannot depend on rumours that so and so is having my wife. It is the same case as bribery. 

While I appreciate the efforts and the commitment of the committee in investigating this case, I think it also had limited capacity to do its work and in the process, people who were being investigated came up with lawyers like this gentlemen called Dusman Kabega. The man is a competent advocate in town who can defend any criminal and win the case. The gentleman came to the committee with all the interpretations. If you check the procedure of the committee, it turned out to be like a court of law instead of an investigating organ of Parliament. 

Well, people are talking about harsh punishment. I must say that I concur with hon. Ruth Akot (Nankabirwa) who asked what kind of harsh punishment can be given. It may not be so much helpful at all; issues have come up and it is according to your discretion, Madam Speaker, that we have it done.

7.29
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter before this House is of paramount importance to all of us. As the Imam of this institution, so that we can soften our hearts and continue to be sober as we deliberate on this very important issue, allow me to move this prayer. 

Dear God, we most humbly ask for your forgiveness. We know some of our thoughts and actions have caused pain or sorrow to others. Please, help us to know what to say and do, guide us to walk more clearly on your path. Show us your love so that we can be a blessing to others. Let us be forgiven by those we have hurt. I thank you.

7.30
MS REBECCA AMUGE (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to agree with Members that this evening we are in a very difficult situation. A situation where we are being watched by all Ugandans; a situation where we are being tested and we either come out gold or ash; a situation where you either decide to debate politically, ethically or by your faith in God. I stand in a more difficult condition; the situation is that almost all these Members mentioned are my friends and not just colleagues. 

But while you were away, Madam Speaker, I would like to let you know that this problem was brought mostly by one Member whose name I will not mention. If I was a strong person like Odonga Otto, I would have also talked about it. It was said and some of us were told that people got money but we were not bold enough. Others told us that they were given black berry phones -(Interjections)- I do not want to get into that and I do not want you to put me to task.

We are in a very difficult situation because as Members of parliament, we are about to receive the Anti-corruption Bill in this House and many people are saying it is very difficult to prove corruption but Members of Parliament are saying they can stand by it and be counted. The President of this country has come out not once but several times to say he is now ready to fight corruption. But where shall we begin from as whistle blowers. Sometimes it is very hard to prove your case. Hon. Otto could have erred by not coming out with evidence but now that we are moving to fight corruption and the people of America have given us more than US $10 million and we have reviewed ourselves to say we can now fight corruption, where is our starting point? 

I want to concur with other Members who have said, unless you get somebody with your wife red handed, you may not incriminate them. People have got others sleeping with their wives, they have beaten them but they tell you to prove beyond reasonable doubt and even the lawyers say that it is not easy to prove a case of corruption. 

I sympathise with Members because I also believe that maybe not all of them took money. We can stand by you because we are defending our integrity as a group but deep inside us we know that something could have gone wrong. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are not coming to the point. What do you want us to do? You are not telling us. 

7.36
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Madam Speaker, hon. Nsubuga has made a million dollar statement, which we should listen to very carefully. Somebody once told me that you can only be sure about your father when your mother is dead because she could make a different pronouncement tomorrow. Hon. Nsubuga has given us a warning, he has said that this investigation was not properly done and even the report has pointed out that the principal witness should have been Mr Mugume. Even when this committee had the powers to call Mr Mugume, it did not. 

I listened very carefully when the chairman was reading the letter written to them by the Speaker and the letter was asking them to find out if it is true that these people had taken money. The recommendation of the committee should have been principally on what they were asked to investigate; whether these people were found guilty or not. The committee’s principal recommendation therefore should have been to say that these people are clean, set them free then we move on. I would like to appeal to the House -(Interruption)- I beg for your protection from my colleague.

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, hon. Malinga and others are telling this House that the Speaker requested Members of the committee to investigate but the letter is very clear. They were supposed to investigate and make appropriate recommendations to the House for consideration. So don’t debate as if Members were supposed to stop at investigating. They were also supposed to make recommendations, which they have made for our consideration. That is why others are saying that they are not harsh enough. That is the information I want to give and the letter is here, you can also read it. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR LULUME: Furthermore, looking at the report, we find that we were not given any limitations whatsoever that this committee could have faced in order to thoroughly investigate this case. Cases in point, which have been given by hon. Odonga Otto and which as an individual he could not prove. The committee had enough powers to call upon these individuals who have been mentioned to give that evidence. The information I want to give is that, this report is incomplete and we need thorough investigation. We need to call upon all those mentioned, including facets and areas where further information is needed, for us to take a position on this case.

MR MALINGA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank my colleagues for the information they have given me. You are a lawyer and you know very well that if a pronouncement is made that somebody has killed a person, the person who has made the pronouncement will only give the limited information that he has and it depends on the state to investigate and find out if the allegation is true and give it to court. In this case, I really think that the investigation was not thorough and it will be unfair for us to pronounce ourselves, as Parliament, on a matter where the committee seemed to have limited interests in a specific direction.  

I appeal to the House to recommit the case to another committee to investigate this matter and involve other organs to help them get the information so that we make a proper pronouncement as a Parliament. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you are really convinced that you have this information, can’t you give it to another organ other than this House? You are bashing the Members. Why don’t you leave it to the IGG or somebody else not ourselves? But you want it here yet you are afraid to give the information and evidence. What do you want us to do? Either you take it somewhere else independent of us - I don’t know why you want to keep it here when you have no capacity.

7.43
MR JOHN NASASIRA (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Having heard what hon. Otto said, I find it difficult to see where we are going to end with this debate. I stand here mainly for a reason or two. Personally, hon. Otto is a friend of mine and most people whose names were raised in these allegations are friends and also Members of this side. I have had a lot of discussions with hon. Otto on some of the allegations that run in the corridors. You know, when you come as a group, there is a tendency to say many things, some of which are unsubstantiated, “So and so told me this, so and so is doing this.” 

Hon. Cecilia Ogwal said that some of us have been in this House for some time. Let me tell honourable members of Parliament that I am standing here as one of the Members of Parliament who has been in this House the longest. I am not talking about the ministry but about Parliament. I can see hon. Omara Atubo here and together with him, we are the only people in the House who were in NRC. The only person missing here is hon. Kiyonga.

Now what that means is that we have seen a lot here. We have seen reports come, investigated and re-investigated; we have had allegations made and cleared, and we have also seen other judgements made. One example they gave was when hon. Sam Kutesa claimed that hon. Byanyima had received a bribe. A similar Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges investigated hon. Byanyima and hon. Kutesa and they found that there was no truth in the statements and eventually, hon. Kutesa was asked to apologise. He refused to apologise, and he was eventually suspended for that session. 

We can argue about rule 149 or rule 77 but the truth of the matter is that hon. Otto made statements here which grossly affect the integrity, the character and the political future of honourable members who are involved and he followed it with a letter to the Speaker, and it is on that basis that the Speaker wrote to the committee to investigate and report back to the House. What is on test here is hon. Otto’s words, the integrity of these people, and even the committee of Parliament because the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges of Parliament is actually the Supreme Court where we take our cases to be heard. So, before we talk about the lawyers and the court cases and what not, the committee of this House is the Supreme Court for us to deal with discipline. Otherwise, where will the Speaker go to address this matter? And it is our committee of Parliament.

The committee went, called all those that were involved, they have satiated their report - and remember they were two cases: the person who made allegations could not produce enough evidence and those who were alleged to have done this have either denied or have proved evidence like in the South African case, that actually this thing was processed. I think to save this Parliament from this impasse that can go and on while more names are being tainted – one time, the former secretary general was asked why he wanted to seek a second term when he had said he would serve only one term. He said, “It is only fools who don’t change their minds.” 

As a historical Member of Parliament, I am saying that in order to save this, the committee has done its work and these Members can go with this report and clear their names on radio or in their constituencies. I want to appeal to hon. Otto and ask him to look at me; that you could have said what you said at the beginning because of what you felt. I think what is being asked of you in the report is that you withdraw the statements and we close the chapter and Parliament gets on with its historic duty of what it is supposed to do, and that is what I am appealing to you to do. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

7.49
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would actually have not said anything after hon. Nasasira but I think it is not right for this House to disown its own committee. It bothers me. First of all, I want to thank the committee for having elevated the debate of this House from “Lugambo” - rumour mongering - because what we have been listening to: “That this one ate; this one did not eat” - this institution should not actually operate like that. 

And I am so saddened that my people in the constituency will listen to today’s debate. They have never imagined that a Member of Parliament can actually engage in what has been submitted in this House. So, Madam Speaker, the committee was open. I imagine that this committee is like any other committees. Members who had any further information about this issue should have tendered it to the committee. You need not be invited; but for somebody to stand here and say, “we are not as bold as him”, you should have gone to the committee. You would have requested the chairman of the committee to chase out the press and have it in camera; it has happened in the past. So, this is really very unfortunate and it is not called for.

Madam Speaker, in order to make Members of Parliament match up to the respect that the people of Uganda entrusted in them – that is why we are called honourable members of Parliament! What is going to happen is that, people may not have all the evidence to confront court because the burden of proof is high, they will come here, use this privilege of the House to smear other Members of Parliament. So, we should not create a precedent where Members of Parliament who think they are bold and are going to be protected by sympathy come here and smear others. 

As a Member of Parliament from Mukono, I was not impressed by hon. Nsubuga, the MP from Buvuma. I was really disheartened because even in the report he said, “It was there, it was not here” but he had the opportunity to go to the committee and state exactly what he has stated. You have let us down as people from Mukono, I must submit. Yes -[Mr Nsubuga: “Information.”] - no information because I have always relied on my MPs to stand up and defend their issues. But you cannot stand up and say, “I think this is not right, we should ….” No, I was not impressed. 

So, with all due respect to the appeals, Otto is my son, he knows it –(Interjection)- he is my son and a Member of Parliament. I said “honourable”. I am very mindful about my language, just like I would say hon. Wadri is my friend and he knows it. But I do not want to encourage ruthlessness in Parliament.  If you have information, stand by it and if we are not satisfied with the committee, Madam Speaker, I would have wanted a debate that moves in the direction that “I am not satisfied, let us set up another investigation.” But to discredit the committee! 

My brother here was really interesting, because I think our Chairperson has matched up to the intellect of a shrewd lawyer. He did his research, he premised his arguments on law, and it was very beautiful even for us who are not lawyers. This is a very good report and it has proved that you must have your evidence at your finger tips. If you do not have it, just go outside and treat it as a tea discussion.

Let met give you an example, Madam Speaker. I am very careful about this Hansard. For members who were privileged to be in the CA, you remember my good friend hon. Akisoferi Ogola, he had had problems with women in the CA by saying that we think like frogs. That sparked off an investigation, and what I remember, Madam Speaker, as you do, hon. Nekyon was picked from the Hansard as having abused another speaker. So, this Hansard is a permanent record. So I would not want us to disown the committee; the committee has done its work. But this House’s image is tarnished in this debate, because the debate has been substandard. 

In response, I am telling you that this one “ate” and this one did not “eat”! There was no merit; the report was superior. Our debate did not match the report. So, I am appealing to hon. Otto on the way forward. I do not think that in your culture - which I do not know very well, that is why I am treading carefully - you are in the morning of your life, you have not consulted your constituency about the decision that you are taking now. (Interjection)- Yes, you are an MP and you have not consulted your people. But in my culture, if you see the stick that hits your co-wife, you should actually bury it. Hon. Otto, today it is these people’s day and you are enjoying it, but tomorrow may be your day. I do not want you to have this same experience that these members of Parliament are going through in the morning of your life, because you have a long way to go and you may need these very people to salvage you in one way or another.  

So, I want you to heed to the appeals that we have made because it is terrible! You have a young family; suppose this allegation was made against you, hon. Otto, it would be terrible with your children growing up. You do not know the consequences of being told that you “ate”. I remember it was a time for examinations, those children who were doing exams suffered; they were humiliated. So, there is no cost. There is no “sorry” that you can give to these people and the damage you have done to our party - leave alone individuals, but the Party. So, there is no price that can be paid.  

So, I want to appeal to you, hon. Otto, that being in the morning of your time, you have a long way to go with all of us here. Just withdraw the statements and remain an honourable Member. We still need your intellect; so why lose it?  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.58
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to debate on this report. When you look at the methodology of this committee, it involves public hearings, review of the relevant laws and the committee also dealt with other matters. But to me, Madam Speaker, this allegation involved exchange of money; money exchanged hands. The committee did not take efforts to really prove whether the money exchanged hands because what happened is that they went ahead to invite people to defend themselves whereas in the matter involving money, there are key things that should have been done.

Madam Speaker, to prove this case that about the members of Parliament who are alleged to have got money from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is very easy. We are also aware that you cannot get Shs.150 million or Shs.170 million through cash unless these people are technical thieves or technical people who know that they cannot be detected. It is Bank of Uganda that says, any cheque below or above Shs.20 million cannot be got ordinarily; it could be either through EFT.

Madam Speaker, I am very uncomfortable at my colleagues who are saying that this House requests hon. Otto to withdraw this report, when we are aware that the report of this committee is not conclusive. By withdrawing this report in this House, I can see my people on the other side saying, “withdraw.” Uganda has been tainted as one of the corrupt countries in Africa. By withdrawing this report, Madam Speaker, we shall be taken as if we are condoning corruption in this country. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I do not think he was asked to withdraw the report; that is not his report. He was asked to withdraw the allegations, not the report.

MR OPANGE: Madam Speaker, even if it is withdrawing allegations, the committee did not take efforts to prove whether money exchanged hands. My request to this House is, this House has powers to order the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to present to this House the bank statements of all the bank accounts held by this ministry. From the bank statement, you will see hon. Kaddunabbi’s name and the amount stated. Then you will ask why Kaddunabbi got money from Foreign Affairs.  

This House also has powers to order those fellows alleged to have got money to produce their bank statements. By doing this, you will have reached a conclusion on this matter. Short of that, Madam Speaker, we are covering problems in this country. We have to order the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to give us the bank statements and the committee goes back to scrutinise these bank statements.  Also, the permanent secretary should be brought to give his defence because he is also one of the interested parties in this case. So Madam Speaker, you have the powers. The Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should be called to this committee. The bank statements of all the accounts held by the ministry should be printed, then we can come to a conclusion on this matter. But I am totally against hon. Otto withdrawing the allegations short of bringing the bank statements to this House. Thank you very much.

8.03
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was actually waiting because I saw the chairman consulting. I would like to start on a very humble note. The humble note is a biblical principle that I believe in. Jesus was once confronted with an adulterous woman - and indeed she was found in the very act - and when she was found in the very act of adultery, they did not bring the man with whom she committed adultery. But they brought this lady to test Jesus whether He would reach a verdict and forget and assume that this woman was adulterous, alone, without a man and whether He was going to decide that this lady be killed according to the Law of Moses. And He said, “Whoever is without sin among you, throw the first stone.” I am not ready to throw any stone tonight, whether at hon. Otto or at the other honourable members who are part of this investigation. Madam Speaker, I am not. I want to go by the example of the Lord Jesus who said, “If you are without sin ….” I do not know how many times I have talked about people, so I am full of sin. However, I would like to ask a few procedural questions:

Hon. Otto is confronted with a verdict he has just seen and so he got up and said, “My position is that I will not withdraw.” Madam Speaker, as a lawyer, I am sure you have been confronted with this situation in the courts where the judge says, “Death”- yes, death! He sentences you to death. Your immediate reaction is to protest. You are really angry. You think, you know. But you know even with a death penalty there is a provision for an appeal; you are not going to be hanged the very moment they pronounce in the High Court that you should die and then they inject you in court. They will not inject you. They will not use that lethal injection on you. They will take you to Luzira and then the President has to sign and you can be lucky that the President exercises the Prerogative of Mercy. 

Madam Speaker, before I get to the other concerns that I have, I would like to address hon. Otto through you, that the decision he has to make is also a decision on which he has to do a lot more consultation. Like hon. Mukwaya said, we in the party are very interested; we in the Opposition are very interested; we do not know what it means but we have to be consulted on that final decision that he is going to make. I cannot imagine, as Secretary-General, that hon. Otto is going to be out of this House for one month, or for one year, if he is just going to say, “I withdraw these allegations.” For me I will finally reach a point where I will encourage him to withdraw and stay so that we continue as a party in the House. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, we all know that for bribery nobody gives receipts. If there is anybody who has a receipt for bribery here, show it to me - (Interruptions)- bribery allegations, show it to me -(Interruptions)– nobody! So, it is going to be impossible to prove these things. (Laughter) Yes. The only exit strategy we have tonight is one: if you use your discretionary powers and allow us opportunity just to consult with hon. Otto. I plead with you; we can put it in writing tomorrow. I would like to implore you, Madam Speaker, using your prerogative of mercy give us 12 hours and by midday tomorrow we will have a position in writing; we will have position, which you can treat as final -(Interjections)- but that a person can hear the verdict now and be hanged now is also really not very natural. Even in the judicial processes in this country, it does not work like that. 

Finally, perhaps before I get to that, I would like to ask the Chair to guide me -(Interjections)- I am also asking the Chair first; maybe I will take it a little later. By the time we committed this matter to the committee, it was to investigate corruption allegations. Tonight the verdict we are presenting is on defamation. Does it follow by inference that once you handle a corruption allegation issue and you do not come up with proof or it does not hold water automatically that the defamation case will hold water? I would like to be guided because that is the scenario we have now. When we sent this matter to the committee it was on corruption allegations but when it is coming back it is a verdict against hon. Otto for defamation. So, which is which? How can we handle these two scenarios? 

Most importantly, the challenge before this House is not merely the trial of hon. Otto. Even Parliament as an institution is on trial this evening. How shall we stand here and say that who will make provisions to protect whistleblowers so that the whistleblowers in this country do not turn out to be the ones in the dock just because they said, “I think this is what is happening, please investigate”? Once you turn whistleblowers and put them into the dock, Madam Speaker, I promise you no Member - today we will throw stones and we will finish hon. Otto but no Member in this House will ever stand up again to warn the House and it is going to set a very bad precedent in the fight against corruption. I would rather we act with caution on the way we are going to proceed for the sake of the bigger picture. If Parliament cannot handle a whistleblower with care, how do you expect other whistleblowers to have courage? 

So I would like to -(Interruption)- information?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, I want to ask you a question. Supposing an allegation was made that hon. Alaso is corrupt; that she received a bribe during the CHOGM. What effect would it have on your family and your constituency? How would they receive it after just hearing allegation that hon. Alaso took a bribe?

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I know that my family would be distressed and I would be unhappy. I do appreciate that my colleagues are very unhappy with this allegations, but while I am not a lawyer, I do not know whether the ingredients of a corruption case, just by inference, are the same ingredients in defamation; I do not know. It is you to really help me. That is why I asked you to guide me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The result of making false and baseless allegations in a public arena is really defamation; you can not split hairs. These people were defamed; there is no question about that. Okay, hon. Okot Ogong.

8.13
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Thank you very much. I know today is a very important moment in the history of this Parliament. Madam Speaker, a matter of corruption is not political. A matter of corruption should not divide Parliament into Opposition and Members of Government.  

I have this book with me: our Rules of Procedure and if you are a Member of Parliament, you are guided by these Rules of Procedure. We should use them as our Bible.  

Any statement on a Member of Parliament will affect the integrity of this institution. I agree totally, that we must fight corruption, but we must fight corruption responsibly. (Applause) As leaders of the next generation and this generation, we must fight corruption, but all actions must be responsible.  We can not move everywhere spoiling and smearing Members simply because we want to appear that we are fighting corruption; that will not be well.  I agree with my brother that, as young people we must start the struggle now and not tomorrow. So, I want to join him, responsibly; I want to team up with hon. Odonga Otto; we must fight corruption.  But we must not appear to soil other Members to further our interests. (Applause)  

Therefore, as a Member of the next generation –(Interjections)- Oh! This generation the matter of corruption should not take us astray. I have heard Members talk about investigation. Hon. Otto is a very good lawyer, I am told because he completed recently and he passed very well -(Laughter)- he passed very, well I agree. But in law you can only succeed when you have evidence and there is what they call credible evidence; what we call in law – some lawyers should help me - irrevocable evidence; you must come with empirical evidence.  

So, as Parliament we need to sober up. This matter can affect the integrity of Parliament depending on how we handle it. I want to appeal to even those who are affected - you know what we call occupational hazards and even to hon. Otto, it is not bad because these are all Members of Parliament and we respect each and every Member of this House.  I would like to appeal to my brother, it will not cost him anything, but to restore the integrity of this Parliament, if he acknowledges that he has not got enough evidence to implicate these Members of Parliament. In that case, I want to appeal to my brother to please withdraw the allegations. 

Therefore, because we do not want to close the meeting without actually hearing from my brother hon. Otto - maybe now that they have appealed to him, that as friends they would like to talk with him outside this House, we can give them time to consult, then when we convene. Because we do not have to make our decisions in haste; it may not help. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

8.17
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  As you know hon. Otto, you are my friend. I have been monitoring your academic and political growth with a lot of interests.  Indeed, when you were studying at Makerere University, I was your chancellor.  

I wish to give you an example. Today hon. Omach apologised on behalf of his senior minister and the matter was closed. (Applause) I also know that you have married, but in order to enjoy matrimonial sobriety, you should be able to say sorry to your dear wife and vice-versa.  

You have inadvertently injured yourself because you did not have hard evidence to prove your case.  Parliament has also been tarnished because I met many people who said: “You are a leader of government business in Parliament, which is very corrupt.” The individuals mentioned have had a very hard time for sometime. I am man of few words and I do not want to repeat what has been said. I only implore you to withdraw those allegations and say sorry; that will end the matter. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think I should ask hon. Otto - he has been listening carefully and I saw him taking notes. Maybe I should ask him to say his feelings now in view of the debate on both sides of the House.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I do not know if you will allow the Chairman Acholi Parliamentary Group to make a statement before I come in?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let the hon. Okello-Okello say something.

8.20
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I think as Parliament of Uganda, we have to be very concerned about this matter of corruption. My interest is that whatever decision we make must be correct, fair and just. It must also stand the test of time. I would not like a situation whether the Ninth Parliament would say that the Eighth Parliament made a mistake. 

I have been asking my self, what is it that the Speaker or the House asked the committee to investigate? According to my hearing, the whole thing has narrowed down to defamation. The whole subject that the committee was asked to investigate, the question of bribery is being swept under the carpet. This is a very serious matter. I was a Member of the Sixth Parliament when a similar situation arose. Hon. Byanyima is here; he brought bank statements – many of them - and laid them on this Table to prove that there was no case of corruption whatsoever; and when he had proved himself innocent, the Sixth Parliament set up a committee of three Members to draft a statement of apology to the satisfaction of hon. Byanyima to be read by hon. Kutesa here. It was that statement that hon. Kutesa refused to read and that was the reason for his suspension. The case had been proven beyond any reasonable doubt and the bank statements were here. 

Madam Speaker, as far as this case is concerned, there are grey areas that have not been touched and we cannot pronounce ourselves finally on this matter here and now. I became very apprehensive when I heard the injured parties being asked to pass verdict. 

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you, Madam. I have listened to hon. Okello-Okello and I have quoted one word that they cannot not pronounce themselves on this matter. And when he stood to speak, he spoke of behalf of the Acholi Parliamentary Caucus. So I want to know whether he is responding in that capacity as Chairperson of Acholi Parliamentary Caucus or as a Members of Parliament then I will know. Because this matter is in relation to allegation of hon. Otto and it is hon. Otto himself to pronounce on the commitment we want him to make on the floor of this House. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I have served this country for a very long time; I have never been a tribalist and I will never be. The point I was making – if I am injured and I go to court, and the court asks me, “What punishment do you want him to be given?” I can ask for the head of that person. It should not be for me the injured party to say that the punishment being passed by the court is insufficient or otherwise. I have been on this subject of defamation several times; I know what it is. Recently, I settled one out of court and another is still in court. 

I have got grown up children and grandchildren, and if I am defamed, it is not me alone; almost the entire clan has been dragged into the matter. I know how painful it is. But defamatory statements will only become defamatory when proven to be false. Once it is proven to be correct, it remains a fact of life; it cannot defame anybody. 

So, Madam Speaker, my way forward is this: I want to give you discretion. This matter has not been exhaustively investigated and we cannot accept the recommendation of the committee. We must go deeper into the matter so that we can come out with a very good decision for this parliament. My way forward is this: I want either of these two things. We eight defer this matter to another body like the IGG, or we set up a different committee because the present committee cannot handle this matter any more. 

The second option is –(Interruption)

MS MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, our Rules of Procedure are very clear. Rule 149(2) provides as follows: “The findings and recommendations of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline shall be presented, debated and approved by the house.” 

We have been debating the recommendations and we are at the verge of pronouncing ourselves on this report. Is he, therefore, in order to take us backward and suggest that we start another investigation when the rules demand that we must debate and approve the report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I told you before that if we feel dissatisfied with ourselves, let us move out of this body. Let us give it to the IGG or another institution; but saying now that “let us have a new committee to start again”, and Members go through the process again for the next one year, no, no, honourable members. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Can I conclude, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, you conclude.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I thank you for your wise ruling, but my understanding of approval includes disapproval. That is my understanding; that the House can approve or disapprove. 

My second proposal is this, if time is now of essence; if we consider time to be more important than fighting corruption in this country, you can use your discretion, and my suggestion is that you caution hon. Odonga Otto and we now take it that the House has debated nothing but defamation, not bribery or anything. You use your discretion to caution. That caution will be to all of us and not only Odonga Otto but to the whole House. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Mabikke. Let us have Mabikke first, then Otto.

8.30
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, you are reputed in this House as someone who guides us in a very sober and fair manner. And your leadership is on test –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do not intimidate me, no, no, no. (Laughter) Hon. Mabikke, do not intimidate me. 

MR MABIKKE: Okay. I withdraw, Madam Speaker. (Laughter) There are many actions of this House that have been challenged in the Constitutional Court. And not every provision of these Rules of Procedure, once put to test in a Constitutional Court, can pass. This matter before us raises very serious legal challenges. In fact some of the challenges border on amending and even scrapping some of the provisions in our Rules of Procedure. The motion or the proposal by hon. Alaso is to me a very sober proposal, and given the circumstances, I think it must be a matter of give and take.

Madam Speaker -(Interjection)– yes, let me now talk like a lawyer -(Interjection)- no, I do not need clarification, let me make my points. In law, defamation is a tort that is actionable. Defamation in law has got its own ingredients and it has got its own defences. If we began debating defamation that is actionable, it would raise a very serious point of law, whether a committee of Parliament can adjudicate in a matter that is actionable in a court of law. That is a very serious question and challenge. This Constitution has got separation of powers. Parliament is a law making body, and matters that are criminal, and matters that are actionable in torts, are matters of the Judiciary. (Interjection) Yes.

MR BAHATI: Thank you. Madam Speaker, in my faith, in St Paul’s writing to the Corinthians, he said that the heart is a distant world. All of us are here debating this motion but some hearts and minds could be somewhere else. But one thing that I know for sure is that the heart of hon. Odonga Otto is on this matter. And you ruled before hon. Okello-Okello came in that let us give a chance for Otto, given the fact that he has heard from his friends, from his mothers, to see whether he can reconsider his position. Is it not procedurally right to first clear that now and then we see how the House moves? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think let us hear from hon. Otto and then we will know how to proceed. 

8.36
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, I first of all want to thank you for spending the time with us up to 8.30, and I really appreciate your patience. 

Secondly, I want to thank my colleagues who gave a passionate appeal that I should withdraw the statement, specifically hon. Oleny, hon. Banyenzaki, hon. Stephen from Bukooli, hon. Sanjay Tanna, and many others who added their voice that I withdraw the statement. But the one who really - or the chairperson in my wedding on behalf of all my friends, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, also made an appeal (Applause and Laughter) If it was not because of Nankabirwa, I would not get up to speak again. (Laughter) 

On a serious note, if it were not because of hon. Nankabirwa, I would not get up to speak again. I would be somewhere else, and I thank you for that. I have three daughters: Twiggy, Nicole and Rupee. And when they grow up, I do not want them to read statements like these in the last page of the committee report: “The committee noted with concern the ease and casual manner in which hon. Otto made serious allegations.” Then another statement, “While it is laudable to fight corruption at all levels including this House, this cause cannot be helped by an approach that borders irresponsibility and lack of seriousness.” These are the statements of the committee on me. 

The last statement, still on the last page: “The committee found that the statements made against the members by hon. Otto were unfounded, baseless and irresponsible.” If they were so baseless and irresponsible, we would not have sat here for all this time. 

Madam Speaker, I will make just one request. The manner in which the committee report was compiled leaves a lot to be desired. There were several annexes, which should have been attached for honourable members to see for themselves; for example, there is a letter from Stanbic Bank written to hon. Alice Alaso telling them, “You are welcome to South Africa. We shall do this and the other.” It was tabled before the committee, it was not brought to this House and the report is saying hon. Otto’s allegations were baseless in spite of documentary evidence. 

I am not opening a Pandora’s Box; what do I have at stake? Just one thing: I was attacked by the media when I had just made the allegations. Everyone was against me. It was only one person, hon. Otada, who stood by me. He said, “Whatever happens, I will be there for you because hon. Wopuwa said it.” Hon. Wopuwa went on air, abused me, made a lot of allegations saying I was mad, I was a villager in town and all those things but hon. Otada stood beside me. So, there are stakeholders.

It is good to listen to advice especially from the Rt hon. Prime Minister and elders, but as a lawyer I know duress and undue influence are not good circumstances to make decisions. It should not be like these poteya pattas where you say “put here” and then you hurry to make a decision so that you go home rich. Most of those who go and play cards in these market places end up losing. So, Madam Speaker, I will request you to give me the discretion. I have party bosses - the Leader of the Opposition can order me to apologise, the Opposition Chief Whip can order me, my party Secretary-General can order me and they have not been so hardened. I would just pray that you give me the opportunity to meet with them and whatever we so decide, I can always make my position in writing. Thank you so much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, I had mentioned rule 77 because I was trying to open a door for you, which allows you to go through a certain process, but your people vehemently opposed it. I did not see it as actually opening a small door for you because it gives you an opportunity to think over the matter for seven days after the decision of this House. The problem we have now is that the seven days actually may become two months. I am not likely to call back the House in seven days time just for this matter. The plenary is adjourning today for the next two months, so I am not likely to call back the House for this matter within seven days. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker and colleagues, I am happy we are about to come to an end or a consensus on this matter. I think the position as being advanced by hon. Odonga Otto is very positive. It is positive in the sense that we are soon reaching the middle, let alone an end, to this debate. 

What will happen, Madam Speaker, if in accordance with our Rules of Procedure - that within seven days the position is made - we are able to meet and agree with hon. Odonga Otto and within the seven days a written statement is submitted to you; what will the implication of this be? Will that not be within the timeframe? If that is that, then we are only begging for that decision to be made within the seven days. Given an opportunity, we could even do that by midday tomorrow. 

The point I am making is that in accordance with our Rules of Procedure, if this has to be - (Interruption)

MS NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, I have attentively listened to learned counsels in this House and as a learning counsel, I need some procedural guidance. Members were raising rule 77 and hon. Katuntu passionately persuaded this House that the issue we are discussing and the mandate of the committee was not under rule 77, which actually requires the seven days. Hon. Wadri is now referring to the seven days when somebody is supposed to make an apology. So, I want some procedural guidance; are we moving under the rule where we said that the committee did not have the mandate -(Interjections)- this was raised in the committee report. The chairperson gave the mandate of the committee, but I am just seeking guidance in regard to what hon. Katuntu said.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, the committee was given an assignment to investigate certain matters. It has turned out that the matters are actually defamatory. Now, we either have to pronounce ourselves on the report and the process continues or the honourable member takes an alternative. Are you giving some proposals, hon. Wadri?

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I stood here actually to appreciate the gesture that has been expressed by hon. Odonga Otto, which I think to a very great extent has soothed our hearts, that he only begs for an opportunity to consult his leaders in this Parliament and thereafter he is ready to come up with a statement. The point I am trying to find out from you is, even if plenary does not sit beginning from tomorrow, what will be the essence and the effect if within seven days hon. Odonga Otto is able to submit his statement of apology to the Office of the Speaker? What will the implication be? All we are asking for is to debrief him so that he is also given a benefit; even if it means tomorrow by noon, we will be through with that. 

MR KIYINGI: Madam Speaker, an issue was raised here as to what the basis of our investigation was and we tendered the letter from the Rt Hon. Speaker. Under Rule 149, when a matter is referred to the Committee on Rules we are supposed to investigate and submit a report with our findings and recommendations. We have submitted a report with our recommendations; what this House is required to do is actually to adopt or reject that report. In the report, we have made a recommendation, which I have heard people actually agree to and passionately appeal to the member to follow. My view in all respects to the members who have submitted to the contrary is that actually we do not even need to invoke rule 77. We have a report, we carried out an investigation, we have given you findings; what is required of you is to adopt that report. What follows after is for the member to withdraw in accordance with our recommendations. I beg to move.

MR NASASIRA: I just wanted to add; when hon. Otto was talking, he was referring to consultations with the leader of the party, the whip and others. However, I think if we are going to preserve the dignity of this House, we must respect its rules. Hon. Mabikke was also talking about the challenges in courts. If we have to continue as hon. Kiyingi was saying under Rule 149 and if all the parties had agreed with the report, then in fact under rule 149(3) the House - let me read the rule: 
“(2) The findings and recommendations of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline shall be presented, debated and approved by the House. 

(3) Without prejudice to sub-rule (2), where affected parties agree to the findings and recommendations referred to in that rule, there shall be no debate save approval of the report by the House. 

(4)Once the House has pronounced itself on any report presented under this rule, the decision of the House shall be binding on the parties.”

Because we want to follow rule 149 - that is why some of us were appealing to hon. Otto to finish this matter today by withdrawing - it would mean we would look at sub-rule (3). This means we shall have unanimous support for the report and we shall pronounce ourselves on it and it will end. If we start pronouncing ourselves on it, then that means later even rule 77 can be invoked. The matter now will remain with the Speaker to wait for the seven days of withdrawal or apology and if it does not come, then the Speaker will have no choice but to take the decision under rule 77(4). So, I think what we were proposing was a smarter way of resolving the matter and finishing it here.

PROF. LATIGO: Madam Speaker, there is one matter which if we complete would allow me to confidently say that there is nothing substantially more to be verified for me to make a decision and even to make an appeal. It is just for the record of Parliament that the investigations are complete. I went out and talked to hon. Kaddunabbi and he informed me of something which is not here, which is the basis of –(Interjections)- excuse me –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let him speak.

PROF. LATIGO: Please, you just -(Interjections)- on page 14 it is put in bold: “He then tendered copies of the cheque folios to corroborate the loan applications referred to which I beg to lay.” When I talked to my colleague, I told him, “You would close this case if you had a bank statement that shows the actual withdrawals on that day.” He told me that he actually submitted the bank statement to the committee -(Interjections)- he told me that he submitted the bank statement to the chair of the committee. Unfortunately, it is not reflected in this statement. 

For the good of Parliament’s record, if that is provided [Members: “It is there”] No, I am talking about –(Interjections)- We are debating this by the way. Please, what is the problem? If there seems to be some worry with the bank statement [Hon Otekat: “It is there”] Hon. Otekat, you do not manage the chair here. We know your record for being very arbitrary. (Laughter)

Well, if the bank statement is not there, I cannot definitively say, “Hon. Otto, you apologise” because there will still be a question in my mind. However, if the bank statement is there and clearly shows that the deductions were made, that is why I asked for an opportunity because I am the leader of hon. Otto in this House; I give him advice and I need to satisfy myself. I do not know if you do not want the bank statement to be responded to formally. I want to hear from the chair of the committee because this is his committee’s report, not any of you. Let the chair of the committee confirm and we sort it out.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kaddunabbi, what did you discuss with the Leader of the Opposition outside? -(Interjections)- No, let us ask him; he is in the House.

MR KADDUNABBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I was in the lobby, I was approached by the Leader of the Opposition and he told me that if I had submitted the bank statement, this case would be solved by now. I told him, and I want to say it again when the chairperson and all other Members of the committee are here, I submitted to the committee a bank statement for the date of 6 February 2008. If the chairman does not have a copy with him now, I can go to my office and get another copy and resubmit it to this House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kaddunabbi, was that the statement of your own account? I have this one of the Muslims association.

MR KADDUNABBI: I told the committee that I do not hold any personal account in Stanbic Bank. The only account I hold in Stanbic Bank is the one we hold as Muslim Parliamentary Caucus where as chairman I am a signatory with hon. Bintu Jalia. It is the only account I hold in Stanbic Bank. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kaddunabbi, this is a very short statement; you could read it out so that members hear it and we conclude this matter. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: In the case of Kutesa and Byanyima, the bank statements were asked from all banks and not one bank; wherever he has got an account.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The allegation was that hon. Kaddunabbi was distributing money to members in Stanbic Bank. That is what is here.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I would like to draw your attention to the rules we are using. If we use rule 77 of our Rules of Procedure to make the final decision –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have not yet gone there. We are concluding on the report and its context before we get there.

MS ALASO: Let me just refer to our rules; it might help. In the first case sub-section (2) -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We may not even need to go there. Let us conclude on the report and the statement. 

MR KIYINGI: The statement has a number of entries, which are very tiny, and withdrawals on the 6th, 8th, 10th, 12th and 19th February. The account name is “Muslim Parliamentary Caucus, Stanbic Bank, IPS Branch.” The figures are too small and I cannot read them, with due respect. The statement was laid on the Table; it is not true that there is no bank statement.

MS KABAKUMBA: Now it is a fact that this statement was laid on Table. The entry of 6th February says Shs 11,000,000 was debited on that account of the Muslim Parliamentary Caucus. Now that this statement is here and it is corroborated by the facts in the report, can the Leader of the Opposition deliver on his commitment of hon. Otto giving this Parliament an apology over his allegations? I need your guidance, Madam Speaker.

MR KIBEDI: Madam Speaker, we were moving in the right direction. I do not think in the report they have presented today there was anything saying that hon. Otto did not have any evidence. It was saying there was no credible evidence. 

I would like to tell my colleague, hon. Otto, a member of my generation, that he has not lost the war; he has lost a battle. Since he says that he is convinced in his heart that he has the evidence, he can reorganise, as hon. Banyenzaki said, and use the many organs that exist. For the mean time, let him withdraw and we continue. It does not mean that when he withdraws he has lost the war. I think it would be procedurally right for us to move in that direction, that hon. Otto withdraws the statement and then he reorganises.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, at 30 I have now realised that words which I have said can be withdrawn. The committee recommends that hon. Otto should withdraw his statement and since I am hon. Otto, so be their wish. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think he has withdrawn.  

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My colleague, hon. Otto, has concluded: “so be their wish.” Hon. Otto, state it clearly and say, “I have withdrawn.” I need your guidance on whether we could give hon. Otto an opportunity to say “I have withdrawn” and then we move on.  

MR KIYINGI: Madam Speaker, there is a report before this House and this report gives recommendations. Before hon. Otto withdraws, can this House pronounce itself on the adoption of this report and then hon. Otto pursuant to that can make a withdrawal?

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, it appears that hon. Otto does not appreciate the gravity of the matter. This is simple English! “So be their wish” means it is the committee’s wish. Procedurally, I think let us follow the rules and pronounce ourselves on the matter. We have been debating and it is 9.00 p.m.  We have been sitting for this long and if hon. Otto does not appreciate the patience that we have put in this matter, the motion is that we vote.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, there has been a lot of consultation on the Floor; I think we must appreciate this. For one, I am touched to see that hon. Otto stood up tonight and withdrew. It has been reported in the Hansard that hon. Otto has humbly withdrawn; unless you want him to stand up and declare again that he has withdrawn.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have said enough. We have had a long debate over this matter. I put the question that the recommendations of the committee be adopted by this House.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In order to put the Hansard right, I think a proper withdrawal would be for hon. Otto to actually repeat the words and say that they were false allegations, not merely saying that “I withdraw”. This is for posterity. People will be reading the Hansard and people’s integrity and reputations have been harmed. We need a proper and honest apology, properly worded, so that the Hansard is put right. Thank you.

MR MAWIYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Surely, the way we had handled this matter was the best for hon. Otto. However, if you want us to invoke the rules - because we operate by rules in this Parliament - if hon. Otto cannot come and withdraw formally, we are going to move under Rule 77(2) which is very clear, but we do not want to reach this far. He should come out and withdraw the statements formally in clear and precise terms. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, just make a simple statement that “I have withdrawn” and we close the matter.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I think we better move under rule 77 if it will make others happy because I will have seven days. I am not making any additional statements. I have made enough statements. I have been pushed against the wall. I have already made a statement; you can check on the Hansard. You can go to any court in this country to look for the interpretation of what I have said.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think let us leave it at that and go to the next item. Honourable members, I know we have stayed very long but it was important to tie up this matter and close the plenary so that we can do other work. We are still going to continue working together but I think what we have done is enough for today. I want to adjourn the House sine die. From tomorrow you can start working in your committees. If we need you, we shall call you again. Thank you.

(The House rose at 9.13 p.m. and adjourned sine die.)

	

