

Thursday, 2 July 2020

Parliament met at 3.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourbale members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I have just a few matters to communicate.
The first is that our colleague hon. Rose Ayaka, Woman Member of Parliament for Maracha District has lost her father, Mr John Yuma. He was a Member of Parliament for Arua West Constituency between 1979-1980 and 1982-1985. I request you stand up in honour of Mzee Yuma.
(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourbale members, this morning, I had a meeting with the Centre for the Human Rights of Children (CHRC). They are concerned that for the last 18 years, the Ministry of Education and Sports has not been able to finalise the National Schools Health Policy, which has been in draft since 2001.

This has come to light in view of the alarming state of child and teenage pregnancies during this lockdown. There has been absence of parental control and idleness among the children. There are many pregnancies that have come to light during this time.

I also recall that hon. Robina Ssentongo, a few months ago, raised this matter and I know the Ministry of Education and Sports has not yet responded to our query about the failure to complete that policy. I would like to therefore, urge the Ministry of Education and Sports to expeditiously handle that matter so that it can be discussed and agreed upon as a country.

In the same meeting, it came to light that Uganda Blood Transfusion Services is in shortage of blood. I would like to direct the Committee on Health to invite the Ministry of Health and Uganda Blood Transfusion Services to design means of raising supplies of blood from the community to cater for emergencies, which are still ongoing.

I also received another petition from the citizens under  Centre for Domestic Violence Prevention (CEDOVIP), seeking for our support to complete the Sexual Offenses Bill, 2019. This is because during this COVID-19 era, there is evidence of very high levels of domestic violence including sexual violence. I am aware that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs has quite a bit on their plate. If this could be expedited together with our Bills, we would really appreciate it so that it is out before we go the election cycle.

I will now amend the Order Paper to permit the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to lay on the Table, Proposals for Regulations under the Political Parties and Organisations Act. 

However, before we get to that, I have another petition from KACITA-Uganda; the traders of Uganda, especially in the arcades who are asking the Government to advise them how they can get support from Uganda Development Bank, under the stimulus package, which the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development announced here. They would like to know the details and how to access those funds. More importantly, they would like to be able to operate in the arcades because they have been out of work for over four months.

Honourable members, I also have another petition from the mobile money market vendors who are also not allowed to work. They are requesting that Government issues guidelines that will allow them to work safely. That is what I had to communicate for this afternoon.

There are just three matters of national concern. On the issue of the New Vision, I think there is a petition by hon. Abala, which is later going to be laid on the Table today. That is the issue, which hon. Lilly Adong wanted to raise. It is already on the Order Paper and hon. Abala is going to raise a petition on the closure of these local papers. Can I invite hon. Rwakoojo - she is not here? Okay, let us hear from hon. Nambeshe, but you have two minutes.

3.07
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter I am raising is in respect to the excesses of the security personnel in Bududa. 

The security personnel in Bududa, what is being referred to as “the new normal” is shooting, maiming, beating and extorting money from boda boda riders. The other day, there was a demonstration by boda boda riders in Bududa District because the police, the previous day – actually, these days, they no longer mount road blocks. A Local Defense Unit (LDU) personnel just hides by the road and stops any boda boda riders passing by.

Madam Speaker, this time round, a boda boda rider was carrying a lady for an emergency. She had complication related to Asthma. These LDUs just pushed a stick into the spokes of the running motorcycle and it fell. The lady who the rider was carrying actually had an aggravated injury; a rapture on the head.

What is annoying is that even when I raised this matter with the Prime Minister much earlier, when the officer in charge then, trigger-happy as he was, shot in the foot a young man who was running away because he had been found sheltering himself from a heavy downpour - I understand he had not observed social distancing – so, instead of having the errand officer reprimanded or disciplined, his services were only transferred to Naguru. In fact, he was promoted. As we talk, he is now in finance department, enjoying much more than what he was getting in Bududa District.

The current case is that after the young man fell down from the motorcycle, they descended on him, maimed him and he was beaten to comma. As we talk, he is in hospital under treatment for severe injuries sustained on his body. I do not think he will survive. We are only praying that he survives.

My prayer is that the Minister of Internal Affairs should reign onto these errand officers and take action on those who are responsible for this – (Interruption)

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, some security organs have made use of this COVID-19 season to torture our people. Last Friday, I had a scenario that happened to me in Busia where the RDC invited me to go with some business people to his office. We moved calmly as if we were going for Holy Communion up to the office of the resident district commissioner.

Madam Speaker, when I arrived, the RDC called me for a special meeting with the leaders of the traders and I left a few other traders at his office. While the meeting was still going on, I was shocked when the police came and teargassed the leaders of the traders in the compound of the resident district commissioner.

Good enough, I was one time a RDC. If you come to teargas the office of the RDC who is representing the President, that is defaming the Fountain of Honour. Therefore, I would like to say that during the COVID-19 time we are in, some people are going to suffer due to torture and frustration caused by security organs. Although I am giving information, I have a prayer that the Minister of Internal Affairs should come and tell us why the police have authority to teargas the RDC. This incident forced the RDC of Busia, Mike Kirya, to apologise to the leaders who were in the meeting. He promised to go and apologise to the business community in Sofia.

THE SPEAKER: Is that information? (Laughter) Honourable members, despite the pandemic, I think it is important that the state agents observe the human rights of the citizens. They should not violate them under the guise of enforcing presidential directives. [Hon. Nambeshe rose] You gave away your time.

3.12
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter concerning Makerere University’s instruction to students who intend to do internship in the year of 2019/2020.

On 24 June 2020, Makerere University Senate resolved that the 2019/2020 academic year internship and field attachment activities shall continue as planned. The resolution was based on the argument that internship does not require students to come to the university campus and their internship/field attachments can proceed.

Madam Speaker, Makerere University is short of the following: Most students travelled back to their villages and with this COVID-19 hardship, travelling back is not easy. Most organisations responded to the Ministry of Health’s call to reduce on the number of workers and employees to only the essential workers and employees, including our institution as Parliament. You directed that interns should go. As such, institutions do not have where to accommodate and host these interns.

Madam Speaker, Makerere University’s directive is short of this COVID-19 hardship and is likely to disorganise these students and parents. My prayer is that the stakeholders need to be involved and the ministry should restrain these institutions from causing unnecessary havoc, and misleading students to disobey the presidential directive of staying home. I pray, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Ministry of Education and Sports is requested to examine the complaint about ongoing internships and field work attachments when the universities are closed, and also the students are supposed to be in their homes and give us an update in about a week’s time.

3.15
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am responding to your communication in regard to the KACITA petition about reopening arcades in downtown Kampala.

Today, I happened to visit downtown, specifically Kikuubo and the surrounding areas. I would like to inform you that the influx of people on the streets and outside the arcades is actually promoting social networking. It is falling short of the directives, which the President gave in order not to spread COVID-19.

My observation, Madam Speaker, is that it is easier to manage those people when they are inside the arcades and they provide preventive guidelines like hand washing facilities, sanitising and checking their temperatures rather than letting them be on the streets, squeezing one another. I think we are likely to have a much bigger problem with the arcades closed than allowing them to open. If they are opened then these people will be absorbed into their shops and the streets will be decongested.

I would urge the Minister of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives to look seriously into this matter because we are sitting on a time bomb –(Interruption)

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give to my honourable colleague is that even in Owino Market, it is the same situation. Those who are selling foodstuffs in Owino Market were allowed to operate. However, we have a big number of people who were selling garments and shoes. Right now, they are living in a very miserable situation.

Madam Speaker, given the fact that we must learn how to live with COVID-19, why don’t we really try to ensure that we ease restrictions in as far as lockdown is concerned so that even those people who used to sell clothes and shoes in Owino can be allowed to operate rather than coming outside and also piling up their items and of course, there is no social distancing!

Therefore, it is better that those people are also allowed to operate in an orderly manner by selling their garments, shoes and clothes, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we ask the Minister of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs to task the COVID-19 Taskforce of Kampala Capital City Authority to examine the situation around the arcades. The minister should give us an answer by Wednesday next week.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON PENDING FULFILMENT OF GOVERNMENT’S UNDERTAKING TO PAY TOBACCO FARMERS

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives?

3.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND CO-OPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I beg to present a statement on the progress made on the fulfilment of Government’s undertaking to pay tobacco farmers.

I beg to report that the ministry received a presidential directive dated 19 November 2019 addressed to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to verify the claims from tobacco farmers countrywide to be considered for payment.

Subsequently, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development advised that a field verification of all tobacco farmers with claims be carried out and we prepare and hand over a verification report to Messrs. Ernst & Young for final verification.

Madam Speaker, the ministry undertook the verification exercise in 16 districts, and we had to do this exercise with the support of the district local governments during March 2020. We had expected the exercise to be completed by March 30, 2020. Unfortunately, the COVID-19 lockdown measures in place delayed the exercise, and we now expect to complete the exercise by July 15, 2020. 

Madam Speaker, as you are aware, the ministry has appeared before the Parliamentary Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry to explain this issue concerning delayed or non-payment to farmers by some tobacco companies for the crop of 2018 tobacco season, and the steps the ministry is undertaking to prevent any future reoccurrence of the problem.

Allow me to inform the honourable members that going forward, the ministry has instituted measures to further address this problem of non-payment from reoccurring in future through the following steps:
    1. All tobacco companies are required to submit a performance bond to cover the companies projected crop volume or value in a given season. All tobacco companies must meet this requirement before they are licensed to sponsor tobacco growing activities in any year. This condition will decisively end the perpetual issue of late or non-payment of farmers by some companies.
    2. The measure will also address the difficulty that the ministry has always faced in ascertaining financial capability of companies when applying to join tobacco growing business. 

Madam Speaker, in light of the above measure, the ministry has so far only licensed four tobacco companies for the 2020 crop season who submitted the performance bond among other requirements, and these companies include:
    1. Alliance One Tobacco Uganda Limited
    2. Uganda Tobacco Services Limited
    3. Global Leaf Holdings Limited 
    4. Meridian Tobacco Company Limited
My ministry has also written to all chief administrative officers in the tobacco growing districts, informing them of the companies which have been licensed to operate in the 2020 season. This was intended to address the fact that no company should operate and recruit tobacco farmers without a license from the ministry for the 2020 season.

In conclusion, I confirm that the ministry is committed to addressing the challenges in the tobacco sub-sector and to fully exploit its potential of improving household incomes for the growers, and contribute to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of the national economy. I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

3.24
MR PATRICK KASUMBA (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report. However, I feel challenged when the minister alludes that verification exercise is ongoing and that the districts are involved. I come from Masindi District, which is a neighbour to Hoima. Before I raised this matter, I consulted the district executives; the chairpersons LC5 and CAOs of both districts, and they were not aware of any verification exercise. Therefore, I am wondering who is handling that verification exercise at the districts. 

Secondly, the minister has mentioned companies that have been licensed to transact in 2020. I am talking about the claims of unpaid tobacco farmers since 2015. Some of those companies have since closed; they are no longer in existence. Some of the companies like Continental Company and Premium Company picked tobacco from the farmers, and the Government stopped them from exporting the tobacco to the different countries. As a result, some of the tobaccos are still held in stores, and those stores are not even manned because the companies have since closed. 

All I am asking is, when is the Government going to pay these farmers? They are stressed; they have loan burdens. The President made a commitment as you clearly stated - the main issue is, when are these tobacco farmers going to be paid? The Government undertook to pay these tobacco farmers, and it is the same Government that issued licenses to the tobacco companies that are no longer in existence. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

3.26
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. The people of West Nile depend so much on tobacco growing. Therefore, what is happening is affecting our livelihood. I am seeking clarification from the minister on the following:

First, he said, in the verification, that they intended to cover 16 districts but they were delayed by the COVID-19 lockdown measures. Therefore, I am inquiring which strategies they have put in place for us to believe that by July we shall be able to finish all the verifications in the 16 districts. It is because we are uncertain when COVID-19 issues will come to an end.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would like to know whether there were districts among the 16 where verification was completed so that we see whether they were paid. I need that clarification. Thank you.

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If I rightly recall, there is a directive that the Speaker gave, which arose from a petition from the honourable members who represent tobacco farmers. This directive was to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. I remember vividly that we processed that report, and I was wondering whether it is not procedurally right for the Chairperson of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry to come and present the report so that we know the findings. We even undertook a field visit, and had an interface with different stakeholders. As it appears, it is more than meets the eye. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the Chairperson of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry is here. 

3.29
MS ZAITUN DRIWARU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. The tobacco farmers right now are working on the ground, but from the presentation here, the minister is saying they have done verification in 16 districts. We would like to know those 16 districts, and whether those are the only districts they are going to stop in. I believe the number of districts that deal in tobacco farming in Uganda is more than 16 districts.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of payment, I find it very irrational to say that COVID-19 has stopped the companies from paying these people. The farmers get loans and after getting them, they enter into contracts with these companies. However, when it comes to the time of payment, the companies breach the contracts. These people need help.

My plea, honourable minister, is that since the COVID-19 pandemic seems to be here to stay, because we do not know when it is going to end, can you tell us what the plans of the ministry are in as far as the payment is concerned. If we observe the guidelines, we can effect the payments. 

Regarding verification, I do not see how COVID-19 could prevent verification. As long as we observe the directives of wearing masks and sanitising hands, the verification exercise could go on. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

3.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give information that Bunyoro is one of the regions which are very good at tobacco farming. Indeed, as the minister has said, the Minister of State for Bunyoro Affairs was requested to coordinate this activity in the eight districts of Bunyoro. 

The verification in Bunyoro has been carried out. By today, out of the eight districts of Bunyoro, only two have submitted the completed verification reports. Therefore, indeed verification is going on but the districts, through the district commercial officers, are still compiling the verification reports.

THE SPEAKER: Can we know the status of the petition? Honourable minister, you can respond, but I would like to know where our petition is.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, our colleague from Masindi said that he was not aware of the exercise going on. In the statement, I indicated that there are districts that were visited and others have not yet been visited. In fact, I have a list and even in my statement, I attached one, which must have been uploaded on our iPads.

There is a list of districts that we have so far visited but there are those which are not yet visited. Masindi is one of those which - Even for those that have been visited, not all the work has been completed. Therefore, we are still continuing.

Having eased on the lockdown, we are able to have officers continue with the work. That is why I indicated that by 15 July 2020, we expect to have completed the remaining areas, so that we can submit the report to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as a requirement. Before they pay, we must know who these people are, what volumes of tobacco they sold or supplied, what has been paid and the balance. All these details are going to be submitted to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It is on that basis that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will pay. 

This is a directive from His Excellency the President. He heard the cries of the people who have supplied tobacco and have not been paid by the companies that have defaulted on this obligation for quite many seasons.

When are the farmers going to be paid? The farmers are going to be paid as soon as we complete the exercise this month and submit the report to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for further processing. Regarding the issue of the districts, the list of the districts has been attached to this statement.

What plan does the ministry have to pay the farmers? That is exactly why we are undertaking the verification exercise, honourable members, so that the ministry pays the farmers. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has clearly indicated to us as a line ministry that we must process and give them the verification report and then they go ahead and pay. Once we complete this by the end of the month, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will proceed with the payments. This applies to all the tobacco growing areas including West Nile, Bunyoro and others. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, for the record, the 16 districts are Zombo, Koboko, Arua, Kiryandongo, Buliisa, Hoima, Kagadi, Kakumiro, Kyegegwa, Yumbe, Maracha, Masindi, Kikuube, Mubende, Kibaale and Kyankwanzi. That is where they have undertaken verification. However, I would like to ask the Chairperson of the Committee on Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to complete the report on our petition so that we can discuss your findings.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DEFIANCE OF THE COURT ORDER FOR THE PRODUCTION OF A ONE ODONGO SIMON PETER BEFORE A COMPETENT COURT

3.36
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am here to respond to the defiance of a court order for the production of a one Odongo Simon Peter who works for the Internal Security Organisation (ISO).

Madam Speaker, this matter has just been brought to my attention this afternoon by hon. Elijah Okupa. I have undertaken to him that he comes to my office tomorrow and then next week we shall have this person produced. I have just undertaken this to him.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE COMMEMORATION OF THE WORLD POPULATION DAY, 11 JULY 2020

3.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, this statement is to inform Parliament that Uganda will join the rest of the world to commemorate the World Population Day on the 11 July 2020 and to note that the World Population Day commemoration will be held under the theme “Leveraging Uganda’s population dynamics for a resilient future amidst COVID-19.”

Madam Speaker, on 11 July 1987, the world population reached a total of five billion people and it stands now at seven billion people. This was a landmark in the demographic history of the world. As such, the United Nations (UN) designated 11 July as the World Population Day and it is observed every year by all UN Member countries. Each year, the national commemoration of this day is marked under selected themes and hosted by a local government that is selected on rotational basis. 

This statement presents key information about Uganda’s population dynamics and its significance to the country. As I have said, the theme for this year will be “Leveraging Uganda’s population dynamics for a resilient future amidst COVID-19.” This year’s theme focuses on understanding the implications of Uganda's population dynamics in the context of the COVID-l9 pandemic.

Prevailing Population Trends and Patterns in Relation to the Theme
Uganda's population has grown fast over the last decades, from 16.7 million in l991 to 34.9 million in 2014. The population is projected at 41.5 million people currently and is projected to increase to 56 million in 2030 and 102 million by 2050. 

The key drivers for this rapid population growth are high fertility (average number of children per woman) and declining mortality, resulting into a high population growth rate of three per cent. This declining mortality is attributed to increased child immunisation, improved nutrition and hygiene, among others.

As a result of the rapid population growth, Uganda currently has the second youngest population in the world, with over 78 per cent of its population aged below 30 years. This is second only to Niger, which stands at 83 per cent. This means that Uganda’s population is growing by about 1.5 million people per year. 

The large size of young people reaching reproductive age provides a population momentum whereby Uganda will see high rates of population growth for decades to come. We, therefore, need to plan for the coming generations.

Madam Speaker, you are aware that despite the challenges of the COVID-l9 pandemic, Uganda has so far managed the pandemic relatively well. In addition, Uganda's advantage is that we have a young population with a median age of 16 years. 

The age group of the population is as follows:
    • 0-14 years – 47.9 per cent
    • 15-64 years - 49.2 per cent
    • Above 65 years – 2.9 per cent



Only 2.9 per cent of Uganda's population is above 65 years, which is the threshold for a significantly higher risk of COVID-l9-related complications and death. Lessons from the World Health Organization (WHO) indicate that older populations are more adversely affected by this specific pandemic.

The Influence of Uganda's Population Dynamics on the Course of COVID-l9
1. Movement of People 
When people travel, they pose a significant risk of carrying the virus with them into other communities. People may move from higher prevalence areas to lower prevalence areas, thereby driving the spread of the pandemic.

2. Displaced Persons 
Uganda is currently hosting over 1.4 million refugees. Such a high number of refugees, who are more likely to live in close quarters with others and often in conditions with poor sanitation and hygiene, limit the country's ability to monitor infection rates and enforce preventative measures, such as physical distancing.

3. Rapid Urbanisation
This is another dynamic in the population that impacts on the spread of the virus. 

4. Large Households 
With an average household size of five people, multi-generational households are common in Uganda. Such housing arrangements, with children and working adults living in close quarters, could put older individuals at a heightened risk of infection.

5. Existing Health Conditions 
Aside from age, a person's overall health plays a major role in determining how COVID-19 symptoms manifest. In Uganda, infectious diseases such as HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria may potentially put the population at a higher risk of suffering severe complications from COVID-19. 

The country also has an increasing trend in rates of non-communicable diseases (NCDs), which have grown substantially in recent decades as a proportion of the total disease burden. People with high blood pressure, for example, are now over three per cent of our population. Those with heart disease are over 2.1 per cent of our population or about nine million, and those with diabetes are 0.9 per cent of our population. This category of NCDs increases the risk of becoming severely ill from COVID-19.

6. Another dynamic that is affecting the spread of the pandemic in the context of the population is the big informal sector. Most Ugandans cannot easily work from home or easily practice physical distancing at work because of the kind of work they do. 

Eighty per cent of the labour force in Uganda works in the informal sector. Small business owners, merchants and vendors who rely on income from each day's work to meet basic needs for themselves and their families, without employment benefits or social protection, cannot easily abide by Government’s directives on mitigating the spread of COVID-19. 

Madam Speaker, we have presented to this House a number of measures to address some of these issues that I have raised. I would like to move to the next item as I conclude.

I wish to end by reaffirming that investing in young people is key to Uganda’s harnessing of its demographic dividend. The demographic dividend is that economic benefit arising out of a country taking advantage of its youth bulge by adopting clear, focused and sustained policies that empower the country's working population and its potential labour force. If this youthful population is equipped with quality education, demand-driven vocational and technical skills, good healthcare and job opportunities, they will be productive, save, invest and can be the engine of the future economic growth of the country. 

Significant Changes in Population Development and Lessons Learnt from Previous World Population Day Celebrations
Uganda has made significant progress in the field of population development. Mortality in Uganda is declining, with infant mortality having declined from 122 deaths per 1,000 live births in 1991 to 41 deaths per 1,000 live births in 2014. Fertility, which was over seven children for a long time, has declined from 7.4 children in 1991 to 6.9 in 2001, to 6.2 in 2006 and to 5.4 in 2016. Life expectancy has risen from 43 years in 1991 to 63 years in 2016. 

This progress is as a result of concerted advocacy efforts by stakeholders in the population and development sector as well as improved service delivery by the National Resistance Movement (NRM) Government and the multi-sectoral approach in provision of services.

Arising out of previous World Population Day commemorative events, the National Population Council and its stakeholders have learnt the importance of continuous engagement of the top leadership of the country on population and development issues. This has elevated the profile of the population issues onto the agenda of policy makers at all levels and resulted into action.

We have also learnt that commemorating World Population Day in different districts provides a platform for sharing of population experiences by different local governments; an opportunity to articulate their population and development concerns; and formulation of strategies to address their respective issues. 

Madam Speaker, because of COVID-19, we shall not have a huge commemoration. We are planning to have a very scientific one, which is expected to be presided over by His Excellency the President and we shall have some other activities prior to the day. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to make this statement informing the House of this important day to be celebrated on 11 July 2020, which will be the other week on Saturday. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable minister, I hope you can advise the districts on how they will commemorate the day if they are going to. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019, THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019, THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019, THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019 AND THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANIZATIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

3.50
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I wish to report to the House that the President has assented to the following Bills: 
    i. The Presidential Elections (Amendment) Act, 2020;
    ii. The Electoral Commission (Amendment) Act, 2020; 
    iii. The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Act, 2020; and
    iv. The Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Act, 2020.

What he has not assented to is the Local Government (Amendment) Act, 2020, which he will be returning to Parliament, in accordance with the law. 

I beg to report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us go to item No. 4 to be presented by hon. Abala. 

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION OVER THE CLOSURE OF ETOP WEEKLY NEWSPAPER

3.51
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I present a petition to this House raised by the concerned people from Teso on the closure of the Etop Newspaper. 

This humble petition of concerned Iteso over the closure of the Etop weekly newspaper was prepared in March. 

Showeth and states that: 

1. Your humble petitioners are concerned members of the Iteso tribe in Uganda, who have been affected by the abrupt closure of the Etop newspaper;

2. Etop weekly newspaper was established as a sister newspaper of the Vision Group in 1990 among other newspapers, namely Rupiny for northern Uganda, Bukedde for central Uganda and Orumuri for western Uganda, to publish news in the loca1 languages of the respective areas;

3. Etop weekly newspaper has been publishing news in Ateso every Thursday of the week and its main circulation areas comprise north eastern Uganda, which includes Soroti, Katakwi, Kumi, Amuria, Ngora, Serere, Kaberamaido and other parts of the country -  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are not supposed to read the petition completely. Read the subject and the prayers. Nevertheless, I would like to ask whether you can allow hon. Lilly Adong to amend that petition to include the other closed sister papers. 

MR ABALA: I can allow it; there is no problem. Before I read the prayers, I would like to ask hon. Lilly Adong to make her amendment. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lilly Adong, can you move your amendment in respect of the other sister newspapers? 

3.54
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to amend my colleague’s submission by saying that the other sister newspapers of the Vision Group, or being published by the New Vision, include Rupiny, which is published in Luo and covers mid north and parts of West Nile as well as the entire country; and Orumuri, which covers western Uganda. They have all been closed at a time when the local people need to read issues concerning COVID-19 in their local languages. 

These newspapers were issuing out learning materials. I just wonder how the learning materials or other information will reach the local people through the New Vision that publishes in English yet not everybody can read English.

Madam Speaker, we are about to go for scientific elections and most of the campaign materials will be issued through some of these media. There is a lot of concern from the people outside. They are asking why they have only left Bukedde to continue operating while all other local newspapers have been stopped. 

The main concern is that the people who had been employed by these sister newspapers have all been kept out of jobs. Their offices in the whole of north – I think it is only Gulu that is open but those in Lira and elsewhere have been closed. 

My prayer is that the minister explains why a company where Government has 51 per cent shares can go ahead to close all other newspapers published in the local languages at a time when people badly need to disseminate information on COVID-19, learning materials and many others issues. 

MR ABALA: Thank you very much for that addition. 

Now, therefore, your humble petitioners pray that Parliament -
1.  Investigates reasons why regional newspapers of the Vision Group, especially Etop, Orumuri and Rupiny, have been closed. 2. Urges Government to fully support the immediate reopening of the Etop newspaper and other sister newspapers and provides for a stimulus package for them. 

And your humble petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

Madam Speaker, the petitioners are 16 in number. Allow me to lay the petition on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the petition is amended by including the Rupiny and Orumuri newspapers, which have equally been closed. The petition will be sent to the Committee on ICT and National Guidance to be handled expeditiously, especially taking into account that the information disseminated in those languages will be needed in the electoral cycle. 

3.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Peter Ogwang): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and my colleagues. 

First of all, the New Vision is under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, specifically the privatisation docket. As the information ministry, we are concerned and an interested party, but for day-to-day management, the New Vision is under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Planning. Therefore, I request that the matter be handled by that ministry, specifically the privatisation docket. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Let the petition go to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for urgent perusal and report back.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, when we discussed and passed the supplementary budget, specifically focusing on COVID-19, the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance and other Government agencies were given money to manage COVID-19, and these newspapers are part of the Government agencies -

Madam Speaker, our main concern is the people who were surviving on collecting information and making sure that offices all over the country are open. In this COVID-19 situation, the Government is making the conditions of these people more difficult. Therefore, the Government must tell us why those offices are closed when we had actually provided money to manage any crisis that was going to arise from COVID-19. Therefore, can we get information to clarify on the matter? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, because of the importance of the matter, apart from sending the petition to the committee, we are also going to write directly to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to explain why, after we had given them money, they have still gone ahead to close these newspapers. Thank you. 

LAYING OF PAPERS
INTEGRATION OF BUNYORO-KITARA KINGDOM INTO THE NEW HISTORY AND POLITICAL EDUCATION SYLLABUS FOR ‘O’ LEVEL

4.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the History and Political Education Textbook published by the National Curriculum Development Centre in conformity with the item on the Order Paper.

Secondly, I also lay on the Table the History and Political Education Teachers’ Guide under the lower curriculum for secondary schools published by the National Curriculum Development Centre.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the History and Political Education Syllabus published by the National Curriculum Development Centre in conformity with the item on the Order Paper. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I will ask the Committee on Education to examine the contents to ensure that the ruling of this House was fully adhered to. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS
REVISED SCHEDULE TO THE UGANDA COMMUNICATIONS (FEES AND FINES) (AMENDMENT) REGULATIONS, 2020

4.03
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Judith Nabakooba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In line with the position that was presented to Parliament on 25 June 2020 regarding the agreement that we had reached as a ministry with Uganda Communications Commission and the Internet Service Providers’ Association, Madam Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table the revised schedule to the Uganda Communications (Fees And Fines) (Amendment) Regulations, 2020 as reflected in the agreed position. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the regulations are sent to the Committee on ICT for perusal and advice. Item 6 -

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS (CONDUCT OF MEETINGS AND ELECTIONS) REGULATIONS, 2020

4.04
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and the Members for giving me this opportunity to present to Parliament the proposed Political Parties and Organisations (Conduct of Meetings and Elections) Regulations, 2020. This is for your eventual approval to enable political parties and organisations hold internal elections during the COVID-19 pandemic period. The background to this is well known -

THE SPEAKER: No, it is just for laying on the Table.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This makes my work a lot easier. Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table the statutory instruments relating to the Political Parties and Organisations (Conduct of Meetings and Elections) Regulations, 2020, as proposed by the ministry in consultation with and approval of Cabinet. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the regulations are sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Members on that committee, as you are aware, those regulations touch all the political parties in the country. Therefore, you are enjoined to actually engage with the different political parties so that we come out with something acceptable. I will give you one week in which to consider the regulations and report back to this House. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO COMMEMORATE THE 75TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE UNITED NATIONS CHARTER

4.07
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to commemorate the 75th anniversary of the United Nations Charter, moved under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS Uganda is proud to join the rest of the international community to commemorate the signing of the Charter of the United Nations;

AND WHEREAS the Charter of the United Nations was signed in San Francisco on 26 June 1945, at the conclusion of a conference of the United Nations on international organisation, and came into force on 24 October 1945; Uganda joined the United Nations on 25 October 1962 as the 110th member of the United Nations. It was conceived as a means of saving succeeding generations from the scourge of war and calls for the UN to maintain international peace and security, promote social progress and better standards of life, strengthen international laws and promote human rights;
 
AND WHEREAS the United Nations Charter Day is commemorated every 26th Day of June, every year, and it presents a unique opportunity to take stock both of the successes and the lessons learned in its implementation over the last decades, as well as to look ahead and examine how best collectively we can overcome current bottlenecks and future challenges;

NOTING THAT the theme for this year's commemoration is “The future we want, the United Nations we need: reaffirming our collective commitment to multilateralism”, this has a rich reflection on contemporary and future desires, missions and strategic thinking for the world we want. Reaffirmation of our commitment for today and tomorrow is a primary necessity, especially when the world is being faced with numerous challenges, problems, including the global disruption by COVID-19 pandemic and its related effects, demanding from us more commitments, assurances and actions.

NOTING FURTHER THAT this year's commemoration coincides with the conclusion of Intergovernmental negotiations on a concise, substantive, forward-looking and unifying declaration that captures collective commitment of multilateralism, shared vision for a common future, which is to be adopted by consensus at the high-level UN 75th Commemoration Meeting of the General Assembly scheduled for 22 September, 2020.

APPRECIATING THAT the launch of the Decade of Action, during the 75th anniversary year, provided an opportunity to the United Nations to stretch its collective capacity to deliver on its commitments such as realising the 2030 Agenda, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, the Paris Agreement and respond to global challenges such as increasing poverty and hunger, devastating impacts of climate change, widening inequality, within and amongst countries;

APPRECIATING FURTHER THAT the United Nations, as rooted in the charter continues to play critical roles in securing peace, stability and prosperity throughout the world as its core pillars, are worthy to celebrate upon because of their contributions to stability and conducive environment for all;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved that this Parliament joins the whole world in commemorating the day of the 75th Anniversary of the United Nations Charter and we recommit ourselves to work with United Nations systems for the improvement of peace, prosperity and tranquility”.

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? (Members rose_)It is seconded. Hon. Woboya.

4.13
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Madam Speaker, I am here to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament to commemorate the day of the United Nations Charter, which Uganda signed in 1962. 

We all know that since the signing of this charter, where Uganda became a United Nations member, Uganda has remained a very active state party to UN. Uganda as a state party, as you all know, has participated in several international UN meetings and gone ahead to implement a number of resolutions that are agreed therein. I must thank you, Madam Speaker, at our level as Parliament, on the issue of climate change, we were able to create the Committee on Climate Change. 

Uganda has also gone ahead to fulfil a number of obligations under the charter as a state party. For example, the promotion of worldwide peace and security, Uganda has utilised its capacities and resources to support the pacification of some of our neighbouring countries including Somalia under the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).

Under cooperation in solving social, cultural and humanitarian international problems, Uganda has played a pivot role on the issue of refugees. You know that we are host to thousands of refugees in this country. This is only because Uganda is cooperating within the UN system.

Implementing of international laws, Uganda does support and indeed, is a signatory to several treaties and conventions. I cannot mention them here. You know that Uganda has gone ahead to ratify a number of these treaties and conventions. Some of them are at the African level.

As we celebrate the UN Charter, we should, therefore, bear in mind that there are still numerous challenges we grapple with, as a country, like the epidemics such as COVID-19. As a country, we still have challenges of poverty. We have not yet attained economic independence. Therefore, as we celebrate, we should be mindful that we still require a lot of support from the UN. 

Madam Speaker, we also have challenges like natural disasters that we are grappling with.  So, we need a lot of support within the UN system. With these few remarks, therefore, I second the motion. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the question is that this House do adopt and resolve that this Parliament joins the whole world to commemorate the 75th Anniversary of the United Nations Charter and that we recommit ourselves to work with the United Nations system for the improvement of peace, prosperity and tranquility.

(Question put and agreed to.)


MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE PETITION AND OVERSIGHT VISITS ON OPERATIONS OF THE NATIONAL IDENTIFICATION AND REGISTRATION AUTHORITY (NIRA)

THE SPEAKER:  Minister of Internal affairs. Is the minister here?

4.17
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS     (Mr Moses Nagwomu): Madam Speaker, I do not see the minister.

THE SPEAKER: Last time, we had started and then, realised that the minister was not there. This is a very contentious area. We want the minister to listen and respond to your report. Can we defer it? I do not even know where the Government Chief Whip is.  She should send for the Minister of internal Affairs. Let us stand over it for now and then, someone contacts him.

MR NAGWOMU: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Prime Minister is here. We need the Minister of Internal Affairs for this report. Item eight -

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE EVICTIONS AND DISPLACEMENT OF THE PEOPLE OF APAA COMMUNITY

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson.

4.18
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You recall we had attempted to present this report. Accordingly, I had laid on Table the committee report, minutes, the verbatim recordings of the committee proceedings, the Compact Disc (CD) containing the 1958 series of the colonial maps of Kitgum, Pakwach, Gulu and Acholi West.

The report was also uploaded in February.

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, sorry, I want to just interrupt your work again. That report touches the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities because there is a contention as to who owns it; the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development because I am told we do not know whether we are in Acholi or Adjumani and then, the Ministry of Security because I think there were some killings there.

MS AMEEDE: Yes, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I think we need those three ministers to listen to your report and respond because it touches three ministries and we want them to be here.

MS AMEEDE: Much obliged.

THE SPEAKER: Let us push it to Tuesday - is Tuesday okay? – and the Prime Minister should ensure that the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities – Deputy Prime Minister, ensure the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the Minister of Internal Affairs to be present during the presentation of this report.

BILLS 
SECOND READING
THE NATIONAL COFFEE BILL, 2018

4.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Henry Bagiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: “The National Coffee Bill, 2018” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Are there seconders? Is it seconded? (Members rose_) Seconded. Justify your second reading.

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Bill seeks to repeal and replace the Uganda Coffee Development Authority Act, Cap. 325, which was enacted in 1991 and only covered off-farm activities of marketing and processing; leaving on-farm activities like planting materials, nurseries, harvesting and post-harvest handling outside the scope of the law. 

In addition, since the enactment of the Uganda Coffee Development Authority Act, Cap 325 20 years ago, new developments, advances and challenges in coffee research, extension, farmer organisations and climate change have emerged that need to be addressed by the law. 

It is, therefore, imperative to reform the law, as it does not meet the current needs and long-term goals of Government.

I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can we hear from the committee chairperson?

4.23
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Janet Okori-Moe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on Table the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the National Coffee Bill, 2018. I also beg to lay on the Table minutes of “The National Coffee Bill, 2018”. I beg to lay.

The National Coffee Bill, 2018 was read for the first time on 3O April, 2019 and referred to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for scrutiny. In accordance with Rule 185(c), the committee considered the Bill and, therefore, now reports as follows.

The Uganda Coffee Development Authority Act, Cap. 325 1991 provided for a public authority to be established. It would be responsible for promoting and overseeing the coffee industry by supporting research, promoting production, controlling the quality and improving the marketing of coffee, in order to optimise foreign exchange earnings for the country and payments to the farmers. 

The Act was amended in 1994 to provide for the Authority to be a body-corporate and to perform the following functions:
    1. To register, in accordance with guidelines issued by the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and advice of the board, the organisations and bodies applying to market coffee;
    2. To issue certificates to coffee farmers in respect of grade and quantity of coffee dealt in;
    3. To collect, maintain and disseminate statistical data in respect of all aspects of the coffee industry; 
    4. To certify all coffee exports;
    5. To advise Government on the mechanism of determining the indicative price for the sale of coffee;
    6. To monitor world market price changes of coffee and adjust the indicative price on a day-to-day basis;
    7. To reconcile the coffee sub-sector policies with micro-economic policies of the ruling Government;
    8. To be responsible for the overall supervision of the coffee sub sector, including related stakeholders and advise Government on coffee sub sector policies.

Madam Speaker, the object of the Bill is to reform the law to provide for the Uganda Coffee Development Authority to regulate, promote and oversee the coffee sub sector and to regulate all on-farm and off-farm activities in the coffee value chain.
The Bill seeks to repeal and replace the Uganda Coffee Development Authority Act, Cap. 325, which was enacted in 1991 and only covered off-farm activities like marketing and processing of coffee, leaving the on-farm activities like planting materials, nurseries, harvesting and post-harvest handling outside the scope of the law.

In addition, since the enactment of the Uganda Coffee Development Authority Act, Cap. 325, new developments, advances and challenges in coffee research, extension, farmer organisations and climate change have emerged that need to be addressed by the law. 

It is, therefore, imperative to reform the law, as it does not meet the current needs and long term Government goals. There is need to regulate the entire coffee value-chain as is done in other jurisdictions, most especially to include the on-farm activities alongside the off-farm ones, especially in regard to generation of planting materials, harvesting, post-harvest handling storage and processing of coffee to improve on the quality of coffee that goes to both the local, regional and international markets.

This is not adequately addressed in the current law. 

Madam Speaker, the current Ugandan Coffee Development Authority Act, Cap 325 provides mainly for the marketing of coffee but it does not address the regulation on farm activities, which has an effect on the quality and price of coffee. The current legal framework does not adequately provide a strong institutional arrangement with clearly demarcated roles for the institutions involved.

The interventions into the sub sector by the various stakeholder institutions are not holistic. As a result, the sub sector is not appropriately run and cannot perform to its maximum or expected capacity. Issues relating to generation of planting materials, harvesting and drying of coffee are not covered under the current law. 

Additionally, under the existing Uganda Coffee Development Authority Act, Cap 325, coffee extension services are not provided for. Furthermore, in the current law, the Uganda Coffee Development Authority’s roles are also limited, and do not encompass the entire value chain. Ideally, Uganda Coffee Development Authority should be regulating both on-farm and off-farm activities including nursery management, pest and disease control in the sector, rehabilitation, harvesting, drying and grading, which is not the case in the way the current legislation is framed.

Madam Speaker, there is also need to amend the Act to allow for Uganda Coffee Development Authority to lead the implementation of Coffee specific extension services as well by coordinating the efforts of different agencies, coffee organisations and associations. 

The Uganda Coffee Development Act, Cap 325 and the Coffee Regulations, 1994 have a number of redundant clauses that have been overtaken by time including the setting of minimum prices, which is not sustainable in a liberalised economy since Uganda Coffee Development Authority only publishes indicative prices. It also makes a provision mandating the Authority to put in place a price committee. 

The fees and penalties in the Act are also weak, and therefore, needs enhancement to make them more meaningful and deterrent to match the objectives of the regulatory framework. 

The objective of the Bill, therefore, is to reform the law to provide for Uganda Coffee Development Authority to regulate, promote, and oversee the coffee sub-sector and to regulate all on farm and off farm activities in the whole coffee value chain from generation of planting materials, planting, through harvesting to marketing.

The Bill further seeks to define the roles of different stakeholders in the coffee value chain including the role of the minister responsible for the coffee sub-sector. 

Madam Speaker, the proposed reforms will provide for a more comprehensive regulation of the whole coffee value chain including on farm and off farm activities. The proposed reforms will also provide for a marketing system by requiring UCDA to establish a voluntary coffee auction system to offer an alternative method of selling coffee.

The system should bring dynamism and efficiency in the sub sector resulting from increased competition in the selling of coffee. The reform will also provide for Coffee Specific Extension Services by making UCDA responsible for coffee extension services in order to remove ambiguity and create responsibility on the UCDA to provide extension services beyond agronomic practices. 

The reform will also provide for Uganda Coffee Development Authority to register and promote coffee value chain organisations at various levels of the coffee value chain that will lead to the formation of an apex body. 

It will also provide for a strong institutional arrangement with clearly demarcated roles for the institutions involved. 

It will also provide enhancement of fees and penalties to make them more meaningful and deterrent in line with the objectives of the regulatory framework and encourage compliance.

Finally, it will repeal the redundant clauses that have been overtaken by time. 

Madam Speaker, in doing this work, the committee held consultative meetings and received written submissions from several stakeholders. 

THE SPEAKER: The Members can read that part. 

MS OKORI-MOE: Members, you will read that section. Madam Speaker, I will go straight to the Bill’s compliance with SDGs. I think Members can also read this one. 

THE SPEAKER: The SDGs part is important. This is the first committee to report directly on the SDGs. 

MS OKORI-MOE: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. 

The Bill’s compliance with the SDGs 
Madam Speaker, the Bill directly tackles SDG 01 on no poverty and SDG 02 on zero hunger. The Bill seeks to improve livelihoods of coffee farmers all over the country through production of good quality coffee that fetches good prices on the world market. 

The Bill indirectly addresses SDG 04 on quality education in a way that improved coffee farmers’ income would enable them to provide good quality education to their children. 

On SDG 05, the Bill addresses issues of gender equality by involving all household members including women and girls, thereby fostering gender equality and equity. 

Part 09 of the National Coffee Bill, 2018 on miscellaneous compliance with SDG 08 on decent work and economic growth, through its section on coffee research being developed, coffee auction system being put in place as well as offences and penalties being introduced will ensure that coffee farmers and other value chain actors act according to the law and hence lead to economic growth. 

On SDG 10, the Bill addresses inequality by availing income to households. 

Madam Speaker, the Bill is directly in compliance with SDG 11 on sustainable cities and communities. It will entail efficient implementation of the law to achieve this when it comes into force. 

The Bill also complies with SDG 13 on climate action through dealing with agronomic practices such as intercropping coffee with recommended trees, which can mitigate climate change. 

Madam Speaker, the Bill is in compliance with SDG 15, which is about life on land. The Bill is promoting planting coffee and shade trees. This will improve life on the land and the environment. 

There is compliance with SDG 16 as well, which is peace, justice and strong institutions. Institutions like UCDA are envisioned to become stronger when the Bill is passed. This is clearly outlined in the objective of the Bill, which is to reform the law to provide for UDCA to regulate, promote and oversee the coffee sub sector, and to regulate all on farm and off farm activities in the coffee value chain. 

Madam Speaker, the Bill also is in line with SDG 17 on partnership for the goals in a way that production of good quality coffee will increase Uganda’s status on the world market and enhance collaboration among the UN member States thereby strengthening global partnership for sustainable development. 

The gaps in the Bill, in compliance with the SDGs,  does not adequately address SDG 5 on gender equality given that most women are not considered especially when it reaches profit sharing after coffee sales have been made yet they are always actively involved in the on-farm activities such as weeding, harvesting, drying, to mention but a few. 

There is also a gap on SDG 9. Industry, innovation and infrastructure are partially addressed by the Bill but there is a gap when it comes to infrastructure development like roads for transportation of Coffee.

Madam Speaker, the Bill is compliant with human rights. Human Right lie under Chapter 4 of the Uganda Constitution. The National Coffee Bill, 2018 is indirectly compliant with Article 30 on the right to education, as a human right in the Constitution of Uganda; as children can easily acquire their right to education when their coffee farmer parents' incomes are boosted. 

The Bill also complies with section 37 of the Constitution on the right to culture and similar rights as the Bill seeks to register farmers to ensure that they are provided benefits in terms of inputs such as seeds and fertilizers to enable them continue with their considered belief that coffee farming is the only source of livelihood. 

The Bill directly complies with Article 40 on Economic Rights because it seeks to improve coffee farmers’ incomes by ensuring that the value addition to coffee on-farm is improved to enable the coffee fetch high prices on the market. 

Madam Speaker, the National Coffee Bill complies with Article 41 of the Constitution on the right to information because it provides for extension services to coffee farmers, information on prices and farmers’ registration to provide other relevant information. 

On the general observations on coffee, coffee is a significant source of income for farmers and export earnings to many nations including Uganda. In Uganda, coffee remains the leading export crop employing over 7 million people, equivalent of 1.7 million households in over 100 coffee growing districts.  

The total volume of coffee exports for Uganda, from July 2Ol9 to April 2O2O, was 4,243,282, which is 60kg bags valued at $413.53 million, compared to 3,481,328, which is 60kg bags, valued at $35O.26 million during the same period in 20l9, which is an increase of 21.9 per cent and l8.1 per cent  in quantity and value respectively.

Madam Speaker, the increase in both quantity and value is attributed to increase in yield of coffee, which was planted in the last five years, which has come into maturity and the increase in global coffee prices. 

On the global scene, Brazil and Vietnam lead in production and together represent slightly less than half of the world volume. Africa produces 12 per cent of the world coffee volume. Uganda is the eighth world coffee producer. Of course, with Brazil being number one, Vietnam being number two, although at one time Uganda was better than Vietnam.  

The National Coffee Bill will enhance the production of coffee and thereby, meet the aspirations of Coffee Roadmap of producing 20 million bags by 2030. 

Committee observations and recommendations

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, on that, just read the subject and then the recommendation. Do not go into the findings.
 

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Speaker, on the Board of the Authority, the committee observes that a nursery operator is farmer and so, there is no need to have their representation on the board. In our consultation, people wanted even nursery operators to be represented on the board. However, the committee contends that since a nursery operator is a farmer, there is no need to have them represented on the board.

We, therefore, agree with the proposal to have the two representatives of farmers on the board - one representing the Robusta Coffee farmers and the other, representing the Arabica Coffee farmers.

On registration of farmers, the committee notes that initially there was a lot of resistance to this provision because it had been misunderstood. However, after thorough discussion, explanation and analysis, the stakeholders agreed with the provision on the registration of coffee farmers.
On page 11 is the reason for qualifying the registration of coffee farmers and that is for purposes of having farmers’ data collected. There is need to know coffee farmers in order to ascertain the number of coffee trees affected in case of an outbreak of pests and diseases so as to facilitate Government intervention. 

Registration will also help in the comprehensive planning for coffee farmers when it comes to connecting buyers and farmers, setting up irrigation systems and the provision of planting materials as well as other required extension services. 

For purposes of traceability, those who enjoy Ugandan coffee want to trace back to that farmer in Uganda who is growing coffee with very good aroma. 

On sensitisation, the committee contends that there should be continuous sensitisation of coffee farmers and this requires Government to know the number of farmers who are engaged in coffee growing. 

The other purpose is for UCDA to come up with a data bank and information that will help it to design programs to help in the implementation of the Coffee Roadmap. 

The committee, therefore, concurs with the provision that a coffee farmer shall be registered and recommends that the registration should be on a continuous basis to allow new farmers to come on board at any time. 

On clause 26 (b), which proposes that the land where the coffee is grown or is to be grown shall have been evaluated by the Authority and deemed suitable for growing coffee, the committee concurs with this provision because establishing the soil's suitability for coffee production will save some farmers the great losses they suffer when they grow coffee on the wrong type of soil, which most often leads to very poor or very low yields. 

Regarding deregistration of farmers, the committee takes note of the concerns raised especially in regards to clause 28 of the Bill, which seeks to deregister some coffee farmers. The committee takes note of the concerns raised by these stakeholders. However, the committee concurs with the provision and recommends that any coffee farmer who fails to comply with the terms and conditions of registration should be deregistered.

The committee also recommends that a coffee farmer should be de-registered if he or she neglects a coffee farm, which can be a haven for pests and diseases that will pose a threat to the neighbouring farms, adulterates coffee or grows types of coffee contrary to the one recommended by the Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA).

When the committee went for its field visit, it learnt that some parts of this country are blessed with stones that look like coffee. Sometimes, farmers who are not honest, get tempted to adulterate the coffee with such kind of material, which is not good for the country. That is why the committee agrees that any farmer found adulterating his coffee be de-registered. 

The committee observed that any person who was registered as a coffee farmer and subsequently de-registered by the Authority may, at any time, be re-registered with additional terms and conditions as the Authority may specify. This will give farmers a chance to be put back onto the register in case their appeal is successful.

The Bill also proposes that a coffee farmer aggrieved by the decision of the Authority may appeal to the minister. However, the committee observed that for a person aggrieved by the decision of the Authority to appeal to the minister may be difficult.

The committee, therefore, recommends that for fairness to all categories of farmers, if farmers cannot reach the minister, the minister can delegate his powers to any established organ of Government administratively. 

The Bill also proposes that the Authority shall oversee the formulation of the National Coffee Research and Development Agenda to guide coffee research. 

The committee concurs with the proposal because there is need to increase research in the coffee sub-sector. Earlier on, I said that Uganda used to be better than Vietnam but we are now No. 8 while Vietnam is second just because they have invested a lot in research.

Owing to the importance of coffee in the country, the committee recommends that there should be a Coffee Fund specific to conducting coffee research. Funding of coffee research should be a stand-alone activity. The committee further recommends that 50 per cent of the sales should go to coffee research and related development.

The committee also recommends that a Coffee Fund should be established to avail credit to coffee farmers and coffee processors. The fund will make it easy for farmers to access credit at convenient and friendly terms.

The committee further recommends that the Coffee Fund should be ring-fenced and set up by an Act of Parliament, where funds will be appropriated by Parliament.

The committee also recommends that coffee financing should be streamlined to offer financial services to farmers the way the Cooperative Banks, which were closed, used to provide. 

The Bill proposes establishment of a Coffee Auction System, which shall be used as an alternative method to the day-to-day method of selling coffee. That is the Farm Gate Markets and the Direct Export Market.

The committee concurs with the proposal to establish a coffee auction system and recommends that the auction system be adopted so that it acts as an alternative to the day-to-day method of selling coffee, which includes direct export market and the farm gate method.

When the committee undertook a study to Tanzania, it discovered that some farmers may receive as low as 50 per cent of the auction price for the coffee that they produce. The auction system is believed to have advantages including better prices. That is the reason the committee recommended it to be one of the alternative ways of marketing our coffee.

On the levy on coffee exports, which is in clause 44, the committee is in support of the provision to increase sales for the following reasons - the clause proposes that the Authority shall levy a charge not exceeding 2 per cent on the free on rail or free on truck or any other form of acceptable contract price of the export of coffee.

Therefore, the committee is in support of the provision to increase sales for the following reasons:
    a. More revenue will be generated from this increase and this revenue can be reinvested to promote inclusive coffee value chain agenda;
    b. The extra revenue can also be a source of low cost finance for coffee farmers and it can be applied in form of revolving fund or by setting up a Coffee Fund;
    c. It will also lead to the increase in sales, which will empower and strengthen UCDA to deliver on its mandate; and
    d. 50 per cent of the sales should go to research and related development while the other 50 per cent should cater for UCDA activities.

If the increase is to be implemented, the committee thinks that a grace period of at least one year should be granted before collecting the 2 per cent so as to clear out the current forward contracts.

On offences and penalties in clause 54, the committee notes the following proposals made by the stakeholders in regard to this provision:
    • The risks associated with abandoning the coffee farm, which could turn into a haven for pests and diseases thereby infecting the neighbouring farms should be mitigated by ensuring that a farmer who stops farming should notify the extension officer or other responsible officers to ensure that necessary steps are taken to kill the pests, control diseases or uproot the coffee trees. 

The committee takes cognisance of the concerns raised by the stakeholders and observes that in order to control the coffee sector, there should be checks as enlisted under clause 54. Therefore, the committee is in support of penalising culprits.

The committee further recommends that no penalties should be imposed on farmers especially if a farmer chooses to change to other enterprises for other reasons. However, the farmer should notify UCDA about the loss of interest in coffee farming. The farmer will then be de-registered.

The committee observed that there is a serious matter of fake chemicals and pesticides on the market. The committee was also concerned that some farmers use chemicals to quicken the ripening process of the coffee thereby destroying the quality of coffee to the detriment of the quality standards required at the international market. 

The committee recommends that:
i. UCDA should collaborate with the Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) to ensure effective monitoring and regulation of the sale and use of pesticides and chemicals in the country.

ii. The standard of machinery to be used in the value addition process should be put into consideration because if the machines are substandard, they will affect the final output of coffee.

Observations and recommendations on farmers’ organisations and other players inthe coffee subsector
The committee noted that the Bill is silent about the specific role of the farmer's organisations and other players in the sector and recommends as follows: 

The farmers’ organisations or cooperatives should be strengthened in order for them to mobilise their members to follow guidelines set by UCDA. Therefore, the key stakeholders should be allowed to play their role while the Authority is at the centre to monitor and guide whenever necessary.

UCDA should build on the existing efforts by the private sector and development partners. These Agencies have already progressed in offering extension services to farmers such as training in best practices in agronomic and post-harvest handling. Therefore, the role of the UCDA should be approving all training curricula so that all the trainers train farmers on how to use the best practices.

The committee also noted that there are very few extension workers countrywide and this has affected their effectiveness and efficiency. Countries like Vietnam, which used to be far below us are now above us because of having a strengthened extension capacity.  

The committee, therefore, recommends that the required coffee extension workers should be recruited and equipped adequately to perform their work. If you look at the Karamoja region, you will notice that the extension worker who handles that region is based in Gulu. That is why the committee feels there should be recruitment of more extension workers to enable them perform their work. 

The committee also recommends that there should be special consideration for the hard-to-reach areas when recruiting extension workers. Some areas are not easily accessed by the extension workers because they are considered hard to reach due to distance, poor road network or topography. Therefore, the extension workers need some form of motivation for such areas, Madam Speaker. 

The committee observed that there is still a lot that needs to be done in revamping coffee research stations and other facilities. The committee recommends that Government refurbishes the dilapidated coffee facilities in the country to enable farmers process and add value to their coffee so as to meet the market demands.

The committee also recommends that Government increases the research funding to enable scientists to generate new technologies including new coffee varieties and by-products of coffee.

On domestic consumption of coffee in the country, the committee noted that there is generally low consumption of coffee in our country. The committee notes with concern that Uganda consumes less than 4 per cent of its coffee, whereas countries like Brazil and Ethiopia consume up to 90 per cent and 50 per cent of its coffee respectively. 

The committee also notes that there is a lot of negative propaganda about coffee consumption, which may require developing communication strategies and engagements with health professionals and other stakeholders to unlock the mind-set. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that there should be deliberate efforts to promote domestic consumption of coffee through targeted campaigns, sensitisation and development of strategies that will also increase coffee markets and farmers will appreciate the value of maintaining quality coffee. It will also create jobs for the youth and women and increase income to the farmers.

The committee further recommends that Government should consider putting up a coffee museum where the public accesses information on coffee varieties, history etcetera. The coffee museum can be a strong linkage to tourism. This is what is in places like Vietnam where they have a coffee museum and tourists get various sorts of information and that is what has also made them increase on their domestic consumption.

The committee recommends that farmers should be supported to produce ready products such as roasted coffee beans, roast and ground coffees as well as instant coffee on the domestic markets.

The committee also recommends that Government should consider tax exemption on coffee machines for roasting and brewing of coffee.

The committee also observes that there are other private actors in the cell and tissue culture industry on various crop enterprises, including coffee. 


The committee, therefore, recommends that a system be put in place to regulate the private actors so that the materials they produce meet the required standards.

The committee also recommends that technology advancement will go a long way to address challenges posed in clause 54 (offences and penalties). The law should allow for technology development around controlling moisture content, which may lead to Ochratoxin A in coffee. Climate change has brought with it unseasonal and erratic rains and droughts which creates uncertainty. By insisting that farmers must dry the coffee, it will reduce liquidity and risk of mould at the farm level.

The committee also recommends that farmers should be provided with facilities like the dryers to enable the grass-root farmers dry their coffee according to the required standards. The committee realised that most of the small scale farmers cannot afford to buy some of these requirements.

The committee also recommends that Government should support farmers with processing plants at least at regional level. 

The committee noted that some of the coffee seedlings and other planting materials being distributed are of poor quality leading to great losses to the farmers. In Vietnam, for instance, there is a clear system through which seeds move from research to the farmers. After a variety is released by the research, seed multiplication is done by a registered entity. However, for us, anyone that can plant coffee is what we have been considering as a nursery operator, without any regulations. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that UCDA should strengthen the mechanism for generating and distribution of coffee planting materials to farmers, managing the quality of coffee seedlings and other planting materials supplied to farmers.

The committee also recommends that all activities of seed production should be managed by National Coffee Research Institute (NaCORI) include production of coffee planting materials. Seed production is the responsibility of the private sector. NaCORI and local governments are responsible for certifying seed gardens and nurseries; or designated Zonal Agricultural Research Institutes (ZARDI). UCDA will then certify and link nurseries to these Research Institutions. Every nursery operator should be encouraged to set up a demonstration plot.

The committee also recommends that UCDA should produce coffee nursery manuals to guide nursery manuals to guide nursery operators in producing quality planting materials including seedlings and clonal plantlets. 

In addition, UCDA should intensify training of nursery operators than leaving them on their own. Coffee nursery role models should be used to promote coffee seedling growing; this will address the problem of very poor coffee seedlings trading in parts of the country currently. This is the best way to ensure good quality coffee seedlings as opposed to the current system where anybody who can afford to venture into the business of coffee seedlings is allowed to start up nurseries, even when the quality is not guaranteed.

Madam Speaker, the committee noted with great concern that coffee seedlings are sometimes delivered too late in the planting season. This leads to mortality because the coffee is planted when the rainy season is coming to an end.

The committee further noted that there is conflict of interest in distribution of coffee seedlings. For example, those meant to supervise also supplied the seedlings - so, they make their own cake and eat it.

The committee recommends that Government through UCDA should streamline the distribution of coffee seedlings to the farmers by ensuring separation of duties for avoidance of conflict of interest.

The committee also recommends that Government, through UCDA, should increase availability of clonal cuttings for farmers in Robusta coffee growing areas to avoid incidence of coffee wilt disease that occurred in 199Os.

The committee strongly recommends that there should be increased funding to NaCORI to generate more improved varieties of coffee which are disease resistant and tolerant to draught.

The committee noted limited access to authentic quality inputs (pesticides, fungicides). The committee received several complaints from farmers about fake pesticides on the market and this was reported to be grossly affecting coffee production and its quality.

The committee recommends that Government, through MAAIF, should strengthen the registration, testing and regulation of Agro-chemical dealers of pesticides and fertilisers and impose heavy penalties to those who sell poor quality pesticides and fertilisers. 

The committee also recommends that the Uganda National Bureau of Standards should play a major role of ensuring importation of good quality pesticides in the country. Government should create avenues to make it possible for farmers to get inputs on credit.

The committee recommends that Government should support NaCORI to generate improved coffee varieties which are resistant to pests and diseases. This could help address the problem of coffee being affected by the pests. It will also be cost effective because it will reduce the quantity of inputs needed while providing increased incomes to farmers.

The UCDA and District extension staff should intensify training of farmers in integrated management of pests and diseases including cultural and biological control.

The committee also recommends that there is need to promote the use of organic fertilisers instead of advocating for inorganic fertiliser use, which may have negative side-effects especially to the environment and health. Traces of the fertilisers may be detected in the final coffee produced.

The committee recommends that stringent measures should be put in place to curb illegal practices of smuggling of coffee, which can lead to adulteration of coffee. This was after the committee discovered that some of the poor-quality coffee is imported from other countries hence contaminating the coffee produced in the country which lowers the quality of our own coffee.

The committee noted that there is a problem of peoples' mind-set
because when some farmers receive inputs from Government, they get reluctant to tend to the crops, because they think Government should also take care of the crops by providing all the required inputs like pesticides and fertilisers since it is government that provided the seedlings.

The committee recommends that Government should institute the aspect of community contribution to input to instil sense of ownership by the farmers.

Madam Speaker, the committee observed that in some parts of the country for instance, in Elgon, Rwenzori and West Nile regions, coffee production has largely stagnated as a result of the age of the coffee trees as well as deficient husbandry practices. This has led to declining yields. 

It is usually considered that a coffee tree becomes economically unprofitable when it passes the age of 10 years. Therefore, I request colleagues with coffee trees that are older than 40 year to start mobilising your people. 

THE SPEAKER: 40 or 10?

MS OKORI-MOE: There should be a deliberate move to promote coffee rehabilitation (stumping) and replanting of coffee by replacing the old trees with new and improved coffee varieties. This is what countries like Tanzania and Vietnam are currently doing and that is why their yields are improving year by year.

The committee also recommends that sufficient support by extension services on specific coffee agronomic practices should be emphasised. This can be achieved through training of trainers, re-tooling and capacity building of the extension officers. The extension workers should have specific expertise on coffee husbandry in order for them to offer the right advice to the coffee farmers.

The committee further noted that currently, the all stores used for storing coffee in the country, are privately owned. The committee recommends that Government should promote and support the construction of coffee stores and warehouses in order to improve storage and post-harvest handling.

The committee also recommends that Government should promote and support the establishment of coffee processing plants at regional level. Government should ensure that the privately owned facilities meet the set standards.

Another recommendation to deal with the effects of climate change is that Government should promote and support the provision of irrigation schemes to farmers according to their need. One of the reasons for the success of the Vietnam coffee industry is investing in water technologies, fertiliser application and irrigation models for small holder farmers

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should promote and support the provision of quality fertilisers to coffee farmers through subsidizing the cost of fertilisers.

Also, Government should ensure that financial institutions streamline some of the conditions attached to acquisition of loans to make it favourable to farmers.

Another recommendation is that UCDA and other stakeholders should carry out rigorous sensitisation of the communities to enable them understand and appreciate the Act when it comes into force.

There should be deliberate efforts to encourage the youth to venture into coffee farming for job and wealth creation. For instance, by provision of soft loans that can be payable at harvest.

Madam Speker, The committee also recommends that coffee factories should be revamped. In Zombo District, for example, the committee established that Okoro Coffee Growers Cooperative Union Factory needs support from Government especially by way of power connection and upgrading some equipment at the factory which are currently worn out, in order to meet the required standards. And Okoro Coffee Growers Cooperative Union have always cried out to Government but have not got any response. 

The committee also recommends that respective local governments should be encouraged to come up with by laws to minimise the harvesting of immature coffee and poor post-harvest handling to promote good quality coffee.

In conclusion, whereas, the committee applauds Government for its efforts of promoting the coffee sector, the coffee industry requires a combination of multi-sectoral interventions for it to reclaim its position on the world coffee scene. Major focus should be placed on strengthening coffee regulations, research and extension, support to large scale coffee production as well as small holder farmers, capital acquisition, value addition, domestic consumption and international partnerships. 

It is equally important to encourage coffee farmers in the country to consolidate their coffee farms for easy management and better yield. Efforts from various stakeholders will, therefore, be required in implementing and enforcing the new law that is geared towards building a sustainable coffee sub-sector which will boost the incomes of coffee farmers and ensure more foreign currency earnings to the country. 

Madam Speaker, when the President delivered his State of the Nation Address on 4 June 2020, he posed a question that the agriculture sector should tell us the guidance needed to ensure that the coffee gives big berries, known as screen-18 and we shall sensitise our people to do it. I would like to say that the answers to the question that was posed by the President are here in this report that I have presented. If adopted and implemented, all this will be fine.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable members, the committee members and all the stakeholders. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for that elaborate and very comprehensive report on the National Coffee Bill. I am particularly happy that for the first time, a committee has reported compliance to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), human rights and right of access to information. This is the first time and I think it is great. Congratulations, honourable chairperson and committee members. 

Honourbale members, we are approaching curfew time. I think you will have time to run through the report during the weekend. We shall take on the debate on Tuesday. 

I want to adjourn the House to Tuesday next week. However, the ministers whom we want for the report on Apaa and the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) must be here on Tuesday. House adjourned to Tuesday. 

(The House rose at 5.21 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 7 July 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)


