Thursday 5th July, 2001

Parliament met at 2.36 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala 

(The Clerk to Parliament, Mr. A.M. Tandekwire presiding)

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

Dr. Kisamba Mugerwa

(His Lordship the Chief Justice, Benjamin Odoki, in the Chair)

PRAYERS

(The House was called to order)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Hon. Members of Parliament, I wish to warmly congratulate you all for having been elected to this august House. I know that apart from those who were elected unopposed, the journey to this House and to the benches you now occupy has not been an easy one. Having achieved your individual goals to become elected Members of this 7th Parliament, I implore you not to relax, as law making requires sober minds and articulate people. Your role as legislators of this country is very crucial, as the laws that you will deliberate upon and pass will affect the entire population of this country. 

May I take this opportunity to appeal to you, Members of Parliament, to seriously consider electing a person of integrity, a person you will all respect, whose ruling will be taken as a 

decision of the House, and by whose guidance this House shall make laws for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda. 

My role here today is a simple one. I am here to preside over the election of the Speaker of Parliament as required of me by the Constitution. Article 82, Clause (1) of our Constitution provides for a Speaker and a Deputy Speaker of Parliament. Clause (5) of the same Article provides as follows: “The Chief Justice or a Judge designated by the Chief Justice shall preside at an election of a Speaker and the Speaker shall preside at an election of the Deputy Speaker.”  

I am now here to discharge this constitutional obligation.  I am now informed that you have all been availed with copies of the procedure we are all going to follow in this exercise. It is straight forward, and I think we can now begin. May I now invite nominations for the Office of Speaker from the Members. Thank you.

MR. AWORI: Your Lordship, I do agree with the provisions. I have no problem with the provisions of the Constitution on the election of the two officers of this House, but I am seeking your guidance on a matter of rule 4 and 5 of the Interim Rules of Procedure as quoted by you and the Clerk.  

My Lord, if we are referring to the books we were given yesterday when we were being sworn in, those rules have never been approved by any House of Parliament.  Are we referring to the previous rules, which have been governing the 6th Parliament?  I am just seeking your guidance my Lord.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Hon. Members, I think it is the privilege of the hon. Member to raise the point of order.   Sometimes in court we call this an ambush but I think here it is in order and unless otherwise I am informed that there are other rules which govern the procedure which Parliament can follow to conduct the proceedings, I shall deem these rules to be in operation until otherwise decided. Can we proceed?

MS. KIRASO: My Lord the Chief Justice and hon. Members, I would like to move a Motion.  My name is Kiraso Birungi Beatrice, Member of Parliament, Kabarole.  I would like to move that hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, Member of Parliament Bukoto Central Constituency Masaka District, does take the Chair of this Parliament as the Speaker.  I beg to move.

MR. ANDRULE AWUZU: Seconded.

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA: My Lord, I beg to move that the nominations be closed.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Order! Mr. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi has been proposed as Speaker and seconded.  Does he accept the nomination?

MR. SSEKANDI: My Lord Chief Justice, my names are Edward Kiwanuka Sekandi, Member of Parliament for Bukoto Central, Masaka District. I accept the nomination.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: I think there was a Motion that nominations be closed?  Nominations having been closed - unless the hon. Member – (Interruption)

MR. MWANDHA: My Lord, Chief Justice, I move that the question be put.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: I was saying that nomination having been closed, I want to put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: I think there being only one nomination, the candidate must be deemed to have been elected and I was going to pronounce on that.
MR. WAPAKABULO:  Sir, I think the procedure we were following was that, if only one name is proposed and nominations are closed, you declare that only one name of so and so has been duly nominated and nominations closed. Therefore in accordance with procedure you declare the person elected without even having us pronounce ourselves on the matter.  Thank you.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: The hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi having been nominated and seconded, the nominations having been closed, and he being the only candidate proposed for this Office, it is now my pleasure to declare him duly elected Speaker of this House.

SWEARING IN OF THE SPEAKER

The Speaker was sworn in.

ACCEPTANCE SPEECH BY THE NEW SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: My Lord, the Chief Justice of Uganda, Hon. Members of the Seventh Parliament, I must admit that I am overwhelmed by the collective confidence that you have expressed to me by electing me Speaker of the 7th Parliament of the Republic of Uganda this afternoon. I therefore express my sincere thanks to the hon. Members who nominated and seconded me to be Speaker of Parliament. 

My deep thanks also go to each of you hon. Members for the trust you have bestowed on me. It would not have been possible for you to elect me had the people of Bukoto Central constituency not identified and voted me to serve them as Member of Parliament (Applause). So, to my entire constituency, I am short of words to express my profound gratitude.  

My Lord, the Chief Justice of Uganda, I congratulate you for having performed your constitutional duty so diligently this afternoon by presiding over this unique sitting of the 1st Meeting of the 1st Session of the 7th Parliament. A Chief Justice presiding over a Sitting of Parliament is a vivid example of the harmony that the Constitution framers envisaged among the three arms of state.  
May I assure you, My Lord, that when I presided over a Committee of Parliament that approved your nomination as Chief Justice - (Laughter and Applause) - it never occurred to me that my nomination would at one time be a subject of consideration under your chairmanship. 

Let me assure you, hon. Members, that as a result of your trust, I will serve this Parliament diligently and be a Speaker for all, -(Laughter)- paying utmost regard to the principle of separation of powers between the Executive, the Judiciary and the Legislature, as genuinely envisaged in the Constitution. 

I believed, as you all do, that the welfare and well being of the people of Uganda is the ultimate goal for all arms of state in endeavouring to achieve that goal. Collaboration among all arms of state is necessary and important for any success in nation building. Therefore, without sacrificing the principle of separation of powers, the 7th Parliament shall collaborate with other arms of Government so as to achieve maximum harmony and development in Uganda.  

As Speaker of the 7th Parliament, I pay tribute to the 6th Parliament of Uganda that laid a foundation upon which we are going to continue to operate as a Legislature. I say this because as the first Parliament after the 1995 Constitution, it operationalised the Constitution and laid precedents that are vital reference points in Parliamentary practice. 

In this respect, I recognise the important role of my predecessor, hon. Francis Ayume, from whom I learnt a lot and he helped me -(Applause)- clout my service as Deputy Speaker so much that we had a very amicable working relationship. I am encouraged further by his presence in the 7th Parliament and there is no doubt that I will never hesitate to seek his counsel.    

I am further encouraged by the presence in this House of my predecessor, hon. James Wapakabulo from whom I learnt a lot. As a Speaker, I will count on his guidance and advice.  

I am paying tribute to the 6th Parliament, but I am not overlooking its weaknesses during its lifetime, especially, in respect of quorum. Let the 7th Parliament build on the strengths of the 6th Parliament and avoid the repetition of weaknesses of its predecessor. For if we all do that, then we shall effectively do the work that we have been elected to do. 

I need not remind you, hon. Members, that we have the biggest Legislature in Uganda’s independence history and so our performance should be commensurate to the size of the House and ultimately the superlatives.  

In setting on to our tasks as Members of Parliament, we need to work together, for no single Member of Parliament can put his own programme or aspiration of his constituency without the collaboration of other Members or marketing such programme and aspiration to others. This demands each of us to be courteous among ourselves and to others so that the 7th Parliament is an august House as it is expected to be by the electorate and the entire people of Uganda. 

What we do here gets to our constituency through the media. They have done a good job in informing the electorate. I hope this relationship between Parliament and the media grows even stronger so that in informing the public, we too educate them in the process, more especially, on the role of Parliament and that of Members of Parliament. Parliament is a public institution and the public is entitled to know what the Legislature does as representatives of people. I therefore assure the people of Uganda of a courteous relationship between Parliament and the public.  

Hon. Members, I wish you all success, and may God bless you. I thank you very much for this honour. 

(His Lordship the Chief Justice handed over the Instruments of the authority of the Chair to the Speaker) 

THE SPEAKER: In the circumstances, the proceedings are suspended for ten minutes.

(The Proceedings were suspended for 10 minutes and the Speaker escorted the Chief Justice out of the Chamber)

(On resumption _)

THE SPEAKER: Before we proceed, maybe we should ascertain whether we have the required quorum -(Laughter). Hon. Members, I am advised that we have the quorum. So, we can proceed with the Business. 

As you are aware, we have just finished the exercise of electing the Speaker. It is now my constitutional duty to preside over the election of the Deputy Speaker, which is also provided for in the Constitution. The procedure is exactly the same as that we followed in the election of the Speaker. So, I need not repeat what we are supposed to do.  Can I invite nominations?

MR.MUSUMBA ISAAC (Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My name is Isaac Isanga Musumba, Member of Parliament for Buzaaya County in Kamuli District. I beg to move a Motion that hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga do take the Chair of Deputy Speaker of this Parliament. The hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga is a Member of Parliament from Kamuli District –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is the nomination seconded?

MR.ONEK: Mr. Speaker, I am Engineer Onek Hilary representing Lamwo County in Kitgum District. I wish to second the nomination of Alitwala Kadaga Rebecca as Deputy Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Before we proceed further, I would like to refer to certain provisions of the Constitution in respect of who can be nominated or can stand as nominated for position of Speaker and Deputy Speaker. It is provided that no Minister or Vice-President can be nominated for the position of Speaker and Deputy Speaker. It may happen that people may raise questions as to whether Kadaga is a Minister and whether she is qualified. So, we want to ascertain that.

MR.MUSUMBA: Mr. Speaker, nothing in the Constitution or in any other written law stops the hon. Rebecca Kadaga from standing as Deputy Speaker of this House. One, the hon. Rebecca Kadaga, under Article 82(2) of the Constitution, is a Member of Parliament. Two, under the requirements of Article 82(3), she is not a Minister. I want permission to lay on the Table two letters, a letter of her resignation and a letter from the Office of His Excellency the President accepting her resignation. The letter of resignation of the hon. Rebecca Kadaga from Cabinet is hereby laid on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Could you please read it.

MR.MUSUMBA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The letter is dated July 5th, 2001, and it is addressed to his Excellency The President, State House, Kampala. It reads: “Your Excellency, Re: Resignation from the Cabinet. I write to offer my resignation from the Cabinet under the provisions of Article 116 of the Constitution. I take this opportunity to thank you for the trust and confidence you demonstrated in me when you appointed me to serve my country, first as the Minister of State for Regional Co-operation, Minister of State for Communications and finally as Minister for Parliamentary Affairs. I remain Yours Faithfully, Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, M.P, Minister for Parliamentary Affairs”. It is signed, and copied to the Speaker at Parliamentary House, P.O. 7178, Kampala. I hereby lay it on the Table.

Mr. Speaker, on the 5th July 2001, the hon. Rebecca Kadaga Alitwala did receive from State House a letter stating that; “Dear Madam, Re: Acknowledgement of your letter dated ref. TDM767001 of 5th July 2001, has been received in State House. I have been directed to inform you that His Excellency the President has accepted your resignation.  Yours faithfully, Hilda Musubira, Principle Private Secretary to the President.” It is copied to the Prime Minister, the Minister in Charge of the Presidency, the Head of the Public Service/Secretary to the Cabinet and Clerk to Parliament. I beg to lay this on the Table (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Constitutional hurdles that would have prevented the hon. Kadaga from standing as Deputy Speaker as nominated have been removed.  She is no longer a Minister; she is only a Member of Parliament. So we can proceed.

MR.MUSUMBA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. According to the rules that have been given to us, the Motion for nomination shall give a brief statement of the background and qualifications of the nominee - (Interruption) 
THE SPEAKER: First of all, let me ask the Member, hon. Rebecca Kadaga, you have been nominated and your nomination has been seconded.  I want to know whether you accept this nomination for the post of Deputy Speaker.

MS.KADAGA: Mr.Speaker, I accept the nomination. (Applause).

MRS.KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Bujenje County, Masindi): Mr. Speaker, I would like to move that nomination be closed for the post of Deputy Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Motion has been moved and nominations have been closed. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, on the premise that we have closed the nomination for the post of Deputy Speaker, I hereby declare that hon. Rebecca Kadaga, Member of Parliament Kamuli district has been duly nominated and elected unopposed as Deputy Speaker of the 7th Parliament. Congratulations (Applause). Can you please proceed to the Table for the oath?

SWEARING IN OF THE DEPUTY SPEAKER.

The Deputy Speaker was sworn in

ACCEPTANCE SPEECH BY THE NEW DEPUTY SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr. Speaker distinguished colleagues in this House, I am overwhelmed by the unanimous support I have received from all of you assembled here. Thank you very much for that demonstration and support. Let me also take this opportunity to congratulate you Mr. Speaker, upon your election to the high office of Speaker of the 7th Parliament and I pledge to work well with you in the management of the affairs of this Parliament.  
 
I would like to take this opportunity also to thank the President of this country, the Vice President, the Prime Minister and all the Colleagues I have worked with in the Government in the last five years. 

But it would be unfair not to thank the Members of this House, particularly in the three years when I have worked with you as Minister for Parliamentary Affairs. 
 
I want to thank very much the Members of the Sixth Parliament for all the work we have done together. It has been a pleasure and I would like to pledge to the new Members that there will be no change in my co-operation with all Members of the Back-bench.  That has been my tradition.  I would like to pledge that I will work without fear or favour and without discrimination against any person or group in this House.  You can rely on me to work together with you. Let me also thank my distinguished nominators and seconders in this House for the work they have done. 

Finally I would like to thank the great people of Kamuli district, who elected me with a landslide that has also enabled me to get unanimously elected in this House.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Deputy Speaker.  Once again hon. Members, I want to sincerely thank you for having diligently executed your functions for which you were elected.  This first day shows that you are going to be vigilant and diligent in carrying out your assignment.  

I think we have now come to the end of today’s business and in these circumstances, I want to adjourn the House until tomorrow. 10.00 a.m.  The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 3.39 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 6th July, 2001 at 10.00 a.m.)




