Thursday, 6 July 2006

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

Mr Simon Lokodi

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are very welcome! 

STATEMENT OF BUSINESS FOR THE FOLLOWING WEEK

2.48
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker, next week we are going to conclude the debate of the State of the Nation Address and start a general debate on the Budget. May I take this opportunity to remind my colleagues to give me their legislative agenda because I do not want to run out of the legislative agenda? I thank you.

PRIVATE MEMBERS' BUSINESS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, today is Thursday and the private Members’ business takes precedence. I now invite hon. Alaso to make a submission.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, I had some business, which I consulted you and I was assured it would be on the Order Paper.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leave that to me.

2.49
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The last week we witnessed continuous reports particularly in The Daily Monitor newspaper and other local newspapers reporting a fear that there is a looming shortage of anti retroviral drugs in the country. I have read statements attributed to both ministers of health, the Minister for Primary Health Care and the Minister in charge of Health, hon. Dr Stephen Mallinga. But the issue of a looming shortage of ARVs is not a thing that we can just listen to and watch without a specific statement to allay the fears of the patients and the caretakers. 

In the recent past, there was also talk that actually the country had run short of ARVs and for two weeks there was not adequate supply. That was the talk and that some people had actually given up their lives; they died because of this. 

So, I thought it would be prudent to have the Minister in charge of Health make a statement to this House, clarify to the nation whether there is actually a shortage of ARVs looming for the next two months, and then if it is true, what does he have in plan? Because this constitutes an emergency, we cannot wait when it comes to ARVs.  My understanding is that any shortage, any failure to secure supplies means people are going to die.  Madam Speaker, I would like a statement to the nation about the position of ARVs.

2.51
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have also received inquiries and telephone calls amounting to may be about 20 or 30 a day, inquiring about the ARVs drugs. We are very well equipped. ARVs are available. We usually have our stocks for three months and for the next three months we are very well equipped to take care of those patients who are already on the programme and we also welcome new patients to get into the programme. 

There might be a shortage because people have not collected the drugs from the National Medical Stores, but the drugs are available. I have made a statement to the media who call me, so there is no need for alarm. I do not know how this false story started. I would like to repeat and assure the nation that the drugs are available for the next three months and beyond.  

PROF. OGENGA: Madam Speaker, I would like to ask a supplementary question since the minister’s statement clarifies what has been in the press. Some time ago, probably a month ago, the press also reported- actually made a declaration that the country was going to embark on manufacturing ARVs locally. What is the position on that?

MS ALASO: I am glad that the Minister tells us that the drugs are actually in place because part of the confusion was another statement attributed to hon. Richard Nduhuura where he said, “Arrangements are being made to procure” which was beginning to create a bit of uncertainty.  

Secondly, Madam Speaker, this is also to do with HIV positive patients out there and in my district, Soroti. I have moved around health centres and I actually found that there is even shortage of septrin, a basic drug for opportunistic ailments.  I would like the Minister to assure us whether besides the ARVs, he also has ensured that the health centres have the other drug for opportunistic ailments.

2.55
MR OLENY CHARLES, (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add on to what the honourable Member has raised. 

Over the weekend, I was at the constituency and I am one of those who called the hon. Minister, regarding the question of ARVs. They have to date 606 patients who are registered for HIV/AIDS care. Of those, 102 are on ARV treatment. One hundred and eighty seven are eligible, but cannot come all due to the shortage of ARVs in the clinic that is jointly run between government and JCRC. So, I am afraid, whereas the Minister is assuring us that there should be no cause for alarm, the people of Usuk  - and as you know we have over 48 camps in that area. You can imagine the tension that is now prevailing among the patients in that part of the country. So, whereas the Minister is assuring us, I also would like to inform him that the medical officer involved has spent two months trying to get drugs from NMS. The issue is really that serious. I thank you.

2.57
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I get very uncomfortable by assurances which are not backed by statistics. I am aware that the honourable Minister was made aware of this question before he came here. I would like to know from the honourable Minister, how many  - when he says we are assured of availability of drugs all the time that we need them before the next importation- How many patients are we talking about? How much do we consume per month? Therefore, how much do we have in store for the next three months? Thank you.

2.58
MR SAMMY OGWEL-LOOTE (Independent, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Madam Speaker, I would like to give the supplementary question to the Minister.  It is arising from the answer that he has drugs.  Just last Friday, a patient arrived from Karamoja, and in fact when he came to my home, he collapsed.  I had to transport this person to the hospital. After a long time, he could be treated. But a number of drugs, which were prescribed for him, were not in stock. 

Now, the Minister is assuring us the drugs are in the stores and they have not only been collected. Who have not collected these drugs? If they are aware they are there, have they been informed that they should come and collect these drugs? Some of us look after these patients and sympathise with them as we travel almost every place, every clinical pharmacy to get these drugs for them.

2.59
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In today’s newspapers, it is reported that the coordinator of Global Fund has resigned due to uncoordinated procurement processes and especially in that area of drugs. Could the Minister explain the circumstances - since you are talking about the procurement of HIV drugs - could the Minister explain the circumstances surrounding the resignation of the coordinator of Global Fund?

DR MALLINGA: I will start with the resignation of the doctor at the Global Fund. As you know, Global Fund was taken away from the Ministry of Health; as we speak, it is under Ministry of Finance. The operation there was precise, everything was going well, and then so many accusations were made. We are waiting for the report, but for the moment, consult the Ministry of Finance.

MR BANYENZAKI: Could the Minister of Finance therefore supplement you to answer this?

DR MALLINGA: Let me finish my response to your question.  You asked questions about – hon. Leader of the Opposition asked if we are going to manufacture ARVs soon. We are interested in that and there is a discussion with certain companies to see if that can happen here. But so far, we are not doing it.  

The problem is that there is what I would describe perhaps as irresponsibility at the district level. Every district has a credit line to come and collect medicines from the National Medical Stores. Unfortunately, some directors at the districts are not carrying out their duties properly. We have the medicines for the treatment of the complications, mostly sulfonamides and any other medicines; those are available at the National Medical Stores.

I want again to repeat; I cannot come up with statistics right away. I cannot remember how many people have AIDS. We do not even know the exact number of those who are HIV positive in the country. But I could come up with a number if you give me the time and if you are really interested in the number of patients who are currently under treatment. I will come with that information later.  

About sulfonamides for the treatment of complications are available at the National Medical Stores; and if you want to purchase them at any pharmacy, I know sulfonamides are available in every pharmacy you can think of. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we proceed, I would like to inform you that students from Mabale Public Secondary School in Kibaale are here in the Gallery. Can you stand up? You are welcome! (Applause)

We also have students from various institutions of higher learning in Uganda. Can you stand up? You are very welcome! (Applause)  Then we do have some student leaders from Kenya and Tanzania visiting in the spirit of regional cooperation. The East African delegation, where are you? You are all welcome! (Applause) Thank you very much. Hon. Alaso, you had a second question.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I also read again last week in The Daily Monitor newspaper that inmates, PRA suspects, had escaped from Makindye Military Barracks. These were inmates who were originally supposed to have been detained in Luzira. They were civilians and were transferred to Makindye Military Barracks. The reports in the newspapers indicate that they dug a hole using a broken pipe and escaped. 

Previously, there were also reports that inmates had escaped from Adjumani and from Arua. That was way back in February. This development has caused a lot of anxiety, first, because government has the constitutional obligation to ensure that we are all protected. Whether we are in custody or not, it is the duty of government to protect the inmates.  

The second thing is that we have an Act that governs the prison service in this country. It also provides for the protection of the inmates. It is therefore very shocking to hear that inmates can just disappear. We would like to call government to account. Where are these people? There is a growing concern now that if you are taken into custody, you end up in a military detention, you are either killed or you cannot be accounted for. 

So, my desire this afternoon is that government tells this country what has been done to recover the inmates?  If they have disappeared, where are they? What has been done? Or if they are there, where are they? These are Ugandans going through a trial process; they have not been sentenced to death. So, we cannot even say they were killed; if they have been killed, they have been killed illegally. They should have been killed if there was need to kill them after a sentence.

Madam Speaker, I would like the Minister to tell us where the inmates are, the PRA suspects of recent, where have they been taken, or what has been done to recover them? Otherwise, this constitutes gross human rights violation in this country.

3.06
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker, the Minister of Internal Affairs is abroad trying to ensure that total peace returns to this country. But of course, there is a Minister of State for Internal Affairs and I do not see him here. I have no hesitation in directing him to answer this question next Thursday. I thank you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I need a clarification from the Rt hon. Prime Minister. From the reports we read, we get to know that these people were under the military police. Could I know from the Rt hon. Prime Minister whether the Military Police is under Ministry of Internal Affairs?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you very much. There are activities, which are interrelated, hence, my answer.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us wait for the sector minister to give us an answer next week. I direct that it be reflected on the Order Paper.

3.08
MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Rubaga South, allow me to raise a matter of public concern about Kibuye-Busega Road. 

On Monday, people held a public demonstration in protest against what happened. The Ministry of Works contracted Zzimwe Construction Company to rehabilitate that road over one year and three months ago. That road was supposed to be done in eight months. 

As I speak now, the road is impassable; the dust inflicted on people’s retail shops and markets is being an environmental hazard. Right now the dust is right from Kibuye, Natete, Nalukolongo, up to Busega. The dust is a barrier to people’s business. The dust has an effect on people’s houses and something should be done at least. 

Madam Speaker, is the Minister aware that the road referred to is a highway whose rehabilitation should be given maximum attention because we all know that that road is funded by the European Union? Why has the Ministry taken such a long time to repair the road? Can we assume that the European Union funds were not released? If they were not released, can t the government provide an alternative? Could the European Union funds have been diverted to something else? The ministry should tell us if it was diverted to something else and I am here to know.  

Madam Speaker, right now I smell a rat. I will support and join the demonstrators if nothing is done within the limited time possible because –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. Can I ask the people in the Gallery not to clap and not to do anything? Just listen.

MS NAMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, the work on that road should be carried out as expeditiously as possible. The government must respond pragmatically to that crisis. 

3.12
THE MINISTER OF WORKS (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to make one clarification that the funding for the repair of that road is not by the European Union. It is by the funds from the Uganda Government; maybe, the future funding when it becomes four lanes that will be through the European Union.

Secondly, there are no funds that have been diverted as the honourable member says she smells a rat: No funds have been diverted so there is no smelling a rat. The honourable member’s concerns are also our concern about the slow progress of the contractor. 

Again, I wish to apologise to the people who have been affected because of this delay of work. We are together in that concern and we are doing everything we can to see that the project gets finished. 

Let me inform the House of the dilemma my ministry has in its effort to support the development of local contractors. Zzimwe Construction Company was the first company that brought an asphalt plant, mixing plant in Uganda. That is the one that you use to mix construction materials and you put on the road. 

In our effort to support them, we gave them two short roads to start with, which were for emergency repairs: the Nakulabye-Nansana Road and Kibuye. They have been paid for all the work they have done. In fact, they were given advance mobilisation like other contractors. So, when you consider the advance mobilisation that they were given and the payments, the payments total to 57 percent including the advance money, which the contractor pays back. 

But they have done about 40 per cent of the work and correctly they were supposed to have completed this road in November last year. So, we go through the contract procedures of giving warning, of negotiating a new programme and every time the contractor has been trying to assure us that he will speed up but the progress has been slow.  

Nevertheless, the problem of dust is between Kibuye and Natete. The honourable member knows since that is part of her constituency. Actually Natete to Busega area now has been surfaced and there is no dust there. So, we are struggling and fighting hard with the contractor to finish this work. 

I have also given instructions to the contractor to water that section everyday so that there is no dust as work continues. As I talk now, there are watering tanks to guarantee no dust and we are going to solve the problem of the delays. 

I want to appeal to the honourable member that the demonstration will not help us but will make matters worse. Let us leave the demonstration and try to finish the work together. The contractor has been given the last warning, if he cannot perform, after consulting the Attorney-General - because this is a contract. We are trying to take other contractual procedures to see that work gets finished. But they will water that road everyday until they finish so that there is no dust. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I want to react to the comment from the hon. Minister about physical infrastructure and why this has continued. 

The issue of Natete Road is not an isolated case. You remember we had the case with the Jinja-Iganga Road, now this is Natete. Even in Kasiro, a contractor has left; he has not even paid people. That is Globe Construction. The work is not complete, they dumped culverts, they have just done spot gravelling and they have taken off. So, it is not an isolated case to Natete; it looks like it is a countrywide case. Why is this so? Could the Minister explain to us why this is becoming rampant?    

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My supplementary question is on road repairs generally. There is a tendency in this country to repair potholes on tarmac roads using murrum.  I think someone does not need to be an engineer to know that murrum and tarmac are not the same thing. They fill it with murrum, then after two weeks, you end up with larger potholes and it is done over and over again. 

Two, Madam Speaker, where they use murrum to repair tarmac roads, they first fill the potholes to the top and then just fill the top black to make it appear as if it is being tarmacked. So, after a week or two you find the potholes are back. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to know from the honourable minister what professional advice his ministry offers to the local authorities. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.19
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I thank my colleague, the Minister of Works and Infrastructure, for the statement to Parliament. He has just told the House that the contractor has accomplished 40 percent of the work and yet he has been paid up to 57 percent. Fifty-seven percent in payments have been done. That being the case, don’t you think, honourable minister, the contractor has been over paid? Don’t you think he has been paid for work that he has not been able to accomplish? That is one question.

Question number two, it is not the first time that I get some explanation from the minister, Madam Speaker. Earlier on he appeared on television and laboured to explain what was going on with that contract. I imagine your ministry should have run out of patience by now. Why has it taken you this long to impose the penalty clauses that are associated with any contract of that level?

MR NASASIRA: If I would start with hon. Okupa’s concern. Yes, it is true there are some contracts, like Jinja/Bugiri Road, where the contractor abandoned work, the contract was terminated and nobody wanted it. But that happens in construction, and it caused the delay on this one. 

I can quote many other contracts which are going on successfully. The Arua/Nebbi Road was finished ten months ahead of schedule. The Pakwach road has been finished. There are successful contracts going on in Western Uganda and Eastern Uganda. 

In any life, in any society, in any work, there are problems and there are successes. That is what you should expect construction to be. I cannot expect every contract to be 100 percent successful. That is some utopia world. It is not part of this world. However, the majority of contracts are going on well. We get the few hitches and we try to deal with them. 

As for Kasilo, my friend hon. Okupa knows very well that this road is a community road – (Laughter)- and he approached us and we tried to assist the community outside the normal network of Works. Let us slowly assist this community whenever we have the resources. 

MR OKUPA: Honourable minister, I do not think that is a justification for the man to do work and fail to pay. That is the concern honourable minister. 

MR NASASIRA: What I was trying to say is that we will finish that work, but we are trying to do it within the available resources we have within that budget. When the contractor was not getting the resources, at the time we halted. As soon the budget is approved here, we shall resume and finish the Kasilo road.

On hon. Okello-Okello’s concern about repairing tarmac roads with murrum, actually most of our roads, apart from those we do with crust stone, are made of murrum with tarmac on top. We call it a seal. They are sealed with tarmac but the major structure of the road is murrum. So even when the pothole develops, you have to start to repair with the same material you used to build and then at the end of the day put the tarmac on top. (Laughter)      

Finally, I would have been happy if you used some specific examples so that we could check. Some of these roads that are addressed to Works actually fall under city council. Sometimes I do not know whether he is talking about Works’ roads or city council roads. I would have been happy if he gave me specific examples.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have a particular road in mind?

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I mentioned two situations. One was where the repair is just by murrum alone without anything on top, on a tarmac road. The second one is where it is filled by murrum up to the brim but then they put a very thin layer of tarmac. It is very thin so after two weeks the thing is gone again. 

I know that there is a difference between local authority roads and central government roads. However, since decentralization, the ministries here in Kampala are supposed to give advice to the local authorities. I asked what advice does the minister give? 

Look at Ntinda Trading Centre where our Vice President passes everyday, if you drive straight you fail to drive. Right in the middle of the city here, they fill potholes nearly every month with murrum, and tarmac roads being repaired by murrum only. The advice should come from the centre to the local authority. This is what I am asking.

MR NASASIRA: Okay, I will find out more and sort it out. Ntinda road is within city council so we shall find out. It is true we are responsible for the standards. You will find out that where the city council is not following the standards, we shall give them the technical advice.

Turning to my honourable Shadow colleague, no, the contractor has not been overpaid. Since he is a fellow engineer and he has been involved in contracts, you should realize that when a contract starts you pay the contractor what we call advanced mobilisation. That is not payment -(Interjection)- Can I follow my explanation? 

MR ODIT: I see the minister is escaping when we have some questions for him to answer, the Minister of Health. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please come back. (Laughter)

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, I have to go and close a meeting at 3.30 p.m. at Statistics Building. I have left Dr Otala; he is very ready to answer all the questions that will arise.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, we have two other ministers here. I see Dr Nduhuura and Dr Otala. Minister of Works, please complete. 

MR NASASIRA: Madam Speaker, as I was explaining, when a contract starts, the contractor is paid advanced mobilisation even before the contractor does any work. He is then paid per certificate for the work that person does. As the contractor gets paid per certificate, he pays back the advance mobilisation. 

Why is 57 percent paid? It is because advance mobilization was paid, but 40 percent of the work done is the 40 percent, which has been paid. The 17 percent is part of the advance mobilisation. In any case, the advance mobilisation has got what we call a bank guarantee. When the government wants to recall that advance mobilisation, the bank will pay for it.  

The second question was, why has it has taken long to terminate this contract. You know there are procedures.  You do this contract according to the law and there are procedures when the contract defaults; for example, part of the delay was an amendment in the design. Because of poor drainage in that section, we had to change. I think the honourable member has seen the type of material we are using now to stop the water. So, when there was a change, the contractor asked for the extension of time. 

If you take the seven months, which is delayed now, part of it was extension of time given. The delay alone cannot immediately terminate the contract unless you follow the procedures of the contract. Otherwise, you will end up in arbitration and pay more. So, we take those into consideration. It is not just summary justice. You have to go within the law. Thank you.

3.30
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you Madam Speaker. I am moving under Rule 35, asking a question for oral answer from the Ministry of Education.  

In the High Court of Uganda under the quorum of Mr Justice R Kasule, application No. 643 of 2005, the case of Father Francis Bakyibemuntu the late and 15 others versus Kyambogo University, it was ruled that the appointment letters that had been previously issued by Kyambogo University were nullified.

Secondly, Kyambogo University did not comply with the Constitution and the law in handling the welfare and the terms and conditions of services of the staff, in specific reference to the Universities and Tertiary Institutions Act, Act 7 of 2003, specifically under section 4, 5 and 6.  

Can the Minister therefore explain how she is handling this matter that nullified the appointment of these lecturers? 

Secondly, because of that crisis, the academic staff and the lecturers in Kyambogo University have laid down their tools and have withdrawn their confidence in the management of Kyambogo University. As a result, the students who are undertaking industrial training and teaching practice are not being supervised. Could the Minister explain to this House what she has done so far to resolve this looming crisis?  I thank you.

3.32
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform this House through you, and in response to my colleague’s question, that for sometime now the staff at Kyambogo University and the administration have had differences. All efforts to resolve those differences amicably did not succeed. 

As the Member has indicated, the staff decided to go to court. The High Court has come up with a ruling, which I believe can also be referred to as a court order. On receipt of that court order, the administration at Kyambogo tried to get together with staff to work out the modalities of implementing the court order. But on many occasions, the two groups did not manage to come together to work out the roadmap on how to implement the provisions in the order. 

When that was brought to my attention by the University administration, I wrote back to advise that the University administration should seek the intervention of the Attorney General or his office to clarify exactly what actions need to be taken.  

Again, the council of Kyambogo University and the administration tried very hard to get together with staff so that the two can agree on what exactly is legally required to be done to sort out the matter.  However, it seems that there were some constrained relationships, which did not permit good relationships to come to a round table to discuss the matter.  I kept on advising the two parties and to my satisfaction the council, over which I have the control, managed to do what they could, realising that they could not by themselves sort out the differences.  

On Sunday afternoon I decided to call the meeting of the two bodies, that is council and staff. Realising my inadequacy in the law, I called my colleague, hon. Ruhindi, and I informed the Attorney General so that I could get advice during that meeting. Hon. Ruhindi turned up and interpreted the court ruling to us. He gave us direction on what was required to be done as a measure to meet the law and the High Court ruling. 

Madam Speaker, I am very happy to report that the meeting was very successful. The executive committee of the staff turned up in good numbers and the full council turned up with their chairman, Mr. Abaliwano. We discussed the issue for about four hours and at the end of that meeting it was agreed that the provisions in the court order should be implemented immediately, without losing anymore time. So, the three parties, the Minister, the University Council and the staff, and I agreed to do the following:

One, that a letter be written to individual members of the staff formerly employed by the merged institution, that is, the Uganda Technical, the Uganda College for Special Needs Education and ITEK as per the court order. This will be rescinding the appointment letters which had been given to those members of staff, whereby all staff individually and collectively should go back to their terms and conditions of service under which they were serving before the three institutions were merged.

Secondly, that the members of staff at the university each be given an identity card to recognise them as employees of the university arising out of the merger of the three institutions.  

Thirdly, it was agreed that Kyambogo University Council shall appoint an ad hoc committee with the following terms of reference:

1. 	To look into the staff issues of concern at the University. 
2. 	To look into the modalities of staff integration into the Kyambogo University staff structure as per the order that was given by the court.
3. 	The chairman of the university staff, on receipt of a letter informing him of these decisions, communicates to his members of staff and causes a general assembly to withdraw their resolution to put down their tools.  

Madam Speaker, that letter was written outlining those decisions and recommendations. It is dated 3rd of this month, which was Monday. It was delivered to the office of the chairman, members of staff of Kyambogo University. The ad hoc committee is in place and it has started its work to look into what causes the wrangles between these two parties and to work out modalities for integrating the staff into Kyambogo University staff. 

From what I collected before I came here, the strike is still on. Talking to the chairman of the staff association, I understand they would like to see the administrative staff, starting with the vice chancellor, the secretary of the University and the bursar, vacate their offices before they can lift their tools.

Madam Speaker, universities are public institutions which, I am happy to report, are governed under the law. The law was passed in the Seventh Parliament in 2001, known as the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act. That law provides for the management and running of universities in this country. 

Council and its committees appoint the vice chancellor, the secretary and other staff. There is no law I have come across whereby the staff have authority and legal powers to remove any of those staff from their offices. Realising that the wrangles must have some other concerns, the ad hoc committee has been appointed to look into what might be causing bad blood between the two. They have started their work today.  

Madam Speaker, in answer to my colleague’s question, I am really on top of issues going on in Kyambogo University. I am fully briefed and I have lots of letters concerning my communication and their communication regarding this matter. I think from that meeting on Sunday and the recommended steps I have listed, this wrangle should come to an end. 

I advise the staff that we all respect democracy and we do not want anybody to be oppressed. At the same time, democracy and law are very close friends. If you want to promote democracy, you must first of all observe the law. If we have got the statute governing universities in this country, then we are bound democratically to follow whatever is provided in that law. 

If the reason given now for laying down their tools is that they want the vice chancellor and his staff to leave office for good, then I think we should do that according to the law. The ad hoc committee will come out with all details on where the vice chancellor and his people have gone wrong and then the law will take its course. 

I would like to inform this house that according to my assessment as sector minister, all things should be taking their course and the law should be allowed to take its course. If there are any staff that should be removed from office, I think it would be advisable that they are removed after a report has been made about their behaviour. This should be done according to the law because the appointing authorities are, according to the law, the ones with powers to dismiss any employer of the University.

Madam Speaker, another case they brought up at the meeting on Sunday was concerning their salaries and appointments. As this House knows, and I would like to inform them through you, the Head of State and the President of the Republic of Uganda on Monday met all academic staff from public universities. He agreed to enhance their salaries according to the monies available. I report that Kyambogo University staff turned up in large numbers and we all left Namboole meeting with the President very happy. So, that issue is not among those for which they are now striking.

Secondly, the court order comes out very clearly to say that there should be mechanisms to integrate these staff members from the three colleges into the University staff. The ad hoc committee is going to do exactly that. Each member of staff would be placed according to his qualification according to the new structure of the University.  

Thirdly, about this other person and other issues raised, the committee is definitely going to investigate all the officers and come out with a recommendation. 

In my opinion, that is the procedure, which might lead to sorting out the wrangles at Kyambogo University. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit and I thank my colleagues for raising these questions. I think all matters are under control. Thank you.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, much as the Minister advised the staff to comply with the law, she should also advise management to comply with the law. It has cost the taxpayers money because they lost the case. So, what disciplinary measures –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I think she said that she has asked all the parties to comply with the court order. She said it twice.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, having not complied with the law before, what disciplinary measures is the Minister thinking of taking against the management? How is she going to take disciplinary measures against these staff that did not comply with the law and they are costing the country taxpayers money? 

Madam Speaker, since the issue is still dragging on and is not resolved can the Minister undertake to come back again, after we give her a time frame, to give a statement to this House as to how that issue has been handled? It is not yet resolved.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think you are asking the impossible. She just set up the committee on Sunday and it is about to start work. How can you now tell her that she comes back in two days when the committee has not started?

MR BANYENZAKI: We could give her two weeks or a month.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you have channels through which to monitor what is going on, through the committee on education. She has said she has just set up a committee; it is only three days old, so let it work. During the course of the year we shall have time to call her back. I think that is really what we should do.


MR KAWANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Minister for that very comprehensive answer. There are only two points I want to raise. One set of stakeholders has not been talked about and that is the students. While all these things are going on, what is the fate of the students’ coursework and whatever they are supposed to do? This is also the concern of the parents of these students. We pay quite a bit of money to get these students through school. We would want to know that they will be able to complete their course without any problem.

Finally, while all these arrangements are being made, what is being put in place to ensure that the standards of Kyambogo University are not compromised?  I thank you.

MS ALASO: I thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister in her response talked about enhancing salaries. Permit me just to bring it to the Minister’s attention that even the teachers have not been paid for the last two months. It looks like there is going to be unrest about the delayed payments. I thought the Minister should know. I was in Soroti and the teachers were planning a strike. I think that is very worrying.

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, just to add to what hon. Alaso Alice has said, even in Manafwa for three months teachers have not got salaries. We have tried to get into contact with the Minister of Finance but for three months they have not got salaries.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Strikes are very expensive. The other time it was Makerere, another time medical staff, the other day it was Kyambogo; it seems that we solve our problems by crisis.  

The Leader of Government Business should answer my supplementary. Is it not possible for this government to solve some of these problems before people go on strike? Strikes have become very rampant in the current government. Are there no mechanisms to handle the problems before the strike? I thank you.

MR KABUUSU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to supplement on the issue raised after the Minister’s response.  I have been to Kyamuswa and teachers were demanding explanation as to whether government was ready with the pledge of the hard-to-reach allowances promised to the teachers in the island constituency.  They were also threatening to go on a sit-down strike about that. I am happy the Minister still holds the Floor; she could add it and give an answer.

MR ALINTUMA: Madam Speaker, I would like to tell the honourable members who think that strikes are the only solutions that even parliamentarians have had problems of non-payment for two months. Because strikes are not a solution, we have not gone on strike and we were paid, so –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think you misheard. They were asking whether we should always wait until strikes occur before we intervene. That is what they were saying.

MR ALINTUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. But it appears that there are some Members of Parliament who think that they can even help teachers by encouraging –(Interruption) 

DR LYOMOKI: Madam Speaker, the honourable Members of Parliament are just reporting issues that are taking place in their constituencies. They are not going on strike themselves. Is it in order for the honourable minister to stand and insinuate that the honourable members want to go on strike in their constituencies, when they are just reporting situations in their constituencies?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, there was no insinuation that members are encouraging strikes. They were saying, please avert the strikes.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I thank the members for raising supplementary questions. I want to say this whole volume is full of answers for about 88 questions, which have been raised since we started discussing the address to the nation. I intend to lay it on Table so that each one could find his answer. I was going to ask for 30 minutes -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we are going to give you your time.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Most of the questions are there but I can give these answers. On the students’ fate at Kyambogo, that is exactly where the concern is. That is why I thought it was in order to go on the ground and see what council has done so far, so that we can work out immediate solutions to the strike. 

The students are already in the field on school practice and other practical programmes, but the teachers are on strike. So, you are right, hon. Kawanga, there is likely to be compromise of programmes because the teachers think they should continue with the strike but the students are already in the field. 

The students need monitoring and supervision and the staff are not at the moment giving it to them. So, you are right and we are really concerned. Everything that has to be done must be done within the shortest time possible.    

The teachers are not paid; I know I have an answer in this booklet on this. I have liaised with the Minister of Finance and he is about to submit, or he might have already submitted supplementary budgets indicating many districts where they had a shortfall in their salaries. He is coming here. 

In fact, he told me to inform this House that this issue –(Interjection)– Thank you very much. I had not seen him.  He has a list of districts, which require supplementary to meet the shortfalls in the salaries. I am sure he is going to effectively meet the requirements of those teachers.

I agree and I would like to appeal to this House to try to fight strikes in institutions.  They are very damaging and I do not think a developing country like ours can afford what happened in Nabumali and other schools where institutions are totally destroyed, let alone staff going on strike.  

I think Kalangala might be among the list, which the Minister of Finance has. All shortfalls in wages will be met according to the advice given by the minister who I am very happy is present today.  When time comes for further details of the 88 questions raised, I will definitely give the answers.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, hon. minister for your elaborate and comprehensive answer.

3.57
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I will begin by reading Article 40(3): “Every worker has a right- (c) to withdraw his or her labour according to law.”  The problem is that people withdraw their labour without following the law.  Therefore, we need to teach them to follow the law. In fact, when the problem occurred at Kyambogo University, I asked that Minister of State in the Ministry of Justice, hon. Ruhindi, to ensure that the ruling of the court is properly understood. He has written to all of them.  They did not win everything by the way. There is a problem of understanding issues properly.

Secondly, there has been a lot of indiscipline in this country.  I happen to be the Chancellor of Makerere, but I become extremely disgusted when there are problems and thugs join the students who are striking and endanger the property of the neighbours. I have given very firm instructions that if this kind of thing happens, those students must be dealt with promptly following the law of the land.  I have also instructed the IGP to protect not only the students themselves, but also the entire environment.  

Madam Speaker, some of our administrators are poor at communicating horizontally and vertically. There is a problem of communication and when this happens, problems pile up resulting in strikes.  It is important for the administrators - vice chancellors and university secretaries to explain what happened. For example, a professor rang and said, ”We have not been paid at Makerere”.  I rang the Bursar and asked, “Why haven’t you paid the members of staff?”  He said, “We did not get our cheque from Ministry of Finance on time”.  Then I said, “You should have communicated the problem.  You must also indicate when you hope to solve the problem”.  Therefore, there is absence of prompt communication.

Finally, a number of people suffer from the phenomenon of presidentialism.  They think it is only the President who can solve their problems and rush to him.  In fact, today I spoke to him and said “Your Excellency, do not deal with the problems at Kyambogo”.  I told him the Minister of Education would handle the problem.  When she fails, I will handle the problem.  When I fail, then I will go to the Head of State.  I thank you.

DR LYOMOKI: I have a clarification from the Prime Minister’s explanation. He has read the law which provides that workers should go on strike according to law. In the public sector, we do not have a law that deals with negotiations. Yesterday, I raised the matter of the Public Service negotiation machinery that government has failed to legislate in the last ten years.  If there is no law to follow, how should workers go on strike?  How can they go, withdraw their labour according to law? 

How does the Rt. hon. Prime Minister expect the workers to withdraw their labour according to law when the government has failed to put it into place, to cater for issues of negotiation?  If it was in place, the workers would understand whether they have exhausted the machinery and therefore go on strike according to law.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. I just beg for your indulgency.  The issue being raised by hon. Lyomoki is very important and I know the workers of this country have been represented in this House since 1996. The Constitution allows workers to move a Private Members Bill.  Have the workers considered bringing a Private Members Bill here so that this House legislates how they could withhold or they procedurally withdraw their labour according to the Constitution?  

DR LYOMOKI: Madam Speaker, yesterday I made it very clear in my speech that workers have come up with the Bill, which we are going to table in the next two weeks.  Therefore, already there is a Private Bill. I raised the matter here yesterday and I asked the members to support me when the Bill comes in the next two weeks.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you bring the Bill and I will put it on the Order Paper.

4.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, Hon. Lyomoki stated that there is no law to regulate workers who work in the private sector and I want to say that that is not accurate.  There is a law, which was passed by the Seventh Parliament called, “The Employment Act, 2006.”  A worker –(Interruption)

DR LYOMOKI: Madam Speaker, I have had a very reasonable knowledge of the laws relating to labour for a very long period of time.  I made a statement yesterday and I said there is no law regulating negotiation in the public sector, not private sector, because I was mindful that I was part of the process that brought four labour Bills in this House. Is it, therefore, in order for the honourable minister to quote me out of context? Is he in order to confuse the law relating to a negotiation in the public sector with the law relating to a negotiation in the private sector?  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, maybe you could read us the section, which deals with that negotiation.  

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. A worker under the Employment Act is an employee, and in Section 2 of the Act an employee means, “Any person who has entered into a contract of service or an apprenticeship contract including, without limitation, any person who is employed by or for the Government of Uganda, including the Uganda Public Service, a local authority or a parastatal organisation, but excludes a member of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces.”  A worker in the private sector is a worker who has entered into a contract of service. A worker working for government is clearly included here. Therefore, this law includes both workers in the private sector and in the public sector.  That is the information I wanted to give and there is sufficient provision for both categories of workers.

DR LYOMOKI: Madam Speaker, this law does not talk about negotiation. The Employment Act, which he is talking about, deals with the general employment but there are specific issues of negotiation. In the private sector it is called the, “Trade Disputes Arbitration and Settlement Act”, which was assented to and that is for the private sector.  In the government sector it is supposed to be the, “Public Service Negotiation Machinery.” So we are talking about a law on negotiation not the law on general employment. Therefore, I think the honourable minister should be able to harmonise and study the laws clearly. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lyomoki, I told you to bring your motion and I will put it on the Order Paper. You will then explain all these things to us and we give you authority.

4.09
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): I thank you, Madam Speaker. This question is directed to the Minister of Health and as he left the Chamber –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He has not left. He is here.

MR ODIT: He delegated effectively and I am confident that the question will be handled. In view of the fact that Malaria is the number one killer disease in Uganda and the government has identified DDT as one of the pesticides in Malaria control, will the minister inform this House whether or not the pesticide is already in use in this country?  

Two, is the government considering bringing to this House a motion on the use of DDT?  If so, will the minister provide a time frame as to when he will present this motion to this august House?  

Finally, is the minister aware of the new international treaty on Persistent Organic Pollutants (POP) ratified in Stockholm in May 2001, which calls for immediate ban, withdrawal, retrieval and containment of a host of man-made poisons, including DDT?  Thank you.

4.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Emmanuel Otaala): Madam Speaker and honourable members, since I am assuming the Floor for the first time, permit me to make a formal introduction of myself. My name is Dr Emmanuel Otaala representing the people of West Budama South in Tororo District in this Parliament. I am also the Minister of State for Health (Primary Health Care).  A number of issues have been raised here in this Parliament and I thought we would be given time, as you had suggested yesterday, to answer all these questions. I appreciate the concern of the Members who give high priority to the health of the citizens of this country and I want to assure you that we the three Ministers of Health in this country are fully in control of the health status of the people of this country.

I will go directly to answering the question that has been raised by my colleague regarding the status of Malaria. We have a comprehensive plan of how we are combating this number one killer disease in this country. We appreciate the fact that everyday Malaria kills over 330 people in this country and that is the reason we need to give precedence to the fight against Malaria. The fight against Malaria is the onus of all of us. 
 
We have a comprehensive plan of social mobilisation, a plan of indoor residual spray of Malaria. I am happy to report to this House that on 30 June 2006, the Minister of Health launched indoor residual spray of Malaria in Kabale, which is in the western part of this country. We are targeting the other highland areas in Mbale and Kapchorwa.  However, we are not using DDT as of now 
but ICON, which is fairly safe according to the standards already established.
 
What I can say about DDT is that, we have been doing many consultations with various stakeholders and other agencies. In fact, last week a team from my ministry was in Brazzaville to talk about DDT. We are aware of the Stockholm Convention that gives WHO the authority to use DDT for control of vectors including the mosquitoes. We are fully aware of that convention and we are doing everything possible to see that we consult all the various stakeholders so that by the time we introduce DDT for the spray of mosquitoes, we all agree that it is the right drug for us to use other than ICON which is fairly expensive. 

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like the honourable minister to help me understand this. He said they have targeted the highlands of Uganda first and he mentioned Kabale, Mbale and Kapchorwa. I would like to know whether Bundibugyo and Kasese are on the low land. Aren’t children in those two areas dying in great numbers? The report shows that Bundibugyo’s children are greatly affected by Malaria. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, did you say you are going to answer these issues comprehensively when you bring the ministry response? Maybe let us wait until you give us the answer.

MR OTAALA: Madam Speaker, when you give us the time, we are going to answer all those questions that were raised here last week and even early this week. However, I will give just a quick answer to the question regarding other areas. We are starting with epidemic prone areas and rolling out to other areas. These highland areas get very severe forms of Malaria and I want to assure the honourable member that we are going to roll out this plan.  These are the most epidemic prone and that is where we have focused our targets first.

4.18
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Francis Epetait):  Madam Speaker, the question raised by hon. Odit is very pertinent. After all, even in the State of the Nation Address, the President hinted on it. In reaction to what the minister has just submitted about the ICON being used, I am sure it is fairly safe. I have to inform you that the programme of residual spraying, that you are talking about, actually started much earlier than 30 June 2006.  The actual residual spraying started in Kabale on 19 June and there are reports that two students from St Paul Seminary School have died and –[Mr Kubeketerya: “Information”]- why don’t you hold your patience please? Therefore, I would like to know whether an EIA study was also undertaken for the same. We would like to combat the killer disease but we should do it in a safe manner, lest we incur more losses.  

I want you to state to this House what the likely impact of the ICON chemical is going to be on the residents of such houses, which have been sprayed.  

Two, this issue of the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) study on the use of DDT; we all need to be fully convinced that DDT is safe. We have to get into this and look at this report otherwise, there is a tendency of certain reports being presented and then the contrary is done. We have to avoid that this time round because we are dealing with life and we are all interested in saving life with whichever mechanism.

DR LYOMOKI: The honourable shadow minister has said two children died and I think he meant that they died because of the spray. However, one of the children died of cerebral Malaria and the other, Asthma. Therefore, I do not know why you do not get information. We got this information from the medical fraternity clearly. The argument could be that maybe the spray could have reinstated Asthma on the second case but for asthmatic cases, all sprays are reactive. Therefore, in terms of the direct cause of death for these two students, it was not ICON spray. This is very clear and, therefore, you should not mislead the House. Thank you.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, I am an OB of the school where the students died. Those students were sick before the spray. Two, the spray began in my own sub-county and no adverse affect has been reported.

MR OTAALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  In response to my shadow colleague, I would like to make a clarification that we started spraying ICON on 1 June 2006 and not 19 June as he stated.  However, we officially launched the spray on 30 June 2006 and for that whole month we have been spraying ICON in various institutions including schools and no students have died in those other schools.  In Rushoroza Seminary, which he refers to where two students died, my colleagues have already actually clarified that by the time of the spray, these students were already admitted. One of them was admitted in a private clinic, another in the school sickbay. They died of Asthma and cerebral Malaria. Therefore, these two incidents are not in any way related to the ICON spray. 

I want to assure this House that before the spray was started, an EIA was done which revealed its safety. Generally, before each episode of spray, the people are educated about the necessary measures to be taken. Actually, they do not enter the houses within two hours of spray and all the other details are normally given to them.

In addition to that, I assure this House that a post-mortem was done on both the students and there is no relationship whatsoever to the ICON. I also stated that ICON is three times more expensive than DDT. However, because there are still controversies surrounding DDT, that is why we are not sparing time to leave our people continue dying. We have opted to use ICON, which has proven safety to start with the spray. Thank you.

MR ERIYA KATEGAYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we are playing with the lives of our people. Malaria kills more people than AIDs in this country. Now we are just playing around with the measures being taken, be it DDT or ICON. In my view, the Minister of Health should come out and tell us how to combat mosquitoes and eradicate Malaria instead of getting this debate, which I think is fuelled by pharmaceutical companies, who have their business here. Because I have heard of two reports on ICON and DDT and some people are saying DDT can do the job. I remember sometime back in the 1950s when we had tsetse flies in Mbarara, there was also debate - you know DDT kills snakes, flies, and all that talk yet our problem was tsetse flies. They were killed and the land is good. The population has even gone up. 

I am concerned that we should involve ourselves in this debate instead of coming out with our own solution about Malaria. Malaria must be eradicated. The debate seems to say, “Okay DDT is cheaper but it has effects on –“. There is no definite position to say ICON is better than DDT. At least what the minister has said is that ICON is more expensive than DDT. According to what I saw in the papers today, ICON is supported by Mr Bush. 

I am not sure if we have done research as to whether there is some connection between Bush and the company, which makes ICON. We know what they are doing in Iraq. I do not think as Ugandans we should be chased around. Why don’t we do our own assessment and take a position? The most important thing is that mosquitoes must be killed. For me I have no kindness for mosquitoes –(Laughter)- because these days you go to the village and find that people are dying in thousands. Ministry of Health cannot give adequate treatment on Malaria –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, in relation to what hon. Kategaya is saying, all the regulations and the vaccinations that we have been using in this country have a direct result of recommendation from the World Health Organisation. I would like to find out from hon. Kategaya or whoever may be in the know, like the Minister of Health, what is the position of the World Health Organisation about the use of DDT in the eradication of Malaria? We have centred this debate as a local issue in Uganda without seeking some views from knowledgeable professional bodies. What does WHO say, so that we may have some third party opinion, which could help us save our people? I do not know whether it is hon. Kategaya or the Minister of Health who may have the information to give the clarification.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Basing on the response of the Minister of Health, it has been the practice by his ministry whether for immunisation or any other programme to do very intensive sensitisation. I, therefore, find it disappointing that the honourable Minister of Health should say here that one of the students died of Asthma. You know that Asthma has allergy related complications. That is common knowledge. It could be dust, it could be flowers, it could be anything and it could therefore be ICON. I wonder whether the minister has actually launched a sensitisation campaign so that such incidences are not just denied but taken care of so that they do not happen.

MR KATEGAYA: Madam Speaker, hon. Dombo talked of World Health Organisation. Honourable members, this World Health Organisation and the rest of other organisations are not the “popes” in these matters. They have interests that they are serving. In South Africa, they are using DDT because they are manufacturing it. They have used it to eradicate mosquitoes. South Africa has better capacity to work on these drugs than our oppressed institutions here. For me, I have no problem with DDT, I can tell you. I have personally studied this problem and I have no problem with DDT. 

What I am concerned about is ourselves dancing between these pharmaceutical companies. Whether we use DDT or ICON, all we want is to get rid of mosquitoes. This is the point I am raising and I think the Minister of Health should come and help us. These pharmaceutical companies should not toss us about. They have their programmes and we must have our own.  

Secondly - of course I am in government - with due respect to the Ministry of Health, when they say they are starting with highlands, this is fire brigade fighting in my view. Lowlands have had more mosquitoes than highlands for a long time. The only difference is that, the lowland people have got more immunity than their counterparts in the highlands. My brothers and sisters from Kabale, Kapchorwa and Bundibugyo had never heard of mosquitoes until recently when the temperature went up. That is why they have what we call epidemic.  However, the problem is not a question of jumping to Kabale or Kapchorwa and Bundibugyo, but rather, shouldn’t we get off mosquitoes? 

When I was the Minister of Foreign of this country, there was a friend of mine, Dr Kabayo, who came with an idea to eradicate tsetse flies in Africa and I supported him. He is doing a good job. Just to kill all the tsetse flies in Africa, because we cannot go on having these vectors harassing our people for many years when we are around. I would like to ask the honourable Minister of Health to come and tell us the cheapest way of getting rid of mosquitoes and, therefore, Malaria. In the villages, our poor peasants go to these clinics and say, “I have Malaria.” There are blessed chemists around who do not even get trained. They ask, “How much money do you have?”  If the poor peasant has Shs 200, he will be given two tablets. The patient gets relief for two days and the next time the Malaria comes back, it is more violent. That is scientific. Therefore, why are we dilly-dallying about whether it is DDT or it is ICON? Make a decision and we will get rid of mosquitoes. Thank you.

MR OTAALA: Madam Speaker, allow me to make some clarification and perhaps put this matter to rest.  We as government are committed to implementing what we promised the people of this country in our Movement manifesto, in which we proposed to use DDT to get rid of mosquitoes. To this effect, the Ministry of Health is going through the necessary formalities as a method of respecting the rules of law in this country –(Interjection)- I am well informed and I would like to continue making my submission. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him explain his programme.

MR OTAALA:  Madam Speaker, I would like to say that the World Health Organisation (WHO) under the Stockholm Convention is allowed to use DDT for control of vectors that cause diseases in the whole world. Very many countries are already using DDT, including South Africa and Ethiopia. We as government want to engage all stakeholders so that by the time we finally introduce DDT in this country, it is acceptable to all of us.  Dr Bimenya of Makerere University recently published his findings following his research in the western part of the country where DDT was used.  There have been a number of allegations that DDT causes impotence, but I want to say that Dr Bimenya –(Interruption)

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I get surprised when the honourable minister says that government is committed to using DDT. I am one of the exporters of horticultural produce in this country, a business, which I have been doing for the last ten years. I export pineapples, bananas and all horticultural produce to European countries.  There are rules that govern exports from African countries.  I own a stall in East London. You could ask any Ugandan who has been to East London and they will tell you.  Using these chemicals on the food for export to European markets is forbidden. (Applause)  

This country is 90 percent agricultural. For government to be committed to using DDT and we are telling people bonna bagaggawale - if you are to borrow money and yet you cannot export agricultural produce, what are you doing? Is the minister in order to say that government is committed to using DDT when we know very well that Uganda depends on agricultural produce?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister is not an Englishman. He may have used a strange word in expressing himself. However, I think this has now become a moral issue.  If it is true that this whole Parliament is dying everyday, where do we stand as leaders in this country?  If 300 people are dying every day in this country, I think we have to take some risks.

MR OTAALA:  Madam Speaker, as I was saying, there is a difference between using DDT in agricultural practices and using DDT for indoor residual spray of mosquitoes. These are completely two different things. I am dismayed that my honourable colleague is giving wrong information to this House. We are going to use DDT for indoor residual spray of mosquitoes and not to agricultural produce. This is controlled in use, which according to the Stockholm Convention, WHO is allowed to use DDT. I appeal to my honourable colleagues in this House that we are working on the necessary Bill to enable us use DDT and when it comes to this House, please give me maximum support so that we can save our people, who are dying. 

If you are really concerned, honourable members, let us fully support this Bill when it finally comes to the House. We are consulting with NEMA; EIA has been done and we are going to present this report to NEMA. When they give us their feedback, we are going to present the necessary Bill to this House. Thank you.

MR KATEGAYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform my honourable colleague who is worried about his exports. South Africa manufactures DDT, use it and yet they have more exports than Uganda.  We drink a lot of juice from South Africa here in Uganda. I have seen South African products in London. They are actually more than what you manufacture. Therefore, do not alarm us. The minister was very clear. It all depends on what you use DDT for. If you are not spraying it in the garden, there is no problem. 

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Madam Speaker, in all humility, I give due respect to the Chair and according to the Rules of Procedure, when you have a matter of urgency, you consult the Speaker. I would like to remind you that I did consult you over a matter of urgency in Amuria District. With your advice, I informed the relevant minister of the looming problem. Since she is here, as well as the Minister of Finance, would it not be right for me to raise the issue?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I wish you could trust me. When you came, I told you that there are a number of issues, which are coming up under private Members’ business but I would give you an opportunity to contribute.

MR MALINGA: Madam Speaker, this is not a contribution on the State of the Nation Address, it is a specific issue to Amuria District.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the State of the Nation Address is about your constituency, Uganda, really I will give you an opportunity to speak.

MR MALINGA: Madam Speaker, I am not contesting for the position of the Speaker but if there will be a strike tomorrow –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you might be the first person to speak in the next debate, please, I am trying to end this matter so that I start that other debate.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON THURSDAY, 8 JUNE 2006

(Debate continues)

4.44
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): I want to congratulate you and all the Members for having got here in the way they did. I have three issues to raise in relation to the State of the Nation Address. But before I do that, Madam Speaker, allow me to say that given the trends of the debate yesterday, it is like some people including me may think that if all Parliament was on one side, this world would not be having problems.  Assuming there was just one side of Parliament, would it mean that this world’s problems would end? Of course no, so, I still implore Members of the opposition to continue opposing and Members of the ruling party to continue supporting and we shall see as we head towards 2011. (Laughter)  

I want to thank hon. Nyombi for raising the motion and I want to support it on three issues: On page 7, I want to quote the President verbatim: “It is not useful to continue operating as if we are going for another election tomorrow or next week. I do not know why the people do not learn from God; God, according to Book of Genesis in the Bible, created the world and the beings there in six days then on Sunday he declared a holiday for himself.” This is what our President, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, said in the State of the Nation Address.  

Does the President have anything to learn from his speech? Because he is saying after six days you rest for one day; he has opened term limits and he cannot tell us when he would even rest. He is very reluctant to tell us when he will not stand; so what kind of teacher would is he to warn others?  We should learn to have manners and respect what we say. So, Mr President is giving advice that he does not want to use or even think of using. And these are the kind of people leading Uganda! (Interruption) Since it is not my maiden speech in this Parliament, I had given room for information but allow me to proceed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What did you say? You were allowing information; I thought I am in charge of this debate.

MR ODONGA: Oh, I am sorry, Madam Speaker. I am very sorry and I respect your ruling. On page 24, there are some Luganda words that appear in the State of the Nation Address where they say the NRM slogan, Prosperity for All, and in Luganda bonna bagaggawale which seem to be the most selling words in the country as of now.  If we do not stand up as Parliament, irrespective of political parties, to create institutions which can help us monitor the performance of the government, we are going to be the next victims in the next elections because every one is saying MPs - especially MPs on the Movement side, you promised your constituents micro finance. You have got the Minister of Micro Finance, Gen. Salim Saleh, but he is already complaining that there is no money in his ministry. It is a very unique situation, it is like where someone goes to hunt and ends up being hunted.  Now, personally I am not a cynic and neither do I want to be a pessimist but this bonna bagaggawale may end up being a “bamu bagaggawale”(let a few prosper). 

I rise and say with authority, give it four years and many of us will be victims of the failed promises. So, I implore this country because for all government projects we have a few beneficiaries. In fact, this is one of the unfortunate countries on this continent that about seven people are richer than all the 26 million people combined. I talk with authority, but I do not want to open many more front lines.

On page 28, the President raised the issue of health and you realise that for the last 30 minutes we have spent in this Parliament we have also been talking about health related matters. I have been meditating and I would implore you Members of Parliament to meditate together with me on the status of HIV/AIDS in Uganda. In the last budget speech, the Minister of Health could agree with me, the Minister of Finance removed taxes on condoms but I think personally the approach Uganda is taking to combat AIDS is wrong.  

My belief and philosophy is that, by removing taxes on condoms, Ugandans would be able to get it at zero cost but what is causing the spread of AIDS in Uganda is the bad use of condoms other than the lack of it. Unless we invest a lot of money in behaviour change, I would see a situation where in 80 years all these houses in Kampala would be free for those who will be alive to divide it among themselves.  

It is good the Minister for Ethics and Integrity is here; the dressing pattern in this country especially for the female is very disappointing. It has been revolutionalised and turned more of 360 degrees, which has not been proportional to the change in behaviour patterns of their male counter parts. We are imitating dressing patterns in Europe but Europe is a society where men respect women more and this is the reverse in Africa. 

So, we are going to see a situation where we will even provide condoms by force to all Ugandans but AIDS would still be increasing and as a father of two daughters -(Interjection)- some one is saying only two daughters! I have increased Uganda’s population and you must recognise that fact. Madam Speaker, thank you for the opportunity.

4.53
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): I must congratulate everybody who is sitting in the august House for having survived the storms. I must also thank the people of Kapelebyong and myself for giving me a second term in this office - I am the first MP in that constituency. I would have been much happier to thank the President for appointing the authorities at the front bench and if I had been also on the front bench this or the other side I would have been much happier. However, I have only a few points to raise: 

One, on page 25 of the State of the Nation Address, the President promised that the government had undertaken to pay teachers Shs 200,000 per month but unfortunately, for the teachers of Amuria, the ministry released Shs 2,100,000 for one thousand teachers in the month of May. In ordinary arithmetic each teacher would get about Shs 2,100 and when the release for June was made, nothing has been indicated for the teachers in Amuria.  

As we talk today, announcements are going on for a grand meeting tomorrow where the teachers are going to take a decision. Either they are being rewarded for the way they voted or something has happened in the ministry. That is the specific answer I wanted to get from the minister and I am sure she has some answers because I had indicated to her that I was going to raise the question.

However, on the State of the Nation Address, I want to start where hon. Otto Odonga stopped on bonna bagaggawale. You know we all want to get rich and Ugandans want to get better. Business in petrol is one of the commodities that make people rich; but for you to be a good businessperson in petrol, you must use the correct containers and stock petrol in a safe place. But if people have been taught that we have to get rich and when a petrol container falls off on the way and we all rush with our jerrycans because we want to get rich, it might catch fire and burn them.  

I would like to warn that let us put petrol in the right containers, put the right structures and put the correct personnel to administer the micro finance. Otherwise, in 2011, around May or June when many new Members will be in this House, we shall be sharing the experiences of bonna bagaggawale like what happened with entandikwa.  

The last issue I want to share with my colleagues is about the security. On page 16, the President talked about disarmament of the Karimojong. Honey is good, and when you want to harvest it, you put on the gear for harvesting it but also take care of the neighbours to the beehive. The Karimojong are being disarmed and it is the wish of the people of Uganda that the initial 27 people, who went to the bush and put Karamoja in their 10-Point Programme, disarm them.

For the last 20 years, I think the agenda has been minimal and some of the commanders of the bush war have started running away from the agenda that they set. We hope that the disarmament will take place to the end. You cannot build half of the bridge and think that you can cross the river. But we also want the government to take care of the neighbours and there should be a comprehensive programme to address this issue.  

On the issue of the Northern war, I am very sure that this is like two people struggling to sit on one chair. One person is already seated and the other wants to get to the chair. The one on the chair is holding firmly saying, “I am not leaving it” and the other one who wants it is trying to pull and in the process many people are suffering, the saucepans are suffering, the cups are getting broken.  

On one of the rallies when we were in Puranga, I told the people of Acholi that our salvation in this war is among three people: God, His Excellency President, Museveni and Kony. I am sure we can talk to President Museveni and we are telling him to use all the available means to see that the war ends.  I also told the people of Gulu that if I had the opportunity to talk to Kony, I would tell him to release all our children without any condition. 

The language used by the President here can backfire in future he said, “Even recently we killed a few of them.” And Kony on the other side is saying, “For me I have not killed.” 

The elders said that when Kony is in Sudan and Congo, the Government of Uganda is able to tell you the exact position he is in (in the Imatong Hills) the number of fighters he is moving with, and in which direction he is heading. But when he is Uganda, he is everywhere abducting children and it is after crossing the boarder that the UPDF is able to see him again. So the elders asked, “Who is killing our children?”  

Kony comes and abducts the children and they are declared rebels. The Government of Uganda bombs them and then it is proud to say, “Even yesterday we killed seven of them.” People are writing history. I would like to appeal to the two leaders (the leader of the Government of Uganda and the leader of LRA) that Ugandans want peace and they should do everything within their means to ensure that we are at peace.

Finally, Madam Speaker, may I request that I have an answer for the teachers of Amuria who are waiting to know why the government is paying them Shs 2,100 instead of the Shs 200,000 –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the minister said she has 88 questions. A number of constituencies have also got problems. We shall give her a chance, she is going to speak you will get that answer today.

5.02
MS RHODA ACEN (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuria): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to give my maiden speech in the House. I want to congratulate you upon the retention of your seat and also my colleagues who are here in the House. I also want to take this opportunity to thank the Parliament of Uganda and the government for granting Amuria a district status. I would like to say a few words. 

The President in his State of the Nation Address said a lot about security. Although most of my colleagues from the Teso sub-region have talked about security, I am also going to talk about it. I am standing here because we need peace for sustainable development, we cannot develop when we don’t have peace. I am sorry to note that the President in the State of the Nation Address addressed the Karimojong issue as a simple issue.  For the last 20 years or so, this has been regarded as a simple issue but it did cost him votes.  

However, resettlement programmes are good, but with a lot of challenges. The resettlement programme in Amuria district has been divided into three main categories, depending on the degree of settlement: There are those communities that are fully resettled and these include the sub-counties of Wera, Aguliya and Atiriri. 

Then there are those communities that are semi-resettled, and these include the communities of Kuju, Orungo and Morungat, which have a total of 15 IDP camps still existing. The unsettled communities include the sub-counties of Obalang, Kapelebyong and Achoa, which have a total of 29 IDP camps.  

Despite the terms “resettlement” or “semi-resettlement” some of the communities termed to be settled, as of now, either as a personal initiative, on NGO intervention or government intervention have not fully received resettlement chits and others have got completely nothing. But they have tried to resettle on their own due to the hard life in the camps.  

However, there are challenges: 

The uncontrolled raids from the Karimojong rustlers - we were informed that they are either thieves or cattle rustlers or warriors, whatever they are.  I want to inform the House that since between May and June, we had a number of atrocities which range from cattle, goats and poultry rustling, damaging of crops, torture and killing of people. It is evident and it is recorded. This has continued. So, the Karimojong issue is not as simple as it has been said.

Lack of infrastructure, social services and utilities in the areas where these communities are supposed to resettle is a big challenge. For example, water; you cannot take back these communities to places where boreholes have been vandalised. In some places they are non-existent.

Health: in some places the structures are there but there are no drugs and health personnel.  

We appreciate the universal primary education programme, and I want to thank government for the year 2005, whereby Amuria District had only one pupil under the UPE programme, who is to qualify for the universal secondary education. If this is to be appreciated, a little more has to be done.

When we look at the roads, many times after Obalang, the locals are maintaining the small roads.  The few of the above needed infrastructures were addressed or vandalised by either LRA or Kony and in some areas they do not exist as I have already mentioned.  


Most of the communities would love to go back home but the presence of insecurity is their challenge.  They appreciate the resettlement programmes and even want to go back on their own but lack of security personnel on the ground makes the exercise of resettlement difficult and has made the IDPs in some areas to get back to the camps.  

I had the opportunity to meet the chairperson, elders and some members of Obalang sub-county.  They have actually opted to stay back in the camps. They say that the UPDF is small in number and are being supplemented by a few Arrow Boys who are working under pathetic conditions. They have not been paid for the last seven months. They were last paid in May and they are threatening to lay down their arms and yet these are boys and girls who had good will for the community.

So in summary, I would just say that the community is urging government to compensate the lives and the property lost during the resettlement period, as government urged them to get back home and yet no proper protection had been given.  

The observations made were that, the lower local government and district local government aren’t involved in the planning of the resettlement process. So, the proposed solution is to involve both of them in the planning process of the resettlement programme.  

Then, also they urge that while they get back home, there should be a provision of infrastructure for the communities before they can get back.

They also request for effective deployment of the armed forces along the border with the Karamoja region and strengthening of the Police force to manage crime since there is a lot of crime.

Government should fully implement the IDP policy and set out special development programmes for the affected areas. I hope the bonna bagaggawale is going to benefit my people as well. So, I urge the Office of the Prime Minister, handling resettlement matters, to strengthen operationalisation of the planned activities regarding the IDPs. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.11
MS BEATRICE BARUMBA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kiruhura): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to congratulate you, colleagues. I thank God who enabled me to come to this House because it was very difficult. I promised to thank Him when I stand on the Floor of Parliament because coming, as an Independent from Kiruhura District, was not easy.  

I congratulate the Seventh Parliament for having given chance to Members to come as independents.  Thank you very much, maybe I would not have come.

Secondly, I support the motion and -(Interjections)- protect me, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, do not heckle her. You are protected; no one should disturb, hon. Barumba Rusaniya.

MS BARUMBA: Thank you. I support the motion and I have learnt a lot from this State of the Nation Address. First of all, looking at the President as somebody forgiving should be an example to the Eighth Parliament. Because in his State of the Nation Address he said, “We understood the problems in the primary elections and we accommodated the Independents”; I think that is very important.  That shows that when somebody from the opposition comes with an idea, which is developmental, Members on the government side should welcome it and implement it.

In the same way, opposition should support good ideas from the government side. For example, in the State of the Nation Address, the President said that the government is planning to give permanent accommodation to the suffering people of the North.  I expect the opposition and the government side, to support this programme and make sure those people get accommodation. The people on the opposition should not look at it as bad because the sitting President has supported it.  

My colleague from the opposition yesterday said they do not know where the bricks and all that are going to come from. But I think if the government can bring mabaati, the local leaders and Members of Parliament should come out and make sure those people get accommodation. Because when we are not here tomorrow, we will not be asked what good houses we built and how many homeless people we accommodated.

Three quarters of this House has ever been to Kiruhura District because you have been to His Excellency’s place. I know even those in the opposition have ever been there because before they changed, they were in government. When you are going there you think it is okay because the few farms on the roadside give that impression, but this is a district where things are not well.  There is no –(Interjections)- protect me, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, she represents that new district, please let her speak.

MS BARUMBA: There is no electricity and no tarmac road; by the time you reach there, you are all covered with dust. The health centre IVs or hospitals, which are there, have no operational theatres because there is no electricity.  

Madam Speaker, the honourable minister will agree with me, there is no girls’ secondary school. The girls mix with boys and end up getting married at an early age because they develop ideas early.  That is very serious.  

I am glad that now there is this bonna bagaggawale.  My people have fallen victim of these other micro-finance institutions and most of their bibanja have been taken as security. I hope when it is put in place it will help my people. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.16
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute. I rise to support the motion to thank His Excellency, the President of Uganda on the State of the Nation Address.  

I would like to thank the President in a special way for two things: One, the President and the Seventh Parliament gave Koboko a district status, and this has given me opportunity to move from the seat of disability to the seat of women. I thank the President for that – and of course unopposed -(Applause)

I would like to thank the President for managing the transition period. When we were debating the Constitution (changing from the Movement system to the multi-party system) there was anxiety that Uganda would go back to turmoil. But because of his wise leadership and able management of state affairs, we are here very safe and happy with our multi-party system. Thank you very much, Your Excellency, the President.  

On the issue of security, I am happy and I thank the UPDF for the effort they have made to chase Kony out of the Northern Uganda though there are some few remnants left. These remnants of Kony are hidden in Congo, in the Garamba forest, which is very near Koboko. His Excellency, the President mentioned that these rebels are in Ombonkoro, which means they are very close to Koboko since Ombonkoro is about eight miles from Koboko. The people of Koboko are worried. As long as these rebels are hiding there, they can match across and disturb our district, which is now aiming at developing.  

We are happy that His Excellency, the President has accepted the peace process. At first I was worried I said, “What will be his reaction, will he reject it?” Now that we are going to negotiate, please let us continue so that we solve this problem of Northern Uganda once and for all. I pray that the international community should not look at it as cowardice because they have not assisted us to arrest Kony in Congo. And we have to use ways, which can bring us peace.

People in Northern Uganda are now being moved to resettle, and I would like in the process of resettling people in their places to consider the vulnerable groups like persons with disabilities.  Quite often they are left behind in these programmes. 
 
The people of Koboko warmly welcome the idea of free secondary education. The only challenge I have seen is that, we do not have many secondary schools in Koboko District. One sub-county, Kuluba sub-county, has no secondary school at all, not even a private one. And now that we have the free secondary education, where will these students study from? Therefore, I am urging government to support our efforts of starting schools, at least two in each sub-county to provide secondary education for the people and the children of Koboko District.

I do appreciate the micro-finance initiative but the issue is, if you get the funds without proper training, will you manage them well? So there is need to have intensive training in business management, to start your business so that those people who do not know business can also start their own businesses. In order to ensure that modernisation of agriculture reaches every body both men and women should be registered. Quite often when it comes to training, only men are registered to train and yet women are the main farmers in the area. So, when they are organising the training women must be first, followed by persons with disabilities. Of course men will be there, but please do not leave women out because without training the women we shall not move an inch from our poverty.

Here in Kampala and other parts of Uganda, people are complaining about load shedding; but in Koboko we have not seen anything like power; we are in darkness. Some businessmen who can afford have several small generators, which are producing fumes that are dangerous to our health.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member.

5.23
MS JOYCE KWEBIHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): I bring greetings from the people of Kyenjojo in the great Toro to all of you. As you are aware, Kyenjojo is a district, which gave the President 91.8 percent to compensate for those districts where he got less than 50 percent. (Laughter)

I congratulate the President upon his victory. I also congratulate the Vice-President, the Rt honourable Speaker, you, Madam Speaker, and the Rt honourable Prime Minister for the victory and the key positions you occupy in the House. I thank you for the work because you do it efficiently. I also congratulate all the ministers who have been recognised and placed in the highest positions of our nation. However, for us in Kyenjojo we are waiting for reconsideration so that we can also share the national cake. (Laughter)

I stand here to add my voice to the mover of the motion to thank the President for his visionary and inspiring State of the Nation Address as delivered on 8 June 2006, in the year of our Lord. We the people of Kyenjojo have two issues at stake: One, is the issue of power and secondly the issue of bonna bagaggawale. I was comforted by the State of the Nation Address when the President stated that in the short term, we are going to have power and possibly surplus power. The situation in Kyenjojo leaves much to be desired. We have no power.  However, one good thing is that, the President has promised us power by the year 2007. I am, therefore, requesting the Minister of Energy and the technocrats to speed up the installation of electricity in Kyenjojo District.  

Kyenjojo District would like to process its agricultural products so that we become producers instead of consumers of imported products. We should be able to export to other districts and contribute to the GDP of our nation. Kyenjojo lags behind in development because of power so I hope it will be speeded up.

Secondly, we have appreciated the Prosperity for All policy as contained in the presidential manifesto early in the year and people have organised themselves in groups. The people are expectant and I request the Minister for Micro Finance and the technocrats to speed up the process and give the people cash instead of promises. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 
  
5.29
MRS FLORENCE SSEKABIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I congratulate you and the Rt honourable Speaker upon your re-election to your respective offices. I do also congratulate my colleagues upon being elected and re-elected to this Parliament.  

I stand to support the motion to thank His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President for a clear and precise exposition of government policy in his State of Nation Address of the 8 June 2006 as moved by my colleague hon. Sarah Nyombi.

I want to thank the people of Kayunga for electing me as their woman Member of Parliament and the first of the kind in the multi-party system. I want to thank the NRM government for promoting affirmative action and for retaining it in our Constitution even during the amendment. This affirmative action, as you know, came in to redress the imbalances that led to the marginalisation of some sections of our people in the past.  

Since the present leader came into power, we have seen great and fundamental changes in that area. I would like to encourage my beloved government and the ministers now to ensure that affirmative action is extended in employment, health service provision, appointments at all levels so that we continue to empower our people and ensure that in future the ground is levelled before scrapping it. 

I want to comment on the economy. 80 percent of the people in Kayunga are farmers so the issue of agriculture concerns us a great deal. The issues of zoning, high value crops, high yield quality livestock and the provision of water for production is high on the agenda of Kayunga and I call upon the ministers responsible to ensure that they come up to support us. 

Kayunga District has three sub-counties in the cattle corridor and many times we may be considered as the central region forgetting that we are part of the cattle corridor. So, I call upon the minister responsible, especially for water, to ensure that we get water for production so that we can be able to continue with our modernisation of agriculture.  

The strategy is appropriate and we need to see that the Ministry of Trade and Industry encourages our people by providing first information on available markets. The people of Kayunga are so hard working that once they know that there is market for a crop or any product they will always work very hard, but they are frustrated by markets. So, we need to have first hand information on markets and the rightful standards.  

Madam Speaker, I also want to comment on land issues. In Kayunga District, the absentee landlords are selling land and displacing our people. So, I call upon the minister to move fast to our aid; the President instructed this sometime back. 

With regard to the social sector, I want to comment on maternal mortality in Kayunga. For three consecutive weekends, I went back home to my constituency to find a woman who died in labour. So, the issue of maternal mortality requires regular reports on what is being done by the Ministry of Health. 

We know that there is no woman in the ministry yet, but we believe and trust that the men there have daughters and wives and should be able to help us with the reduction of maternal mortality rates. Presently, according to Dr Mugerwa Ibon, the Vice-President of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, we are losing over 10 women per day in maternal mortality. That is still high though a lot has been done since 1990 and we still need to do much more.

Madam Speaker, allow me to comment on education. The people of Kayunga appreciate universal post primary education and we are looking forward to the construction of more schools and the real implementation of the programme. 

On the political scene, I want to mainly thank His Excellency, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for having come out clearly on the issue of opening up the political space for multi-partism. In Kayunga, if he had not come out, the people were not ready to open up. As you know, he got 70 percent support there.

5.35
MR HERBERT SABILA (NRM, Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to join the rest of my colleagues to congratulate His Excellency on the State of Nation Address that he made on 8th June this year. This address was very well composed, very realistic and politically friendly. Just to allude in verbatim, on page 36 of the report, he says: “Although we have in place the three arms of government, Uganda as a country is one and the people we are required to serve are one. We should build the necessary spirit for the good of our motherland.” I think His Excellency should be appreciated for this type of statement. (Applause)

My people of Kapchorwa are also very thankful for having one of us being appointed a minister and they send greetings to His Excellency –(Applause) 

Madam Speaker, allow me to comment on a few issues. One of them will be in the area of cattle rustling. I happen to border Karamoja where we have cattle rustlers (the Karimojong and the Pokot) coming from. Wekele also have the Pokot coming together with the Karimojong. Well, this is a practice that I found when I was born and up to now it is still going on and sometimes I even do not know which government to blame because it was there even before the Movement existed. 

Now I am very happy and appreciative for the disarmament programme that is on going and this should be a welcome idea. We the Members of Parliament should support this programme. When disarmament is taking place in Karamoja, we know that, as hon. Okorimoe said yesterday, we would not sneeze once the disarmament programmes are accomplished. I want to inform my honourable colleagues that government is actually doing some good work on this. 

Madam Speaker, in April this year, the Chief of Defence Forces (CDF), Gen. Aronda was in the eastern part of this country. We had a meeting in Kapchorwa, and then he proceeded to Bukwa. He was meeting the district leaders to get views and ideas on how the disarmament programme could be accomplished without having adverse effects. I want to inform my colleagues that we should actually give our ideas to the CDF and the Minister of Defence who are implementing this disarmament programme other than criticizing without giving any assistance.

Again this year, in June, Gen. Aronda came back and was indicating the actions already taken, the gaps that exist and discussing with the leaders. I think this is a very good gesture that the Ministry of Defence, and the chief of defence forces are doing all they can to ensure that the disarmament programme is accomplished. I only have one question on this matter. My concern is that, as the cattle are being rustled, what do we do with the families that have lost their cows? 

I also wish to comment very briefly on Northern Uganda. I am one of the Members of Parliament that were in Northern Uganda last week, under the Parliamentary Forum for Children. Well, the situation in Northern Uganda, particularly the children, is not good. But government is doing something. When you are there, you will see the UPDF in effort; they have even rescued 17,000 children from captivity. And this cannot go without appreciation. 

Well, in the President’s address, he indicated that now that they have completed schools and health centres, he was embarking on cattle resettling; the people are now being given iron sheets. In Pader, I saw iron sheets; I even touched and felt them. These things are already in place. (Applause) So, government is doing something and we should appreciate that.

Finally, I come from an agricultural area and we grow wheat. Wheat is a very productive crop. When farmers grow it, they sell it at a very high price. So, the only problem here is lack of combine harvesters. I wish government could address this. We used to have them, but they have all broken down. That is a very critical area. I am also considering introducing apple growing. You know our climate is very much like those areas of Kabale where apples are grown. I request the minister responsible for this area to ensure that apple growing is also done in Kapchorwa, so that the slogan of bonna bagaggawale fits in that mountainous area as well. I thank you.

5.41
MR MOSES MUKOSE (NRM, Busiki County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to also add my voice to Members of Parliament and congratulate His Excellency and the Members of Parliament upon their slide victory into the 8th Parliament. I congratulate you very much. 

Madam Speaker, I also greatly thank the 7th Parliament for the great job they did to honour Busiki and grant it a district of its own. I cannot fail also to congratulate and thank you, Madam Speaker, for the energy you put in to assist Busiki to become a district. But as I talk, it is unfortunate that the Minister of Local Government is not here now, but there is a problem so far. It was stated that by 1st July, Busiki would be a district. But as I talk, the Electoral Commission has not come up to inform the people of Busiki when it will carry out the exercise of electing the LC V chairman and the woman Member of Parliament. So - it is good the honourable minister has come –(Laughter)- maybe –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, allow her to breathe a bit.  (Laughter)

MR MUKOSE: Okay, I will not interrupt her, maybe she will be informed or I may inform her about it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, just inform her.

MR MUKOSE: So, as I talk now, people are eagerly waiting to elect the chairman LC.V and the woman Member of Parliament for Busiki as a district called Namutumba District. So, Madam Speaker, I would at the same time like to thank the honourable members for the great task they have done to elaborate on President Museveni’s speech.

Madam Speaker, there is another problem in Busiki District in as far as sharing of properties in these mother districts is concerned. What these mother districts are doing is to send most of the interdicted members of staff; at times those who were retrenched are the people they are sending to these new districts. 

So, I call upon the Ministry of Local Government to come up with guidelines on how we should recruit members in this particular new district especially in the civil service society so that we get rid of that problem of sending people who are rejected from other districts, especially on the side of the chief administrative officers, the Deputy CAOs and other civil servants who head departments.  

Madam Speaker, I cannot fail to talk about secondary school education. The Government announced that, “During 2007 we are introducing (USE)” - which is Universal Secondary Education. But as I talk now, in Busiki we have only two government-aided secondary schools. So it will become a problem to assist my people in Busiki to join or to benefit from USE since most of these secondary schools are already full and they lack laboratories in this particular place. So it will be hard to assist in the science project, which is being announced by the Ministry of Education. So I appeal to the Minister of Education and Sports and his colleagues to come up with a policy of assisting these third world secondary schools to acquire laboratories and facilities to assist in educating the science project.  

I also do appreciate the Universal Primary Education as far as Busiki is concerned. For the last three years we have acquired 135 classrooms, which indeed has boosted UPE in my area because before, most of our pupils were attending under trees. (Applause)

Before I end my submission I would also like to call upon the Minister of Information, who is not here now - maybe you are not aware that Lusoga is being wiped away from Radio Uganda; and even other Eastern languages -(Applause)- yet Radio Uganda was the radio, which had been assisting our people to eradicate poverty, to teach them about Malaria and to sensitise them on the various problems. So I call upon you, Madam Speaker, and the Ministry of Information to come up with clear guidelines on how those languages should be inculcated on that particular radio.

I also want to talk about hon. Magoola’s comment on the pension project. She did not talk much about it but as far as pension is concerned, there are delays in its coming, but there is also a problem of Pay As You Earn. In fact as civil servants, Pay As You Earn is deducted the day you acquire a job and the day when you retire. So, I appeal to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to stop deducting this money from people so that this becomes the last type of payment that a person pays. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity you have given me to talk before these Members of Parliament. I thank you very much.

5.47
MR ERISA KAAHWA AMOOTI (NRM, Buruli County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity to address the august House for the first time. 

Allow me to also to add my voice to the others and congratulate His Excellency the President, the Vice-President, the Prime Minister, the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, the honourable ministers on the front bench and their counter parts in the shadow cabinet and fellow colleagues the Members of Parliament. I sincerely congratulate you all. I know it was not easy, but for you to have made it to come here is a great achievement.  Congratulations!  

Also allow me to add my voice and support the motion by hon. Nyombi to give a vote of thanks to His Excellency upon the State of the Nation Address. On behalf of the people of Buruli, I also appreciate the Government’s effort in increasing the primary teacher’s salaries. We also do appreciate the emphasis put on UPE and the policy on USE, and we call upon the people of Uganda and the hon. Members of Parliament to support this noble move to have everybody educated in this country.  

I am personally a teacher, and I operate a private school. I feel very proud to have been one of those who began the private schools movement in this country in 1988. I am the Director of Progressive Secondary School and this is a school, which began very humbly. We began teaching in papyrus houses without floored buildings, and inadequate scholastic requirements. In fact at that time even Members of Parliament were opposed to the beginning of such schools. We took our stand as teachers and insisted. We taught children in a humble way. Today, Progressive Secondary School is a great school in this country and I think you know that. (Applause)  Not only that, I feel very proud when I see myself in Parliament with six of my own students in the same House -(Laughter). This movement of private schools did not only end in our humble beginning, but also there are many other progressive secondary schools, which you have heard about all over the country. If you go to Masaka road, you will find so many schools that began humbly - talk about the St Lawrence schools. I am one of the founders of the St Lawrence schools and I am proud of that too. It began so humbly, without enough scholastic materials; we were there teaching in classes without much assistance - talk about the schools in all these suburbs of Kampala, they all began very humbly. This UPE and USE can become something very great, just give it the support that is required. (Applause)  

As leaders of this nation, it is upon us all to go to our people and encourage them to love this project and I believe we shall take off in Education and otherwise. Madam Speaker, allow me thank the Government on another aspect of supporting primary health care, especially in fighting Malaria. A lot has been said and a lot has been done. We are very grateful. 

We also thank government for the financial support always given to the non-profit hospitals especially the missionary hospitals. However, I would like to bring it to the attention of this House and the nation that the education sector especially the private schools seem not to receive enough appreciation. They are doing a good job; we are educating this nation, but not much is done to support the private schools. I call upon the ministry concerned at least to consider seconding teachers in private secondary schools. By so doing, probably they would be paid by government and that would mean everybody is being paid and the bonna bagagawale thing will become reality.  

Of course bonna bagagawale is “bonna bakole.” If possible, let the concerned ministry give a revolving fund to private schools so that we can effectively finance these schools and employ more people and pay them sufficiently with proper arrangement. If that is done, we shall be very grateful. The people of Buruli have many other things to report but of course I am aware we do not have enough time; they are very grateful for the work done there, especially on the Kafu-Masindi road. But the people of Buruli are concerned about Kinyara Sugar works, which is about to be sold; maybe we shall discuss that later, but they are saying that in case it is sold, do not let the Banyoro of that part of the country have a raw deal. 

We are very proud to have oil discovered in Bunyoro. The people of Buruli are saying that we should not have a raw deal about land. We have enough problems already; much of our land is allocated to the game park, which gives a lot of money through tourism. So the Banyoro especially those from Buruli are calling upon government that in case they cannot repair our roads and other things, let us have our people allowed to cultivate some of the areas being reserved for the game parks and forest reserves. They have nowhere to settle and some of these areas are set aside for wild animals, which are not even there in some places. Thank you.

5.55
MR HENRY BALIKOWA: (NRM, Budiope County, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to congratulate you upon your re-election to that prestigious office. In the same vein I want to thank and congratulate the hon. Members of Parliament who made it to this Eighth Parliament, I know it was not easy. 

In a special way, I want to thank our President for fulfilling his constitutional obligation to deliver the State of the Nation Address.

Madam Speaker, allow me to give a few comments on the State of the Nation Address. On the issue of security, I want to appreciate the role of this government in ensuring security in this country and urge this Parliament that it is collective responsibility to see that we ensure that security is attained in this country. However, the Government should do a little bit more to see that they strengthen security especially on the border areas since the President told us that Kony is no longer in Uganda, that he is in Sudan. So since he is in Sudan, let us tighten our borders so that he does not cross again.

On the economy, as you are aware our economy is doing badly but I want to appreciate the President’s effort to build two dams within 42 months. However, I am here to represent the views and interests of the people of Budiope constituency. 

My people were listening when the Minister of Finance was delivering his speech and I want to inform this House that in 1996 - it is unfortunate that I have not moved with my manifestos, but in 1986 the President promised power to Budiope people. He did so in 2001, but it is unfortunate that when the Minister was reading the speech he never mentioned the extension of power to my constituency and I know that is why the people entrusted me to come and demand for their rights. I, therefore, request the Minister concerned that this time around the people of Budiope should be accorded that service.  

Madam Speaker on the issue of transport, in 1996 we were promised a ferry. In 2001 we were again promised a ferry; in 2006 I am glad that the ferry is there this time but it is unfortunate that when the mover of this motion was delivering his speech, he said that they have started the work on Kayunga side. I thought Budiope should have been given that priority? Madam Speaker, in Budiope constituency the issue of bonna bagagawale is a common song. Wherever you go, people ask for money, but how are they going to access the money? So it is my humble request that the Minister concerned should come out clearly to tell this august House how the money will be accessed so that we can in turn inform our people.  

On the issue of education, I want to appreciate the President’s effort for UPE. Actually our constituency has benefited from UPE and I want to assure this House that USE will work because even UPE was opposed but in the end, with the wisdom of our President, it succeeded. 

So I know USE is going to succeed, it is only my humble request that the Minister this time targets the rural schools, not urban schools because right now, according to the Presidents speech, 53 percent are enrolled at the university, that is science based. But these are urban schools not rural based schools. So this time round we request the Minister to at least to consider rural schools if we are to promote the science strategy. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, there is something I want to say. Since we started this debate, 127 members have participated so I would like to put a close to this phase, ask the Government to respond and then on Tuesday we can begin the second phase of this general debate under the Budget. 

So, I would like all those members who would want to speak and have not yet spoken to register with the Clerk so that in phase II we start on the rest when they are all through. Then we shall give everybody a second round. You have time to register; the topic continues. On Tuesday we shall kick off the second part of the debate.  

The Prime Minister, I am sure that on Tuesday we shall have power from morning. In fact I propose that we sit in the morning and afternoon, to run our business faster. I am glad the Prime Minister has accepted. So, if we do not finish this phase of the business today, we can finish it on Tuesday morning and then straight away launch phase II of the debate.  

Let me give the order of the responses. First, the Attorney-General on one issue of regional government, followed by the famous Minister of Education and Sports, who has 88 questions, then the Minister of Public Service, then Defence, and Gender. Then the Minister in charge of the Presidency, the Minister of Health, the Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, Minister of Energy and Minerals, Minister of Internal Affairs, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Minister of Trade and Industry, Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

Then the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Minister for Security, Minister of Communication and ICT, Minister of Local Government, Minister of Water and Environment, the Government Chief Whip, Minister of State for Northern Uganda, the First Deputy Prime Minister, Minister for East African Co-operation, the Third Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Information and National guidance and finally the Prime Minister. 

But for those ministries for which nothing has been raised, you need not say anything, it is only those who have been touched in the debate. If you have nothing to say, you just give the moral support by being here.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural question and I would like to find out if we shall be allowed to raise supplementary questions. I realised that less than a half of the Members have contributed and certainly some of us have got issues that needed to be raised that may not have been raised and so could these come as supplementary questions if –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Like I said, if you have spoken in this debate, you will speak in the general debate on the budget and again we shall receive answers at that phase. So, let us finish this phase first. We will start the other phase later and then they will have to come back and answer.

6.04
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you, Madam Speaker for this opportunity. I rise to make a statement on regional governments. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, last year Parliament passed the Constitution Amendment No. 21 of 2005. That Act came into force on the 30th day of December 2005. Some of the most important provisions of Act No. 21 were the amendments made by the Act to Article 178 and the fifth schedule of the Constitution relating to regional governments thus section 4 of the Act replaced Article 178 of the Constitution with a new Article, which provides for the formation of regional governments.  

Article 178 and the fifth Schedule provide for the manner of establishing regional governments, the responsibility and functions of regional governments, the requirement for each regional government to have a regional assembly, regional ministers. It also details the functions and services of regional governments and funding of regional governments.  

Article 178(13) of the Constitution provides that regional governments shall commence on 1st July 2006. This date has already passed my statement today. Therefore, I am particularly concerned with this date and to explain the stand of government as to the consequences and implications of the passing of this date.  

Madam Speaker, in my view the passing of the date of 1st July 2006 is not fatal in any sense. Article 178(13) is intended to prescribe the date on and after which regional governments can be formed as provided for in Article 178 of the Constitution and the fifth schedule. Article 178 prescribes procedures for bringing into being of regional governments. Therefore, the first of July is the earliest date when these procedures can begin.  

It was also considered as a convenient date for budgeting and planning purposes for catering for the regional governments thus Article 178(1) provides that two or more districts may corporate to form a regional government to perform the functions and services specified in the fifth schedule to the Constitution.

Article 178(2) provides that a district shall not be taken to have agreed to enter into a cooperation arrangement to form a regional government unless: 

(a)	A resolution for the purpose has been approved by the district council/by the majority of two thirds of the members of the district council 

(b)	The decision of a district council has been ratified by not less than two thirds of the sub county councils in the district.

Article 178(3) provides that the districts of Buganda, Bunyoro, Busoga, Acholi, Lango specified in the first schedule to the Constitution shall be deemed to have agreed to form regional governments for the purposes of Article 178. Therefore, the districts in these five regions are not required to pass the resolutions referred to in Article 178.  

Even so, the operationalisation of regional government can only practically be given effect when Article 178 and the fifth schedule are fully operationalised by Parliament. Article 178(5) requires each regional government to form a regional assembly.

Under Article 178(6), a regional government shall be a body corporate with power to sue and to be sued. And Article 178(7) provides that a regional government is the highest political authority within the region and it shall have political, legislative, executive, administrative and cultural functions in the region. 

Article 178(8) provides that a regional government shall in particular have a relation to the regional functions and services conferred upon a regional government in the fifth schedule to the Constitution and may make laws, which shall have the force of law. 

Article 178(12) provides that the fifth schedule to the Constitution shall have effect in respect of the matters specified in relation to regional governments, including among others, details about a regional assembly, voting in the assembly, regional ministers, funding of regional governments and detailed functions and services to be performed by the regional government.  

In addition to the procedures and steps required to be taken in order to realistically bring regional governments fully into being, there are various matters, which the Constitution requires the Parliament to determine or prescribe concerning regional governments. A Bill to give effect to these arrangements should be brought in the near future to Parliament for Parliament to prescribe these matters. The matters to be determined or prescribed by Parliament and the steps to be taken by government, which are to be included in the proposed Bill include the following:

(a)	Following Article 178(4), the creation by Parliament of Mengo and Hoima Municipalities.  
(b)	Article 178(a), section 5 of the Act, grants for districts, not forming regional governments.  
(c)	Following the full schedule in paragraph 2, you need an Act of Parliament to prescribe a composition of a regional assembly.
(d)	In paragraph 4(4), you need an Act of Parliament to prescribe the grounds and procedure for removing regional chairpersons.
(e)	Paragraph 5(2), Parliament must determine the number of regional ministers.
(f)	Paragraph 8(2)(c), Parliament shall prescribe the benefits to be enjoyed by traditional or cultural leaders under Article 246 of the Constitution.  
(g)	Paragraph 10(3), Parliament shall prescribe the manner of representation of regional land boards on district land boards.
(h)	Paragraph 13; prescribe for the administration of national and cultural sites.

And paragraph 14 provides for take over of regional governments by the President. The manner to be prescribed will be similar to that, which exists for the districts in Article 202 of the Constitution.  

In conclusion, the primary model for establishing regional government is provided for in Article 178(1) in the following terms:

Two or more districts may corporate to form a regional government to perform the functions and services specified in the Constitution. The exceptional to this model is provided for in Article 178(3), which states: “Subject to clause (1) and provisions of this Constitution, the districts of the regions of Buganda, Bunyoro, Busoga, Acholi and Lango, as specified in the First Schedule shall be deemed to have agreed to form regional governments for purposes of this Article.” 

I construe Article 178(13) to be the enabling provision in determining the earliest time when the processes of establishing regional government would legitimately and lawfully commence. The Government is already seized with the matter and will soon bring a Bill or Bills to Parliament for the operationalisation of regional governments.  

Madam Speaker and honourable Members, I thank you for your patience. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Attorney-General.

6.15
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I said, many comments and questions were raised about the policies, management and practices in the education sector from primary to university and I think I will adopt the omnibus approach, where I will just categorise the answers to avoid answering one by one, because most of the comments and questions were related.  

I have categorised the answers into six groups. One, which I think is a very important statement to make to this House, is readiness for implementing universal post-primary education and training. That is a major policy shift in our system and probably this being the first time to state it officially here in Parliament. I will explain it in more details.

The second group of questions and comments concern the quality of UPE in the country over the nine years now since it was launched. Many colleagues raised a lot of questions and comments on that issue.

Thirdly, the Kyambogo University staff concerns, I have addressed those ones, and I think I will not go back to that.

The fourth category of comments and answers concern teacher’s salaries, arrears and shortfalls, and other questions concern the teachers’ training, recruitment and transfers. I will briefly give answers to those.

The fifth category of questions and comments relate to university education and admissions to public universities in the country. Then the final group of comments concern the science education policy in the country. 

Let me start by the issue of readiness of the Ministry of Education and Sports, and indeed government to implement the universal post-primary education programme.

Madam Speaker and dear colleagues, allow me to give a lengthy preamble to this matter. I am making this public statement for the first time on this programme and I think I should give a little bit of preamble.  

Readiness to implement universal primary education and training should not be perceived only in terms of resource inputs as many Members have been asking about classrooms, laboratories, teachers, and so on.  

It should also be considered from the national policy framework. I am inviting my colleagues to consider readiness to implement this programme, to start the programme from a broader perspective of macro-development policies in the country. 

Education is not based only on inputs, but it is based on the programme the country has for the development of her people. In a broader perspective, these macro-programmes of policies include the following:

Vision 2035 - many Members of this House might have read the vision of our country, which is code named 2035.

The second is the education for all the Millennium Development Goals 2015. As a country we are committed to those objectives and goals and indeed if we are talking about our education, we have to link with such macro-policies - the national human resource development policies, because many of us are aware that education is the base for human resource development, though some may say health and others. The force “macro programme” is the enhanced economic production, based on industrialisation and improved export. 

My colleagues here in those areas know that we cannot improve economic production without increased investment in education. Social class, social transformation and social integration; these are all macro programmes and policies, which have got direct link with education.  

Madam Speaker, we are all aware of this democratisation process and we require that people be educated to a certain level if we are to develop democracy in the country. Therefore, when we talk about secondary education I believe we are on the right track. 

Concerning cultural growth, culture grows as people develop. Therefore, if we want to see a dynamic trend in the cultural growth of this country we need to educate the people beyond primary education. 

Concerning the general improvement of the lives of the people, whereas primary education will help, secondary education will do better. Madam Speaker, available literature on human resource development indicates that the level of education attained not only determines the rate at which a country develops and grows but also the nature and scope of that development. Literature also goes on to equate the levels of resource investment in education with socio-economic benefits gained by individuals, families, communities, society in general and the nation at large. With that background, universal post-primary education will serve as an empowerment strategy for people to improve their lives.  

Uganda has over the past nine years invested heavily in Universal Primary Education (UPE) and about 0.8 million children have completed P.7 so far. Out of these only 50 percent have transited to post-primary education; the others have not been able to continue due to lack of fees. This scenario has greatly affected children from poor families especially those in the rural areas and in areas affected by the insurgency. Therefore, when we talk about readiness - and I have listened to my colleagues ask whether we are ready - can we be more ready taking into consideration the reasons I have given above to start universal post-primary education? 

An education system is ingrained in the macro policies of a country. If we are saying we are not ready then we are not really committed to the macro policies, which I have listed above. Personally I believe we have been ready since yesterday for this programme. Against that background, the NRM Government made a commitment through the President to provide universal post-primary education and training, which is commonly known as Universal Secondary Education. And what are the policy objectives of this programme?  

One, increasing equitable access to post-primary education. Right now this access is not equitable as it is only the rich and those in some urban areas with the access. If we want to be equitable in the provision of this service then it is time we introduced the programme.

Two, assuring achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. These goals talk about gender parity, which if one stopped at primary education level would only take longer to achieve.

Three, enhancing the sustainability of UPE. I understand that since this programme was announced many UPE teachers, children and parents sponsoring these children are now working harder than they did last year because they are all looking forward to going to post-primary. If we are to sustain UPE we must introduce a programme to which these children can transit. Of course this objective will also include consolidating the gains from UPE. 

Madam Speaker, as a person involved in this area I must say that primary is very good but if enhanced by post-primary education then literacy levels will increase as it is at post-primary level that children or the people do more reading to ingrain literacy skills. However, if one stops at primary level then after some years literacy phases itself out. Therefore, to consolidate the gains we need to proceed to the next level of education.

Four, to reduce the high cost of post-primary education.  

Five, to enhance human resource development through technical practical skills and so on because at that level children are introduced to certain elementary and in some cases technical skills that they need.  

Six, general improvement of the lives of the people. This point is general but many of you have lived with people who have gone to secondary schools. In their adult lives these people are more productive and probably easier to mobilise than those who did not either complete P.7 or attend at least four years of secondary education.

Seven, enhancing other national social policy objectives including health. It is easier to deal with a patient who has been to senior four than one who did not even complete P.7. Concerning nutrition we do not expect mothers who have completed senior education to have children with kwashiorkor and other related problems.

Eight, concerning gender equality as I said at another meeting, this will be enhanced through education. We who are here are well educated, equal and happy, however, if we do not forward the education of women to post-primary level that equality will be very difficult to achieve.

Nine, concerning population control, family planning and other measures will be better understood when women and men are educated up to senior four level because it is at that level that they study biology and other sciences related to population control.  

Ten, as regards cultural growth, I have already referred to that.

In view of the above objectives and many others, we are more than ready and able to put in place a programme to implement this. 

I will briefly go through what we have drafted so far for this implementation. The policy will address universal post-primary education, which includes vocational education. That is why we are not simply saying universal secondary education, as it is only one branch of post-primary education. We are including technical and vocational education in the package so that we can equip young people with something at post-primary level, which is academic and vocational in nature.  

Eligibility will be based on successful completion of primary seven and successful achievement at PLE. Many people have started speculating that we are going to push everybody ahead. At this level no country can make that mistake. The investment is much higher as it is at this level that people develop their cognitive capacities. Therefore, if we just push everybody ahead we shall not achieve our objective. One must have completed seven years of primary education and one must have passed PLE. The pass mark is not yet decided but through consultations with you we shall agree on the cut-off mark. If we do not make entry specific and based on success we shall have disaster concerning literacy.

Madam Speaker, the available funds will only cover payment of non-boarding expenses. If a student is enrolled at Nabisunsa, Buddo or Mwiri, the Government is not going to pay the boarding expense because if we do we shall not be able to afford the cost as a country and government. Government will cater for tuition fees, pay the teachers and supply the books. If you want your daughter to sleep in Nabisunsa then you will have to meet that cost. Furthermore, we are going to look to private schools to assist us in implementing this program. (Applause)

Concerning community and private schools, we have currently 41 sub-counties in the country without post-primary schools. We are going to start with those areas and see how we can construct some schools there. In the second category we have 271 sub-counties with community and private schools but without government secondary schools. We are very grateful to the private sector as they have schools in those sub-counties. Because of the limitation of resources we cannot construct schools there. 

Therefore, we are going to get into an understanding with those community and private schools as we did when the UPE programme started and see how we can move together but we shall need a memorandum of understanding. (Applause) I am happy that you are clapping my colleagues but this process will be selected and verified. Not every community or private school will qualify. We shall have to inspect them and get into an agreement of partnership before these schools can enrol our students.  

Affirmative action will be applied as usual using an agreed selection criteria to take care of the girl-child and children from the most deserving areas and families. This measure will ensure equity to address the existing imbalances in the provision of education in the country.  

A question was raised as to whether there is a task force in place. There is an inter-ministerial task force, which will look at the details of implementation. They will come up with a paper that will be discussed by the stakeholders, including Members of Parliament. Under this arrangement this programme will start next year and I should say here that we asked the President for a year of preparation.  

Some members were wondering what lessons we learnt from UPE. With UPE children joined at any level and in one year the population in schools rose from 2.7 million to 5.7 million and that was a little bit heavy. Therefore, this time we asked for one year of preparation. Furthermore, we are starting with one class only. Therefore, the total implementation of O’ Level will cover four years starting with only senior one. 

Many people have been jubilating that they will join at senior five or senior three where they dropped off. We are going to avoid that unless we are advised otherwise because we learnt a lesson from UPE. We shall, therefore, start with one year and then the following year we shall add another and see how we manage.

Concerning how we are going to fund this programme, we are suggesting and proposing that each school gets Shs 7 million per term as a threshold. In addition we shall give what we call variable costs in schools to help meet immediate needs. The same threshold will apply to technical schools. Government will provide bursaries to those students who will enrol in private and community schools. If a community school like St Lawrence recruits our students under this programme, we shall pay them the same fees so that they can run their programmes. 

Concerning efficiency measures, we are thinking about double shifting. Many Ugandans will remember some years back that we piloted the issue of double shifts. Therefore, we believe that in urban areas where the enrolment might be very high we shall split the schools either horizontally or vertically so that senior ones and twos can study in the morning and the rest in the evening. We are yet to decide on which is best either vertically or horizontally but we shall consult you for your input on that. 

Regarding construction of classrooms, we want to start with two classrooms per site in those 41 sub-counties. These two classrooms will be for senior one and then probably a staff room. We shall continue adding classes as money becomes available. We are not going to put a fully-fledged O’ Level school on every site but rather embark on incremental construction. 

Madam Speaker, many colleagues have approached me about grant-aiding schools in their areas. We are proposing that this scheme be halted. During 2006/2007, we are not going to grant aid. Rather we shall be working on the modalities I have described above. Science laboratories will be constructed as money becomes available in the short and long run.  

Regarding recruitment of staff, we need 2000 teachers to kick start this project but we shall continue recruiting as we move on. In the meantime, we are carrying out a rationalisation exercise to establish the actual number of teachers. Whereas it is a public secret that we have ghost teachers, when we start this programme we do not expect or want them. We are also carrying out that exercise to establish the need right from the ground. In the meantime we need 2,000 teachers. Later we shall up grade that. We expect a full time teacher to teach 22 lessons a week. Normally a week has 40 lessons but 22 a week will leave some time for teachers to do thorough work.  

Madam Speaker, we are reviewing the curriculum as an efficiency measure. Currently there are just too many subjects and we think that we are not making the best investment. Therefore, we are looking at reviewing and cutting down on the number of subjects and integrating some to make sure that we do not have about 40 subjects taken at O’ Level. 

Furthermore, the core subjects will include Swahili. We believe that it is high time Ugandans joined the East African Community in the language area. We are still very behind regarding Swahili so we want to introduce this in the medium term in schools. 

Madam Speaker, for the financial year 2006/2007 we have Shs 30 billion as the kick start budget. That is why we want to move cautiously so that we do not spread out too thin on the ground.  

In summary, the Government has provided the most critical and basic requirements to enable us to start the programme. The mechanism for disbursing the money to schools will be worked out. An additional 2,000 teachers are going to be recruited before December and necessary steps have been undertaken by the interim ministerial task force to undertake further consultations to fine tune the policy and also to sensitise all stakeholders countrywide. 

As Members of Parliament we are organising a seminar where we shall all sit and discuss this issue and where everyone can make their input so that we can all move together. A national implementation committee will soon be appointed to draft the guidelines so that every stakeholder knows exactly what to do. I wish to say that this programme will start with effect from February next year. Concerning teachers’ salaries, their training and recruitment, I am very proud to say that the country has got many training institutions now for teachers and that the supply of teachers is no longer a problem in this country. 

This is because all the private universities have got a teacher training component and they are more than 15 of them in the country. Likewise, public government universities as well as national teachers’ colleges also produce teachers. So, at the end of the day we really have an ample supply of teachers. 

As regards recruitment, the ban was lifted although we are recruiting selectively. For example, currently we need teachers for English. I am very sorry to tell you, Madam Speaker and my colleagues that we do not have teachers for English in this country. God knows what happened!  We are short of teachers in that area, therefore, we are recruiting those teachers who can teach English right from primary level. Therefore, if you can please help us mobilise teachers for languages like French, Germany, Swahili and other mother tongues. Many Ugandans are professing now that they cannot teach in their mother tongue. No country can move culturally without anybody to write or read in his or her mother tongue. Therefore, language is a big area of consideration during recruitment. 

Concerning sciences, we have a reasonable number of teachers teaching sciences but unfortunately they are all busy doing more lucrative jobs. We need more science, technical and vocational teachers because as yet we do not have teachers to teach those subjects. Sometimes I feel like going to import some from India or any other country. That is why we are trying very hard at university and tertiary level to give buoyancy to technical and science areas so that we get enough teachers.

One member complained that the transfer of teachers is not objective. Transfers are very objective and I would like to inform the members that sometimes teachers ask for transfers. That is to say some transfers are initiated by the teachers themselves, others are transferred at the initiation of the head teacher for one reason or another while other cases are as a result of indiscipline where the teacher is given another chance to serve in another area. 

If a teacher has certain sexual tendencies in a co-educational school then we transfer him to a single sex school. Some teachers are attracted to bars and restaurants so we transfer them to rural schools. Therefore, these transfers are very objective and we suggest that they be taken as they come. Furthermore, the Ministry now has a policy to transfer teachers who have served in an area for more than eight years. Many of them become unproductive and sometimes the change of working environment motivates them to work even better.

Concerning salaries, as I said earlier on, my colleague will come up with supplementaries, which he has informed me will cover the shortfalls in the salaries especially for primary school teachers. 

Madam Speaker, there was a question which was very interesting. A Member asked whether Members of Parliament and middle class Ugandans have children attending UPE schools. My answer is, yes. What I need to explain here is that schools like Nakasero, Buganda Road, Kitante, Buddo Junior and Namagunga are UPE schools. The only difference is that some of them have a boarding component. What people did not know was that some of these schools are UPE schools. My own grandchildren are in UPE schools and I am very comfortable with that. 

I should probably add that UPE and universal post-primary programmes are addressing especially the poor. In Uganda we have that liberalisation and I am glad you are happy about that. We are addressing our fellow Ugandans but if you want to pay something somewhere else, then for goodness sake please take your children there! 

Concerning the lack of public schools in various parts of the country, Madam Speaker, the Government has a long-term plan for constructing schools in different parts of the country. If your constituency has not yet been reached then we shall be there in the short or long term.

About the university quota system that was launched last year, I am very proud to say that it has worked miracles. By last year’s admissions every district was able to field 16 students at the university. (Applause) I do not know whether my colleague from Moyo is still here because I have a list of names of students from various districts, including Moyo, the universities they went to and the courses they are taking. (Applause) I will lay that on the Table here for anyone who may want to check on someone who comes from his or her district because this was done very effectively. As soon as I get the lists for this year, I will definitely bring them for my colleagues. 

Concerning education in the Teso region, I must say that we have had insurgency in that area and this is affecting the quality of education in that region. However, government is doing its best to try and uplift the situation there. About teachers’ welfare, we are all aware of their salary improvement and I am very proud and happy with the Government for bringing teachers up to that level. And I am sure in Buganda we say, “Ssesolye bw’atafa atuka ku lyengedde.” This means that if a certain type of bird does not die, it will one time feast on ripe bananas. In future as we move on we shall be able to meet the requirements.

Concerning school meals, there is still a problem. This was a measure to improve quality of education but government at present cannot afford to feed these children. From the beginning of UPE the Government asked the parents to at least take care of that aspect. What is required now is to persuade them to meet that obligation. This is because even if these children did not come to school they would still have to feed at home. So, why is it so difficult now? Some people are saying, “These are Museveni’s children, let him feed them”, but at the end of the day the child belongs to the mother and father. We are still persuading our friends, the parents to feed their children.

About sciences I must say we are doing very well. May I inform this August House that since the policy was pronounced very many schools are working out ways of meeting that requirement? The public should be thanked and most especially the parents for the action they are taking in that area.

Madam Speaker, I think that in our best interests I will make more copies for ease of reference so that my colleagues can look at them. The lessons we have learnt from UPE are many. We have learnt that we should not have started all the classes at the same time. This has made work very difficult although at that time it served a lot of purposes. 

Secondly, we are looking at management and the provision of equipment. We are also looking at many other aspects about which we have learnt lessons, which lessons we should use for implementing Universal Secondary Education. 

Madam Speaker, with those few words -(Laughter)- I must again apologize, I have not mentioned everybody’s name and what he or she contributed. However, I thought this was the best I could do with over 88 comments and questions. I will lay this on the Table for further reference and I pledge to bring more copies so that other Members of Parliament can refer to these answers. It may not cater for all the Members because of the cost involved in providing copies but it can be accessed in the library. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. 

DR LYOMOKI:  Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, no, this is not a debate. 

DR LYOMOKI: But there is a point she has left out.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you have other questions that the Minister has not addressed, raise it in the debate on the Budget.

DR LYOMOKI: The question concerning nurses was asked but she did not answer it, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Concerning what?

DR LYOMOKI: Concerning nurses. The hon. Member of Parliament for Ayivu, hon. Angufiru asked the question. You see, there is a question of upgrading the nurses’ curriculum so that they start getting diplomas –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is my responsibility to ensure that each of you gets a copy of this document and the Minister will avail them to you. Whatever has not been answered in the general debate is in this document. 

I see that the document of the Minister of Works is small. Let us hear the contents.

6.52
THE MINISTER OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICAITONS (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There are over eight million pupils and students under the Ministry of Education and only 60,000 kilometres of roads in Uganda. Therefore, I will take the proportion at the same time that is to say 8,000,000 versus 60,000. My presentation will be very short. 

During the debate of the President’s State of the Nation’s Address, honourable members required clarifications on the status of a number of ongoing road projects, other roads and related matters in the country. I wish now to make this clarification in this short time I have been provided. I would, however, like to assure honourable members that since I have just presented to Parliament my ministry’s ministerial budget statement for financial year 2006/2007, most of the road projects and programmes will be found in that document and we shall have more time to discuss them during the debate on the Budget.  

Let me now make brief responses to certain key projects that were raised during the debate. First is the Jinja-Bugiri road. (Applause) I am glad to inform the House that work on Jinja–Bugiri road, which had stalled when the contract was terminated in February 2005 after the contractor had abandoned work, has now resumed under a new contract and contractor. (Applause) 

A new contract was signed on the 26th June 2006 and the contractor is now mobilising. The work will start this month and it will take 30 months. During construction the whole road will be maintained to a reasonable condition for the road users. I would also like to use this opportunity to assure the people from the project area that all the unskilled labour will be recruited from amongst the local population. (Applause) I would also like to add that the contractor’s site office will not be in Magamaga Barracks although the campsite will be in Magamaga. Also the contractor’s site will have its own fence and gate. It will have nothing to do with the barracks. The contractor will only move around as he builds the camp.

About the Kapchorwa-Aswam road, which was another issue that was raised, it is true that because of the terrain and the type of soils in the area, this road is sometimes impassable during the rainy season and the people of this area have sometimes been forced to pass through Kenya. However, by the end of this financial year this problem will be history. My ministry will spend Shs 3.7 billion on this road. 

The road has been divided into three sections namely Kapchorwa-Moyok, Moyok to Alek and Alek-Aswam. (Applause) A contract for each section has been awarded. These three contractors will start at the same time in August this year and work is expected to be completed in June next year. In the mid-term the Government intends to tarmac this road with funds from the East African Cooperation Fund as soon as negotiations with the Kenya Government have been concluded. We used this same arrangement to complete the Sironko-Kapchorwa road.  

Our third project is the Kabale-Kisoro road. This road was not mentioned in the President’s address. Actually in the address roads were not really mentioned because the contracts had already been tendered. Tenders were opened on the 3rd of April this year, evaluation of tenders has been completed and we are having final discussions with the African Development Bank who have provided a loan for this project before the contract is awarded this year.  

Concerning the Soroti-Dokolo-Lira road, this road will be tarmacked under two contracts: Soroti-Dokolo and Dokolo-Lira. Both contracts will start at the same time. A loan of about US $45 million has been secured from the World Bank. Contractors have been pre-qualified and tenders will be issued in August. Work is expected to start by January 2007 after completing the tendering evaluation and the whole process.  

About the Rwenzori Mountain road, the plan to construct a road across the Rwenzori Mountain ranges, which we call the trans-Rwenzori road has been de-referred in the medium term. However, the people who come from Kasese District know that a lot of work is going on. 

Furthermore, full reconstruction in first class tarmac of the following roads is in progress: Katungulu–Kikolongo; Kikolongo-Bwera and Mpondwe at the DRC border, Kikolongo-Kasese to Kilembe mines and Kasese to Fort Portal. In fact, Madam Speaker, Kasese District has got one of the highest number of tarmac roads in the country. In addition, we have worked on a number of roads leading to the mountain. These include: Bugaya, Ibanda, Nyakaringajo, which is about 25 kilometres; Mubuku–Ibanda and several roads in Bwera and Karambi sub-counties. All these roads go to the mountain to provide facilitation for the people and also for security reasons.

Madam Speaker, I have also noted other concerns such as lack of tarmac roads in Kibaale and other districts. Issues were raised concerning the Ibanda-Kamwenge road among others and of course lack of tarmac roads in districts like Kiruhura where I come from. 

More ferries for Buvuma Islands, was another concern that was raised. All these will be addressed in the Government medium and long term plans.  

Madam Speaker, there was a claim that government is developing country roads using the old master plan of 1972. I did not even know that such a plan existed. Government prepared a ten-year road sector development programme in 1996, which program was revised in 2002 and now covers the period up to 2011. A ten-year district and urban road development plan covering the period 2003-2013 was also completed.  

In addition, government is finalising a 15-year national transport master plan including a master plan for the greater Kampala metropolitan area. Roads will form a big component of this multi-modal transport master plan and as I said earlier, we will have more time to discuss details when we discuss the policy statement of this financial year. I thank you for your attention, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have done enough work for today. As I do not see the Minister of Public Service here, we shall resume on Tuesday at 10.00 am. The House is adjourned to Tuesday.

(The House rose at 6.44 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 11 July 2006.)


 


