Wednesday, 9 July 2003  
Parliament met at 2.19 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you realised yesterday, many of you were interested to contribute to the debate going on. But if we have to listen to everybody, it is necessary we programme our speeches so that we do not go beyond 5 minutes earmarked for any contribution. Therefore, we should be strict on time so that many members can make their contributions. There were members who I had listed yesterday- they are not here, I do not know- but please stick to 5 minutes.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE (SECURITY) (Mrs Betty Akech): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to apologise to my colleagues, Members of Parliament; the statement is going to be photocopied, and my Minister for the Presidency will arrive shortly to read it.  If you could allow us time at later stage to read it, because it is urgent, we would be grateful.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You do not want to read it? Okay, when we get the copies, you will read it.

MR LUKYAMUZI:  If the minister in Charge of the Presidency is allowed to read a statement without giving a copy to the members, this will be the second time we are condoning mal-practice.  So, in terms of procedure, should we proceed under such a disorganised framework? 

THE SPEAKER: Can you read the statement and copies will be distributed later.

MRS BETTY AKECH (Standing in for the Minister in charge of the Presidency): Mr Speaker, it is my pleasure to up-date Parliament on a subject that is of greatest interest to all Ugandans.  I have no doubt that members of this august House have gathered from various official sources the news of the visit of President George W. Bush of the United States to Uganda.  President Bush is due to visit our country as part of his current state visit to a number of African countries. The entire African programme runs from July 8th to July 12th 2003.  

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs in close liaison with the office of the President and the United States counterparts finalized the itinerary for the visiting President.  Uganda and United States government officials have concluded arrangements for President Bush’s stay in Uganda.  

The United States President is scheduled to visit our country on Friday, 11 July the 2003.   The programme provides for all activities and events to be at Entebbe Municipality.

Highlights of the visit:

On arrival at Entebbe International Airport, the President of Uganda, His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and the First Lady Mrs Janet Museveni will receive the visiting President of the United States and United States First Lady.

After befitting protocol and hospitality ceremonies at Entebbe International Airport, President George Bush of the United States and the host President of Uganda will proceed to the Imperial Botanical Beach Hotel Entebbe for bilateral talks.

After the bilateral talks, the visiting President will meet United States Embassy Staff and US nationals resident in Uganda at the same venue.  

The visiting US President, His Excellency the President of Uganda and the two First Ladies will then proceed from the Imperial Botanical Beach Hotel, and walk to the TASO-Center, Entebbe.  At the TASO centre, a receiving group will attend the official statements by both Presidents.  

Substantive issues:

Bilateral talks between the visiting President of the United States of America and the host President of Uganda will focus on regional peace, international security, international trade, technology assistance and bilateral cooperation in the support of the fight against HIV/AIDS.

Official Statements. 

The United States and Ugandan President will then make formal statements to the press at the Imperial Botanical Beach Hotel, and also at the TASO-Center, Entebbe.

Organization and hospitality:

Given that the itinerary of the visiting President of the United States will cover an estimated 4 hours only, it was agreed to limit main events to the bilateral talks at the Imperial Botanical Beach hotel, and a visit to TASO-Centre, Entebbe.  Invitation to the receiving and departure ceremonies is accordingly limited to leaders and officials with direct roles in scheduled activities.  Departure ceremonies will be held at Entebbe International Airport, on the same day.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to thank the Minister in charge of the Presidency for briefing us about the United States President’s visit to Uganda.  I have got three questions, and I need very serious answers to these questions.  

Government is not just learning that one of the most powerful Presidents of the World, President Bush, is visiting Uganda.  We here in Parliament are the representatives of the people.  The US President supposedly is not coming to visit only President Museveni; he is also coming to visit the people of Uganda and we are the representatives of the people.  Why is the Government briefing us at such a late hour as if we are strangers in such a central function where we are supposed to be in the forefront?  That is question number one. 

Question number two, Mr Speaker, His Excellency, the President of the United States is the second United States President to visit Uganda in the last eight years.  Why has Government not made arrangements for the Members of Parliament to equally meet the President of the US?  We can travel to Entebbe and meet President Bush.

The last question; many of you in this Parliament have read the history of the United States; the United States is a product of a liberation struggle for democracy and freedom.  President Bush being a conservative knows very well what it means to talk about the United States; they rose up against King George to fight the shackles of dictatorship.  That being so, Mr Speaker, the Movement Government has been in power for 17 years now –(Interruption)- yes, the Movement in general – as I speak now, there is still tension in this country and wars are still going on. 

The Political Parties to which I belong have since the visit of President Clinton been demanding with humility that whenever the United States President comes, they find us space to meet him because we are also Ugandans.  Why has Government not made arrangements for Political Party representatives to equally meet His Excellency the President? They are aware of the fact that the United States of America is a product of struggle of a protracted war related to freedom, democracy and the right to be freedom?

Finally, may I move that the Government of Uganda on our behalf as Parliament make arrangement for us to seriously meet His Excellency, President Bush on Friday?  Thank you very much.

MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Minister in charge of the Presidency for making a statement to this House and to the nation about the impending visit of President Bush to the Republic of Uganda.  I want to register a disappointment of the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs on the failure of Government to brief this House in good time.  

This morning, I heard from the Speaker saying he was also hearing this for the first time.  To me, it is a reflection of how the state is being run and the role of Parliament as an arm of Government. I do not think that kind of relationship will take us far in good governance.  I would have preferred the Minister of Foreign Affairs to make this statement because we will have known as a Parliament that there will be follow up.   Because it looks to me even in this statement, in the itinerary that it is a matter of the Presidents and their wives to talk to each other.  I do not see statehood at all. Where will the Vice President be and his wife?   Where is statehood in all these visits, because the more we keep distorting governance and the structures of statehood the more we diminish as a nation. 

What is the purpose of the visit?  Is it a public relations affair? Much as I agree they have done very well in the area of AIDS, but the glaring absence of Parliament is to demean the republic.  I know this will not be any lesson to our Government because it follows from President Clinton’s visit where we were baked in the sun at Kisowera.  We were baked in the sun and it just shows the kind of attitude that our leaders – (Interruption)

MRS RAINER KAFIIRE:  Thank you very much for giving way.  I would like to inform my colleague holding the Floor that in the last visit of the President of the United States, President Museveni met with His Excellency, the President of the United States in Mukono without the knowledge of the area Member of Parliament.  The honourable member of Mukono sat together with other Members of Parliament.  Thank you very much.

MRS MUSUMBA: Thank you very much for that information. I am very worried about the attitude of Government in relation to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  Is it an expression that they are incompetent, or that the role of foreign affairs and foreign relations can be hijacked at any point by the Ministry of Defence, and now by the Minister in charge of the Presidency?  Why is it there in the first place?  

As we try to rationalize the budget, if it is not relevant, why don’t you just scrap it?  This has created tension within the ministers themselves. Who is a super minister; who is a second class minister?   All these cannot lead to good governance.  So, what is the matter with Ministry of Foreign Affairs? Is he not able to inform this House? 

Mr Speaker, the way members are treated when there are such visits, heightens the fear of many democrats that we are not yet there.  This is not a democracy because democracy works on three pillars, and in this democracy only one pillar works at the expense of the other two.  Therefore, it cannot be democracy.  Can we use the visit of President Bush to deepen democracy in this country?

In the last visit of President Clinton, prominence was given to children as if these children would follow up anything.  They did the dancing but there was nothing about governance. This is politics, unless you have turned it into showbiz.  

I am sure part of the team that is escorting President Bush includes senators and other leaders.  Where are the leaders of Uganda?  Where are the leaders in all this?  Are they there to receive the President and shake hands with him on his way out?  Is that how we intend to govern this nation?  The American citizens could have met their President back home. They do not need to meet their President in Uganda. I mean this whole thing is turning out to be below standard. I think whoever is in charge of preparing this itinerary should register the dissatisfaction of this House about the way events are being managed, and the absence of statehood in the visit that is impending.  Thank you very much.

MR KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi):  Thank you very much Mr Speaker.  I am equally disappointed as my colleague who has just been holding the Floor. Is it because Members of Parliament are a security risk that we should not be allowed to see the President of the United States!  Or are we so ugly as Members of Parliament that this big visitor cannot avoid to look at our faces?  

Now, Mr Speaker, what will happen next time when you have another guest and then you invite Members of Parliament to come and welcome the guest, do you think we shall be able to turn up after this experience?  Because I believe out of the 4 hours, at least Government should have spared 20 or 5 minutes for Members of Parliament to shake hands with President Bush and that is what we call good governance.  But here you are leaving us out as a bunch of irresponsible citizens- (Laughter)- surely – (Interruption)

MS BINTU LUKUMU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and thank you very much hon. Kalule Ssengo.  I would like to inform you that all the workers at the airport and taxis have been stopped from going to airport– (Applause)  

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker.  I want also to inform the House that some of us who have been using that airport to export our little produce from today we are not going to do it! Some of my farmers had actually harvested perishable fruits and vegetables but only to be told that tomorrow there is no business at the airport.  Now, how would these people be compensated?  I thank you.  

MR KALULE SSENGO: I thank you for that information.  Now, Mr Speaker, I was imagining that the President of the United States of America would be interested in looking at Ugandans.   Now, if we are not getting a chance to wave to him or clap, how will he know the hospitality of Ugandans?  So, we still have a day in between, I would request the protocol group to see whether they can allow a few of our colleagues to represent us. We have commissioners in this Parliament; they can go and represent us.  I will feel satisfied if this Parliament can note our disappointment.  We are really disappointed about this kind of arrangement.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR MAFABI NANDALA:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  In fact my issue is about the business we are going to lose as Ugandans. Many of the Ugandans have entered in international contracts to supply commodities and now the airport is going to be closed for a good time. 600,000 people have already been put at a disadvantage.  The insurance scheme they carried out on their goods did not cover the visit of any President.  How is the Government of Uganda going to compensate the businessmen who have firm contracts if they lose this deal?

Secondly, I have been telling colleagues here that there is a problem in the job description of our ministers.  If we knew good job description, when did the Minister in charge of Presidency become in charge of foreign affairs?  Did they come to advertise that he is now the new minister?  I think we have lost direction.

Lastly, the President is going to visit Uganda and it will be bilateral talks.  What are those talks that we Ugandans are not told about?  Don’t we need to know them because you might have forgotten one important talk, which we would have chipped in for the development of our country?

MR MOSES KIZIGE (Bugabula County North, Kamuli):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.  I want to start by thanking and congratulating the President for having invited the President of the United States of America to this country – (Laughter)  

Mr Speaker, from my daily visit to the websites, I know very well that the visit of the President of the United States of America to Africa was scheduled a year ago.  It was only after the visit of our President to the United States last month that President George Bush accepted to include Uganda in his programme.  We must thank the President. (Applause).

MRS MUSUMBA: Thank you very much my colleague from Bugabula North. I am wondering how my colleague got to know that, because it is not part of the statement made available to us. I wish he would clarify to me. Thank you.

MR KIZIGE: Mr Speaker, I was very clear in my statement. I said, “from my personal research”; anybody can put in a few key words and make an Internet search and this information is available.  

Mr Speaker, it is the hope of the people of this country that the President’s visit will bring a lot to Uganda. I know very well that much of the money that is going to the UPE programme was a result of the visit of the President of the United States of America way back in 1998. If it were not for President Clinton’s visit, probably the UPE programme would not be where it is today. 

We are just waiting to hear the statements that will be made by the President of the United States of America and the President of Uganda after their bilateral talks, so that we know how Uganda is going to benefit from these visits. 

Given that the President is staying in the country for only four hours, it will be extremely difficult for him to meet as many people as he would have desired. But the concerns of the members are understandable. In future, it will be good for an opportunity to be availed to Parliament to host heads of state in Parliament here, such that we can hear from them on state visits. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam South, Apac): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I think it is significant and appreciated that the President of the United States of America should pay a visit to the Republic of Uganda. And if being so also, immediately after our President visited America. It is a very immediate reciprocation of a visit, which is not quite common, regardless of the way it was arranged. 

But what is the value of this visit, to Uganda and to Africa? Is it more for us than for Bush? My view is that after the monstrosity in Iraq, President Bush needed a human face, and the African tour - with all its social and economic measures - plus a bit of the handling of the situation in Palestine and Israel, is supposed to give President Bush an international face. 

I think President Bush is gaining much more than us because the international reaction, particularly in the civil society, on the invasion of Iraq definitely did not give President Bush and America that kind of face.  

However, Mr Speaker, the visit to Uganda has caused such tremendous and immense disruptions. I do not know whether those whose contracts and economic existence, particularly dealing with international flights, which have been disrupted by this visit, will not claim compensation. If we are going to avoid to pay compensation - fortunately the Attorney General is here - can this disruption be treated as a force majeure? So that it will not enable us to be forced to pay heavy compensations to the flights, to international airlines. 

An honourable member here has an export schedule, which has definitely been disrupted, hopefully these goods will not perish. I cannot see any sensible businessperson missing to claim compensation; and who is going to pay for this? Are we, as the host country? I suppose so; the Attorney General seems to think so, if I read his hand correctly. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, thirdly, the significance of this visit and the fact that the entire country is not being allowed even to get near the President of the United States of America, except the President and the First Lady, has the implication of declaring all of us terrorists! It has that implication of declaring us terrorists, who cannot be entitled to get near the President of the United States of America, and I think this is important for us to take note of. Although, personally, I have no desire, like my colleague hon. Lukyamuzi, to get near and shake hands – (Laughter) - with the President of the United States of America, because I do not see what I am going to get out of it -(Interjection)- I beg your pardon? Am I supposed to have tête-à-tête with the hon. Minister of Defence, or he should catch the eyes of the Speaker and say so. But we could have that in the lobby after this, and I will be obliged.  

It is very serious and it creates a serious attitudinal problem to us, as respectable citizens of this country, that this visit should make all of us people who cannot be trusted, in so far as the security of the President of United States of America is concerned. All our airports have been taken over, Gulu, Arua, whichever small airport, by the Americans. 

It is a terrible vote of no confidence on our capacity to ensure security in this country for any visiting head of state. I do not know whether a similar thing is happening in South Africa. But I would doubt very much if South Africa would allow that sort of thing to happen, particularly that would have the implication of sending Mandela to stay out forever. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, earlier the Business Committee agreed that debate on these statements would not take more than 30 minutes. So, I will just allow two members, hon. Wakikona and the workers’ representative.

MR DAVID WAKIKONA (Manjiya County, Mbale): Thank you very much Mr Speaker, and I thank the Minister in charge of the Presidency for the statement. 

I want to talk about organization and hospitality. I wish President Bush would make it a habit to visit Uganda. I live in Entebbe and for the last week, people have been working day and night. They have painted roads, painted fences, cut grass, trimmed the trees and all the dust, everything, has been removed. (Laughter). 

When we want these services, ordinarily we are told there is no money. But now if you went to Entebbe, you would, for once, think you are not actually at Entebbe, that an artificial Entebbe has been transferred to the old Entebbe. (Interruption) 

MR MIKE SEBALU: Thank you very much for giving way.  I do appreciate the point you have brought up about people being enthusiastic and doing work. Although President George Bush will stay in Entebbe, even Kampala City Council set aside Shs 10 million to prepare for the visit. (Laughter)

DR MATOVU BYATIKE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I think it is just natural for anybody, for everybody, when you are getting a visitor, to do something. Even if Entebbe has been clean, we had to do something more because we are getting a visitor. So, it is just natural; it is not that we are doing it for President Bush alone. I think it is always there. Thank you very much.

MR WAKIKONA: I know it is also natural to live in a clean environment. 

Mr Speaker, what we have been hearing from members here teaches us something. I have been working for Civil Aviation and we have always cried in this House for Uganda to have an alternative airport.  There are contracts, like that of “honourable national cake” there  –(Laughter)- hon. Mutuluuza, sorry. I withdraw, hon. Mutuluuza. I did not mention the name, but it is hon. Mutuluuza. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: When you said “national cake”, did you mean any Member of Parliament here?

MR WAKIKONA: I did not, but I saw him stand up. 

So, this teaches us that the Government should think seriously about establishing an alternative airport to Entebbe, in case of such. Normally we are told –(Interruption)

MR ONEK: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I was one of the founding directors/board members of Civil Aviation Authority. In those days we had a plan to make Gulu an alternative international airport. The French Government came up with 5.6 million dollars to effect that plan. 

Since I left the Board, I do not know what transpired, up to now. It is now probably eight years ago but there is no alternative international airport. Our current alternative airport is only Nairobi, which is not in our country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you. That emphasizes the need for an alternative airport. But we had also offered Soroti for the East, so that these things are balanced.

My request to Government is that let us introduce night work. People have been working up to 2.00 a.m. at Entebbe, and comfortably. So, let us light our cities. Now in Entebbe you do not even need headlamps to drive, every place is lit. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to associate myself with the sentiments raised by some of my colleagues about the inconveniences in terms of business that this visit will cause. But at the same time, it is important that we do a cost benefit analysis. I believe there is something that this government and our country will stand to benefit from this visit. So, as we look at those inconveniences, we should also have that in mind.

Mr Speaker, from the submissions of some of my colleagues, I have seen very serious contradictions. Quite a number of times many politicians from this country, some even from this Parliament, take issues that are supposed to be the concern of our people to London, to Washington, and we never have a problem with them. But I have observed that whenever the President of this country tries to also take his issues to some of the people where some of these people go, it becomes big business. (Applause)  

So, much as other people have the right to go and accuse the His Excellency the President in London and Washington, he is also free to make friends with President George Bush. So, if the President -(An hon. Member rose_)- no I will not take information. President George Bush is a guest of the Government of Uganda; President Museveni is the fountain of honour under the Constitution, so we should give him some leeway. 

I believe it is important that Parliament must be involved, but if they have not chosen to do it, why should we make it a big deal with President George Bush? President Moi has been here, President Mkapa has been here, many other presidents have been here but Parliament has never clamoured to meet President Moi, for example. (Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you. Mr Speaker, the role of the President, who is the head of state, is specified constitutionally. A President is a president and a head of state, whatever he does, he does it on behalf of everybody. Is it in order for the hon. Member representing the Workers to confuse the role of a head of state with ordinary people like me, who could go to London at our leisure and articulate our politics? (Laughter) Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: In view of which provision of the Constitution? But I do not consider you, an honourable member representing people, as any other person. I think when he calls you, you are part of the Government. I think that is what he was saying.  So, you cannot dissociate yourself from the Government as such; you are a Member of Parliament. (Applause)

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise guidance. I want us as African leaders to stop looking at leaders like George Bush and Blair as being superior to President Mkapa. When President Mkapa comes, no one wants to see him; when President Bush comes, everyone wants to go there. We must stop these double standards. Mr Speaker, -(Interruption)

MR SEBALU: Thank you very much my colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give is to the effect that when the statement was being made, it was categorically said that even the attendance of the bilateral talks are going to be limited to those line sectors. Even at the level of Cabinet, not every member of Cabinet will be there.  So, when you look at it from that point of view, I think it is a unique visit, which may apply in unique circumstances. That is the information.

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Someone said in his submission that what brings President Bush here is purely his selfish interest or those of America. But from economic history, I have not known any place where development has taken place without private business interests.  

One of the most re-known scholars in economic history, by the name of Adam Smith, is very clear on how selfish interests promote development. For example, today I could go to my place and discover there is no transport and I buy a bus and take it there. I will buy the bus because I want to make profit, but as I make profit I will also be helping people who do not have transport. 

Now, while President Bush may have his own private interests, Uganda will subsequently benefit. So, I do not want us to make a big deal out of President Bush’s visit. Let us treat it like President Kibaki is visiting Uganda. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Since queries were raised against the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, I think I will allow the Minister to answer.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Maj. Tom Butime): Thank you very much Mr Speaker. I will just handle only three points because I know that there are other ministers who will clarify.  

First of all, Mr Speaker, I look at this visit as an opportunity in terms of focusing Uganda on the international scene. When Pope John Paul II came here, Uganda was on the international scene.  Rafsanjani came, President Clinton came, President Mbeki came, and the coming of Bush is another opportunity on the part of Uganda to be put in focus on the international scene. I think that is really very important for our country.

The second point, Mr Speaker, is in response to hon. Salaamu Musumba. She is now the chairperson of the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs.  First of all, I welcome her as chairperson. We hope and we are prepared to work with you as a ministry, so that we develop and help the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Whatever you think is inefficient, together we will work to improve it.  

As far as the schedule of visiting heads of state is concerned, that is not the schedule of my ministry. My ministry is a facilitator, but the schedule is for the hon. Kirunda Kivejinja as he will elaborate when he comes on the Floor.  

Lastly, Mr Speaker, this Parliament is a very important institution in Uganda. For Members of Parliament to wish to rush to Entebbe to be seen is most unfortunate. (Laughter). I have heard of certain incidences where a head of state visits a country and depending on the time that he is spending in that country, he can address Parliament. Is that not it? Unfortunately, the time is so short for President Bush that he cannot come and address this august House here where we are. As for rushing to Entebbe, I would not be interested myself. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): I thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minister in charge of the Presidency will be clarifying on a number of issues, but I would like to make a few points.  

First, President Bush is here for very few hours. Given that fact, it is very difficult to fix so many things in those few hours, and it is important that we focus on matters that are going to benefit Uganda most. Normally when your are dealing with a developed state such as America, they demand that the President be informed of the issues to be discussed well in advance so that he has a well researched answer. So, we cannot just go on changing issues in an ad hoc manner; they do not accept it.  

The second point I wish to make concerns the location we shall meet him. It is near the airport.  There are security problems when meeting in such a place and they require specialized security arrangements, both national and global. (Interruption)  

MR LUKYAMUZI: I would like to thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for giving way. I would like to give him information on two issues. One is that a proposition of a meeting with the head of state does not necessarily mean that he must talk to us. We could even meet for coffee.  

Secondly, in the program that has been articulated by the Minister in charge of the Presidency there is a provision for His Excellency the President of the United States to meet Americans residing here. Could we not fit somewhere there –(Laughter)

PROF NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, what hon. Lukyamuzi has said must be dismissed with costs. (Laughter). And I want to save the time of this House by not addressing the issues he has raised. 

However, I wanted to also say that initially President Bush was not going to visit Uganda, but the President made a special request. It took some time before that developed country considered other logistics to accept the request, and I am delighted to inform you that it was accepted. So, that is a special tribute. It is a special tribute to the President and to the people of Uganda. 

I want to inform you that I represented His Excellency the President at a summit where we discussed trade relations between America and Africa. When President Bush was addressing us, he mentioned Uganda at least three times -(Applause)- as being exemplary in handling HIV/AIDS and other areas, and I felt very proud. There were 13 heads of state and on that occasion I was nearly the head of state -(Laughter)- but, I decided to remain the technocratic Prime Minister, whose post is guaranteed under Article 113 of our Constitution, in case some of you are doubting. So, even some heads of state wondered why Uganda was featuring so prominently. Many of you are not aware how much we are praised abroad and elsewhere.  

Let me finally say that Members of Parliament will not be ignored. For example, how can we invite people and do not invite the Speaker of this body; how? And when the Speaker comes, obviously the body legislative will be there. (Applause). But the Minister in charge of the Presidency will in fact inform you of other people who are going to be there. Yes, we are mindful of the role of this Legislature. That is why as a former Member of the Constituent Assembly I know that we played a critical role in upgrading your role. 

The task before us is to ensure that we have harmonious relations between the three arms of the state, the Executive, the Legislature and the Judiciary. I want to assure you that we shall continue having harmonious relations with the three arms of the state. If there are mistakes that have been made, and obviously human beings are prone to this, they will be cured. Management is a learning process. We are all not born managers, and we welcome your input. In fact, whenever events take place people should be free to have an assessment. There could even be a questionnaire so that you can give us an input, and other members of the body politic. I thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, SECURITY (Mrs Betty Akech): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You will note my substantive Minister for the Presidency is already here, but we agreed with him that I take one or two issues then he will take on the others.

First, I want to reassure my colleagues, Members of Parliament, that actually we worked together with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and other ministries in preparing for this visit. The Minister will elaborate.  

Secondly, I want also to reassure my colleagues that we will be having representative groups of people at the airport, to wave, when President Bush comes in with President Museveni, and their wives. We will also have a limited number of people greeting the President, and we will also have a few ministers. Actually, not all ministers will be there. There shall be a few ministers at the airport and at TASO. But this group is representative. We have some Members of Parliament in it, we have members of the Judiciary in it, and so on. So, we really have catered for that.

The third point I want to make is that Uganda is actually going to benefit from this visit because first of all, Uganda is a showcase in the United State and in the world in the fight against HIV/AIDS; the success in UPE, and in the fight against terrorism. Therefore, we believe that we should be able to benefit from the money that the United States has put to fight HIV/AIDS, which is US $15 billion. Uganda should definitely benefit because of its success in that. 

Uganda should also be able to benefit from some amount of money that has been put in the Africa region to fight terrorism. Uganda features prominently there and we shall also benefit from the Millennium Challenge Account, which is also a sizeable amount of money. The good working relationship between the Government of Uganda and the United States definitely puts us on the international scene, in a positive manner. My senior minister will elaborate. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the responses from the Executive regarding this very important subject and in order for us to cement the good existing relations between Uganda and the United States, permit me, under rule 40(1)(m), to move the following motion:  

“In appreciation of the good relations, which exist between Uganda and the United States of America, I beg to move that Government makes appropriate arrangements for Parliament, under the leadership of our good Speaker, to meet the visiting American President.”

THE SPEAKER: You said under what rule?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Rule 40(1)(m): “any motion raising a question of privilege”.

THE SPEAKER: Well, if you are talking about 41, it is about seconding of motions. Is that the one?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Rule 40(1)(m). Mr Speaker, it is rule 40, clause (1)(m). (Laughter). Could I justify the motion?

THE SPEAKER: Well, if you are talking about (m), is it “any motion raising a question of privilege”?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, the privilege of the Member of Parliament to move that.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear your justification of the motion.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I strongly appreciate the reasons, which have been advanced by the Executive, including the Rt hon. Prime Minister, but the main aim of this motion is to concretize the already existing relations between Uganda and the United States - good relations. Two Presidents will be visiting Uganda. This is the second head of State of the United States to visit Uganda. 

Since President Clinton visited Uganda there has never been any opportunity for the people’s representatives to directly link up with the President of the United States. We are the representatives of the people. The US President is not only coming to visit the Uganda Government, but also the people’s representatives. We do not mind even if we have some 40 MPs to represent us, provided our image will have been articulated under the leadership of the Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded?

HON. MEMBERS: No. (Dr Mallinga rose_) (Laughter).

MR LUKYAMUZI: Secondly, I have been moved by the reasons articulated by the Minister in charge of the Presidency, namely that the President is coming to ensure that Uganda is supported in its crusade to fight HIV. Who is most close to the HIV patients? It is we the people’s representatives. So, we need to come in so that we encourage the man to support us.

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, I think honourable members have heard the motion.

MRS SSEBAGEREKA: Mr Speaker, we have not heard the motion. Where is the motion, what is the motion?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Should I read the motion again, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: He read his motion.

MR LUKYAMUZI: The Motion is: “In appreciation of the good relations, which exist between Uganda and the United States of America, I beg to move that Government makes appropriate arrangements for Parliament or its representatives to meet the visiting US President.” I beg to move.

MR KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Mr Speaker, I want to say that the motion cannot be accepted on the ground that actually I have not given the arrangements yet. The clarification is that what he is asking for is actually taken care of.

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, you have heard the motion by hon. Lukyamuzi, a motion that was seconded by hon. Dr Mallinga. The background is very well known to you; unless there is any other person who wants to make a contribution –(Prof Latigo rose_) you want to make a contribution? (Laughter)  

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the good intentions of the mover of the motion. However, I think hon. Lukyamuzi moved his motion without making adequate consultations on this matter. And it is important for us as Parliament not to ridicule ourselves by moving motions that actually show that we are ignorant. (Laughter). 

Well, the motion has no effect. We have to be realistic about some of these things. The arrangements for the visit of the President of the United States have already been completed; and it is very clear that hon. Ken Lukyamuzi is not included on the programme. (Laughter). No amount of motions will change that situation, and therefore I stand to urge my honourable colleague to save us and withdraw the motion. (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: Well, I put the question to it. You heard the motion and its justification. You have also heard contrary views. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF THE PRESIDENCY (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I need to apologise for coming late. It is because I have been at the airport, doing some state work. However, I have been very much encouraged by the interest of members in the visit and arrangements that have been communicated to Parliament. As you ruled that a ministerial statement is not for debate but for clarification, I stand only to clarify a number of issues.

One, it has been said that the schedule of state visits is a schedule of the President. So, there is no conflict between Foreign Affairs and the Presidency. That  exactly falls within the ambit of the Presidency. That is why it is my honour to inform Parliament on what is going on in the Presidency.

The second point is that one of the President’s jobs is to try and create friends and invite people here. Definitely, we need to compliment him for having been able to be our biggest public relations officer for Uganda. (Applause). He has done the job very effectively and as we have been told, President Bush’s visit to Africa was fixed more than two years ago. He was not supposed to pass through Uganda by all means, but because of the persuasion and charm of our President, he was able to say, “Okay, I will be able to include Uganda, at least for four hours.” I think that is a very good achievement. 

We need to compliment the President because after all, he is one of us. He is the head of our Government, and he is the elected representative who spearheads everything in Uganda. If he does something good, let us say, “thank you”. 

With that background, I want to reassure the members that the intention of this statement to Parliament is exactly brought with the consciousness that there are three arms of the state: the Executive, Parliament and, of course, the Judiciary. There is very little interaction except when we have got problems and that is when we go to the Judiciary for adjudication. However, daily interaction of the Executive and Parliament is necessary in everything, because the Executive rules are according to the rules set by Parliament. So, if Parliament has got something, the Executive is the one to effect it; and if the Executive is doing something, it is just natural that Parliament must be informed. 

My coming here was actually to inform you that the country is hosting the President of America, formally. There is no way we could be able to bring that guest without informing you, and this was the way.

Secondly, it is not normal that before you are sure of a visitor’s coming, you go and announce to the people that you will have a guest; because he may not turn up. We do not want to have those embarrassments, and we had to tell you exactly when we are sure that the guest is coming. Now I can assure you that the President is coming. He will arrive here at about 1 o’clock. He will stay for four hours, and a scheduled programme has already been worked out. 

In that programme - I can just give you a hint as indicated here - all arrangements to receive him at the airport and all the paraphernalia areas that go with the reception are already in place. From the airport, he will go and hold bilateral talks; and in those bilateral talks definitely, we have our own national interests. We have peace programmes in our region, we have got a disturbed Northern area and those will definitely come up in the talks. We hope that during those talks, something fruitful will be able to come out. If anything comes out of them, it will be pronounced to you and you will see the fruits as we move ahead.

From there, because of the tightness of the programme, he will only have time to go and visit the TASO offices. Then he will go back to the airport and to other destinations. So, the programme is tight, but we have made it in such a way that a cross-section of the leadership and the people of Uganda will be able to participate in the visit. How? 

The Parliament will be represented and you know who the best representative of Parliament is. You will see him there exactly doing your job on your behalf. The Judiciary will also be represented. There will also be Members of Cabinet, because they are the organisers, and members of the public will also receive him at the airport. 

Along with that, there will also be citizens, very many of them, and this time breaking protocol, they will be on the tarmac. These will be ordinary citizens, because the special members like Lukyamuzi are represented by their big man. The other fellows whom hon. Lukyamuzi represents, their representative will be on tarmac and they will be there in a big force. Along the road, all the people who will not be on the tarmac are invited to be on the road between the airport and the Botanical Gardens, and to wave. They are all invited. The Parliament is too big to be on the road and that is why I have told you.  

Then at TASO, after the bilateral talks, they will make some brief statements to the press, to inform the world and the country what actually they have been talking about. At TASO, President Bush will be introduced by the President and he will make a statement about his visit here, and mainly on the problems of HIV. I cannot speculate on what he will say. So at TASO there will be special invited guests from all over the sections of society - about 70 to 100 - who will be there to represent society. All 24 million Ugandans cannot be at the function. 

We will also have a representative of Parliament. Otherwise, if all the wanainchi who vote us in would be the ones to come here, it would be very difficult. But you must trust that the people, who are entrusted to do a job, are doing it on your behalf. If they do not do it well, you have got areas where you can be able to discipline them.

The cards are ready and in fact members of the committees of Parliament will be part of those who are being invited. Actually, we have taken all precautions to ensure that the interests of everybody are taken care of. The most important thing is to make the visitor feel that the four hours he has spent in Uganda were too short. We want to make it very successful so that we can reap the maximum out of this. Thank you very much. (Applause).

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

(i) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2002/03.

(ii) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2003/04 ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.

(Debate continued)

THE SPEAKER: As I indicated earlier, you have five minutes each.

MRS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (Woman Representative, Ntungamo): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute to the motion on this year’s Budget Speech. I will begin by thanking the Government, and in particular the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, for a visionary theme of “increasing production for increased exports and eradication of absolute poverty”.  

However, I am wondering how we are going to achieve this noble theme when the most important resource in this country, the human resource, is ignored in this budget. I have not seen anywhere in the budget attempts to improve salaries for civil servants, the implementers of government policies and programmes. Mr Speaker, remuneration has got a direct bearing on production.  A well remunerated person is motivated to work hard and the reverse is also true. So, as along as these civil servants like teachers, doctors and extension workers continue to get peanuts as remuneration, we shall continue to see stagnation of government programmes in this country.  We shall also continue to experience massive corruption and shoddy work in terms of construction of schools, health units and roads.

I am wondering how the Ministry of Public Service hopes to achieve its mission of developing and retaining a competitive and motivated public service workforce when the workers salaries continue to be low at all levels.  I would like, therefore, to call upon Government to consider very seriously the issue of providing adequate remuneration to the civil servants in this country if we are to achieve our noble theme for this year’s budget, and if we are serious about transforming this country from a peasantry society to a modern one.  

The second issue is on health.  I would like to appreciate the increase in the budget for the health sector.  However, I wish to point out that the money allocated to referral hospitals in the districts is inadequate.  In the last session, I was privileged to be co-opted on the Social Services Committee that visited the south western region, and what we witnessed there is unbelievable.  All the hospitals are in serious need of renovation and facilities like x-ray machines are non-functional. 
 
Now while I commend Governments efforts to bring health services nearer to the people by building health centre II and III, I would like to urge Government to reconsider health priorities and include both referral and district hospitals on the list.  The emphasis seems to be on the construction of health centre II and III, and yet referral and district hospitals are equally important.  This is one of the reasons why we are getting an increase in the number of patients seeking treatment outside this country because our hospitals lack adequate facilities.  

I would like, therefore, to call upon Government to consider seriously the renovation and re-equipping of referral and district hospitals, if we are to attain good health standards in this country and promote a healthy productive life.

Lastly, on the issue of agriculture production, Mr Speaker, most of the peasants in this country have played their part by producing enough for their home consumption and also for sell. But they have been disappointed by lack of markets. For example, in my district, a litre of milk is just Shs100, and yet we are being asked to encourage our people to triple their efforts to increase production.  I would like the minister to tell us about the magical strategies she has put in place to overcome this problem of market, so that we can mobilize our people to increase production for export and eradicate poverty.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR FRANCIS MUKAMA (Kigulu County North, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute to this motion.  I want to join my colleagues who have thanked his excellency the President for bringing the President of the United States of America to our country.  That reminds me, Mr Speaker, of the 1960s when the United States helped us in the agricultural sector with funding and expertise to establish the ranches in Ankole and Singo areas.   So, I hope that with the coming of President Bush, you will be able to look at this area. I also pray that the Minister in charge of the Presidency will include our Minister of Agriculture in that small group that will meet the President. 

Secondly, the President did say in his State of the Nation Address, I quote- on page 8: “The unsettled question is how to create wealth and social economic transformation fast enough to deal with poverty and unemployment”.  Now this cannot be done if you do not have a proper planning mechanism.  

When you look at the Budget Speech on page 11, section 39: “Institutional Frame work for planning,” it is reads: “Mr Speaker, Uganda’s Planning mechanism is based on long term Vision- Vision 2020- the Poverty Eradication Action Plan”. I have not heard of vision 2020, I have heard of vision 2025. It seems we want to link this one to –(Interruption)

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: I thank the honourable member for giving me the opportunity to clarify this matter, which I think I clarified yesterday.  The vision is not 2020.  I had an opportunity to check through- we intend to meet most of the targets in the year 2020, but the vision still remains 2025.   So, I call upon honourable members to amend that paragraph to read vision 2025.  Thank you very much.

MR MUKAMA: I am glad that you have admitted because I was going to say that you are trying to pre-empt what the National Planning Authority would be doing.  By the way, it seems there is a fight in the Ministry of Finance regarding the operationalisation of this constitutional body, the National Planning Authority.  It has not yet been facilitated to take up its proper role.  The board was set up but they are not working.  So, I hope that all of you will be up to see that this planning authority takes place so that we go ahead with our national planning.

MR MUSUMBA ISANGA:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to inform the House and the honourable member that there is no fight in the Ministry of Finance over the operationalisation of the National Planning Authority.  Everything is on course, the board has been appointed and the premises are being finalized. We will be launching the expanded board on the 21st July this month.  There is no fight, Sir.  I thank you.

MR MUKAMA: Thank you very much. I hope that will come to pass.  Another point, which I wanted to touch briefly, was modernization of agriculture.  By the way, somebody asked me, “What do you mean when you talk of modernization of agriculture”?  I had a problem explaining modernization of agriculture.  Now I pray – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, this point of modernization of agriculture has been mentioned over 40 times by members who contributed before you.  I advice those who are going to contribute to deal with other issues other than issues that have been dealt with, including taxation on fuel. Please, you can proceed.

MR MUKAMA: Thank you for the advice.  Since 40 members have so far mentioned this, we need to find the way forward. Because, I wish we detached the other components within that plan so that we focus on agriculture.  If we remain with the agriculture, is it not getting its own allocation?  I continue to say that our Minister of Agriculture should come up with agricultural investment plan to enable those who allocate funds to give it its due role and facilitation.  This is what I pray that we do.  Thank you.

MRS BINTU LUKUMU (Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  This year’s budget speech dwelt more on the export-oriented policy, and it touched areas of market, that is coffee, fish and horticulture. But I did not see areas concerning maize.  We are aware most of our peasant farmers produce maize at a large scale, but there was nothing about the market for maize.  I am asking the minister to assure the people of Masindi and other districts that are engaged in producing maize, how they will get access to the market.  The AGOA market focuses on cotton and that is all, what about people who produce maize?  

I would like to talk about the taxes that were increased.   I am conversant that any country that is supposed to have development communication is paramount and must be given priority.  In the Budget speech, the minister increased the tax on cellular airtime, and yet the peasants had started getting access to the buyers of their produce. I am wondering what strategies has Government put in place in order to solve such issues?

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, I would like to talk about health.  Money has been increased on health sector, and we are aware that Government has taken keen interest in the campaigns against HIV/AIDs. But there are other diseases that have come up and they are common, like kidney failures. In order to have an in plant of a kidney, you need to go to South Africa, Kenya, because Mulago cannot afford transplanting such internal organs.  I would be happy to see that the Ministry of Health puts among its programmes a key aspect of having such equipment in Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to talk about the Local Government.  Most of the sub-county LC III are operating without executives.  In my district, Kibanda sub-county, Kigumba sub-county, Kiryandongo sub-county and Mutunda sub- county do not have any executive.  The sub-county chiefs and the chairpersons are operating the funds of the sub counties.  I am wondering what Government is going to do!  How shall we fight corruption if we leave the money that is sent to the local government entirely in the hands of these chairpersons and their sub-county chiefs?  

I want to talk about the territorial boundaries.  We have so many people coming in from Congo to Masindi, Hoima, Kibale and the rest of the countries.  The Immigration offices are just stationed in specific areas.  These people are potential threats to our country, and our country would have made more money if the immigration offices were put in these places.  I am seeking clarification from the Minister of Finance. Now that we are looking at the budget, what are you intending to do in order to protect our territorial boundaries?

Lastly, Kinyara Sugar Works is soon being privatised; we have those people who used to work with the Kinyara Sugar Works before the NRA liberation war.  Some of these people have never got their gratuity, and today we are going to privatise it. What is their fate? How will they benefit?  Who will pay their money?  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.
 
MR DAVID WAKIKONA (Manjiya County, Mbale):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Most of the things have been dealt with, but I have a few observations concerning the Budget speech.  I will go straight to science and technology on page 10, Paragraph 36.  The Minister of Finance is saying they are using science and technology to enhance productivity.  When you read down in the paragraph, they say they have prototypes of locally designed power inverters and stabilizers.  According to my knowledge, a prototype is a something new that has been subjected to test over a period of time. I do not know how this is going to enhance productivity, or it will remain there as a statement. I needed some clarification on that. 

I also wanted to know about this National Indigenous Knowledge Resource Centre.  What do they do really, and of what financial benefit is the country gaining from them?  Somebody said yesterday that we send people to Japan.  Is this center going to cater for such people who may want training in Japan in order to carry out specialized duties, and what type of people?  There are things which have appeared in this budget, which appear not to be common knowledge to many of us in this House.  

Then I looked at the medium term expenditure framework.  I wanted to know about the policy and the spending on internally displaced people and people affected by disasters.  Many people in this country are just like refugees in their own country.  One time the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness moved with me and promised over 10,000 people that she was going to settle them somewhere; up to today there is no money to buy land and Kibaale has become hostile.  So, the people are still waiting for settlement, and I have not really seen this policy in the budget and yet people are dying– (Interruption)

MR BESISIRA:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  You are aware that Kibaale hosts almost all the tribes of this country.  We have been living harmoniously and we have not evicted or sent away anybody. Is it in order –(Interruption)- nobody can prove that to me.  Is it in order for a honourable member of this august House to say that Kibaale has become hostile when he cannot prove to anybody that there people who have been sent away from Kibaale?  Is he in order, Mr Speaker?  

THE SPEAKER:  Since you are from Kibaale, you have given him the correct information.  I think he will not follow it up.  Let us proceed.

MR WAKIKONA:  Thank you very much for that ruling.  Mr Speaker, - (Interruption)

MR ISANGA MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I do hesitate to interrupt the honourable member but he has asked something that I thought we could clear now.  What is indigenous knowledge that is being talked about in paragraph 37 of the Budget speech? I think it is fair that I do clarify to the honourable member that Uganda is endowed with a lot of natural products that have medicinal value, that once they have been researched on, they can help in increasing development in this country.  One of the things, for example, is the toothpaste from the Omutete.  We also have medicinal value from trees like Moringa and Aloe Vera  - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Is it an indigenous tree, Moringa?

MR ISANGA MUSUMBA:  Well, it is grown here, Sir, so, it is indigenous knowledge.  These are the kind of natural products that we are looking at standardizing and making them available to our people.  I thank you.

MR WAKIKONA:  Thank you for that information, but I wanted to know about – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  There is information from hon. Amongin, do you accept it?

MR WAKIKONA:  Okay.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (DISASTER PREPAREDNESS& REFUGEES) (Mrs Christine Amongin):  Mr Speaker, honourable Member of Parliament has raised an issue of the displaced people as a result of landslides.  It is true there are people who were displaced from Manjiya and Bubulo due to landslides.  When a decision was taken to resettle these people, the land was identified by Mbale district.  When Sironko district was curved out of Mbale, there was controversy because all these people about 10,000 of them were supposed to be resettled in Bunambutye in Sironko district and Nakapiripirit.  The new administration of Sironko said the people were too many and there was also insecurity, but the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness is still trying to see how best they can resettle these people who were displaced as a result of landslides.  

MR WAKIKONA:  Thank you for the information, honourable minister. But since 1997 to 2003, we have waited really for too long.  Now, Mr Speaker, there is insecurity caused by guns, but there is also insecurity caused by other factors like the landslides.  We must work very hard to improve security in these areas.  

Then Public Administration – Paragraph 48, on page 13.  The Budget Speech urges pre-payment system for telephone service.  I am warning Government, we do not want the case of International Credit Bank to again engulf the pre-payment service.  People bought credit cards for fuel and the bank just disappeared with the cards and money.  Please let us take care when we looking at this.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, reduction of arrears is covered in the Budget Speech in table 5. And so how the ex- East African Community people will be compensated is zero, and yet right now 800 people out of the 4,000 are still demanding Shs5 billion.  

There is a case, which has already been notified to the Attorney General, and I had talked to the minister in charge of Pensions. Why don’t we settle the case of these people who are still demanding money, which they rightfully earned?  

Why do you give Shs15 billion for pay reform strategy?  Last year, you gave Shs17 billion, this year you have added Shs15 billion, and yet when you look in table 6, the 15 or 17 billion shillings is not reflected at all. The statements talk of the money, but in the actual table for the allocation of funds, you do not find funds to this amount. Please, in future let us get budgets that rhyme with the statements made. Otherwise, sweet statements without corresponding figures do not make much sense to people’s representatives. Thank you very much.

MR HILARY ONEK (Lamwo County, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I represent a constituency that has constantly been referred to as, “under fire” here. Our major concern right now is our life. This budget speech, unfortunately, had only two lines talking about the insurgency in the North. In all other aspects presented here in this budget speech, there is an elaborate statement indicating achievements and projections of what is to be done the next financial year. On security, there is none.  

I do appreciate Government efforts to modernize our Army and the current defence review activities going on. I greatly support that, and I think it is a good move to improve on efficiency, that is, optimal utilization of resources including human resources in the Army. 

However, there is no mention in this budget speech of the effectiveness of the 23 percent we added to that defence budget, which made the defence budget shoot up by 18 percent above what was projected last year. There is nothing mentioned. For example, I would expect data like, “so many people were killed by LRA. This year, we have reduced attacks to the displaced peoples camps by such a percentage. We have reduced on this and the other”. There must be some indication of improvement on the security situation. It has not been reflected.

I would like, actually, to commend the efforts of the UPDF towards this war, in most cases. Perhaps it is we, the politicians, who have not done sufficiently to encourage our forces, to give them the morale, give them what is due to them wholesome, so that they perform their duty properly.

I would also like to commend our brothers and sisters from Teso and their leadership, particularly Gen. Jeje Odongo, hon. Malinga, hon. Etonu. I commend them for all their efforts to try to mobilize people against LRA. However, the same mobilization took place in Acholi, right from 1991/1992 when 18,000 of our veterans mobilized themselves into arrow groups. They were using bows and arrows to fight LRA alongside Tinyefuza’s force, which actually chased away Kony to Sudan and we had a relative period of peace.  

All these people were reabsorbed into the Army, and in 1993 they were moved to Kasese when the ADF situation started. I saw them with my own eyes; I met some of my village-mates in Kasese. They were moved to Kasese and they effectively dealt with the situation there.

Another 12,000 LDUs/home guards were recruited between 1994 and 1996 and they kept peace in our area. But when this situation in Kisangani came up, they were all drawn away from there and moved to Congo, leaving our area open. When the Operation Iron Fist started, there were no local defence forces to actually check the spill-over from Sudan. We have done all that; our people have supported and fought alongside the Government.

We know that in a situation like ours, opportunists of different shades take advantage. We have got some few elements within our Acholi community whose sons may be there and they are benefiting materially. We have also got politicians who do not hail even from our area who actually give encouragement to Kony; some are abroad, some are here. How did Opoka get to join Kony? It is politicians who sent him there, to take advantage of that situation.  

There are so many opportunists who are using Kony for different purposes and they blame us; they say the Acholi do not support government, and therefore, they are supporting Kony. Acholi do not support Kony activities; we do not support killing ourselves, it is impossible!

I come to recent utterances by Mr Ecweru, the RDC Kasese, in the New Vision of 30th June. He said that Tabuley, who comes from Kapelebyong, rang him and told him in Luo, “Ole in iming sana”, abusing him that “you are very stupid” and so forth. 

If Tabuley comes from Kapelebyong, he must be an Etesot, how can you again talk to him in Luo? You see, that is a manoeuvre, the lies that go on in the way we are presently tackling this security situation. Telling him “Ole in iming sana”! That is not even Acholi language; it is a dialect of Luo from Lira. It is all tided up nicely to appear as if Acholis are the ones fighting.  

An Itesot friend of mine told me that in 1996 370 UPA rebels who did not come back were flown from Nairobi to Sudan. Ecweru, who was the external co-ordinator, knows that he did not come home here with everybody; he left some of his people there.   

On the 16th of June this year, over 300 rebels crossed into Uganda from my constituency, Lukungu sub-county. My people reported to me that some of these people were speaking different dialects, not our dialect, Luo. They were speaking Ateso. I reported this to the Chief of Staff. I rang the Chief of Staff, he can tell you I reported this occurrence to him, and he told me they were going to investigate. 

From my investigations from my Iteso friends, what is happening is that Tabuley, who comes from Kapelebyong, is called Okiria. He is a commander of that team, which is composed mostly of Iteso, which has come from Sudan. They are from the 370 people Ecweru left out; he did not come with them. Now Ecweru turns the whole thing to secure his job with Government, trying to appear nice, turning the whole thing as an Acholi affair.  It is sad!

On the 28th of June, Ecweru rang Capital Gang ordering Iteso to kill all Acholi above the age of 20. Today I am announcing that anybody who knows an Acholi killed in Teso, anybody of goodwill who knows that any Acholi is molested in Teso, must report the matter to security forces. Let us know, as Parliamentarians and as the people’s representatives. 

This announcement reminds me of a radio announcement in Kigali, which said that Hutus must be killed. Now, these are the leaders we have today; they are the people who are running the affairs of this country. How can we have a country like this? 

I have a lot to say here, unfortunately I am cut short by time, I will talk more next time. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS VICTORIA SEBAGEREKA (Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, let us contribute for five minutes, not more than six.

MRS SEBAGEREKA: Yes, Sir. I want to thank you for allowing me to contribute. I bring greetings from Kayunga District. I want to congratulate His Excellency the President for having been elected Chairperson of the East African Union. And I want also to congratulate him for being a good sales representative for Uganda internationally.  

Mr Speaker, I have four points. First of all, I want to talk about Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs). These are organisms that we want to deal in knowing fully well what we are doing. There has been medication, which is genetically modified, and those are on prescription. But there are genetically modified foods, genetically modified seeds, genetically modified trees and plants. 

I would like to request that other than the normal biotechnology, Ugandans should know and there should be laws governing the intake of genetically modified organisms –(Interjections)- yes, because these are things that we do not know. We do not know what kind of things we have, what kind of things we are taking; there has to be a bio-safety law to make sure that these genetically modified organisms are taken in with everybody’s knowledge.

Mr Speaker, I also want to mention that Uganda should not be drawn into war as the European Union and America are fighting their wars. We are not a country that needs or lacks food; we have enough food. We want the technology and the know-how to make sure that that food is equitably distributed. 

So, on the genetically modified organisms, that is what I want to say; we do not need them to feed Uganda. We need proper seeds and we need biotechnology like we have in Kawanda. We are not like Ethiopia, we are not like any of those countries which need food aid. We need technology to improve on our food. (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): I feel that the honourable member is raising a very important issue, but I thought I better clarify. There is no way we are going to increase productivity, ensure food security, generate household incomes, overcome pests and diseases, which are affecting our various crops, without going into biotechnology. 

Biotechnology is a science, which may help us, but genetically modified foods or genetically modified organisms are part of biotechnology. You seem to be confusing biotechnology or genetically modified organisms and food safety. 

When it comes to food safety, I think that is something that is being taken up by the Uganda National Council of Science and Technology. They want to put in place, first of all, a bio-safety policy. Secondly, put up bio-safety regulations, because as of now we have no legal framework to even detect or prevent any of these foods.  

So, while the Uganda National Council of Science and Technology is taking that up, another arrangement is also being made to understand biotechnology. We will put in place a biotechnology policy and also biotechnology regulations, but we are building up the capacity. It is important for us to build capacity so that we debate these issues from an informed position. What is important for us is to build up capacity in terms of personnel, scientists, infrastructure and also equipment. 

Before we say no or yes, it is important that we build up capacity and understand these things. We should do that before we pronounce ourselves on the negative or positive.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Sebagereka for giving way. Hon. Sebagereka is tackling an issue, which is so fundamental environmentally, that we cannot leave it hanging. But to my greatest surprise, the Minister, whom I thought would clarify issues scientifically, just confuses the issues. 

It is one thing to talk about safe production environmentally, in terms of industries, but it is another to talk about improved production or biotechnology; the two are not related. Right now, the Uganda Government is so confused that instead of emphasizing biotechnological production vis-à-vis safe production in terms of industry quality, it is failing to clear the issues related to GM foods. 

Many people from time to time talk about genetically modified foods. We all know that these are dangerous foods, which you should only eat when you have no alternative. The Uganda Government is keeping mum. What does the Uganda Government have to say about genetically modified foods?

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I am on the Standing Committee of Science and Technology and we have been interacting with the Uganda National Council of Science and Technology. So far, nothing like clearing GMOs has been given a go ahead in the country. The Uganda National Council of Science and Technology is drafting national bio-safety regulations and they are working out the biotechnology policy. So, nothing will take place before those things are put in place. I wanted to bring this to the attention of the members, so that they get it.

MRS SEBAGEREKA: I want to thank the hon. Minister of Agriculture and the members for the two points of information. I have taken them with grace. But I want to assure the Minister that I know there is a difference between conventional biotechnology and genetically modified organisms I am very much aware of that, sir. 

I want to request and to stress the importance of a bio-safety law and a bio-safety policy, including facilities for testing. We need the testing facilities and we need the enforcement mechanisms  If those are met, I would be very grateful. 

I would like to request that institutions should be supported by Government to create the awareness that is needed about GMOs and the normal biotechnological improved seeds. We have to know when we are modernizing agriculture. We need laws in place. Of course we need improved seeds, but we cannot accept to be dependant on the GMOs. We will not manage, and that will phase out our small-scale farmers. 

I want to talk about the Kayunga –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But time has really gone.

MRS SEBAGEREKA : Yes, just that  -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I will give you a minute.

MRS SEBAGEREKA: I was interrupted, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, you accepted. But I will give you one minute.

MRS SEBAGEREKA: The Kayunga-Gayaza Road; there is a plan that all the big trucks and trailers will go through Jinja and through Kayunga to Gayaza and Kampala. I will talk later with the Ministry of Works people, but I want to say that the people of Kayunga are very worried. Our road is still very narrow. The trucks are already starting to come through that road. There is a bad junction between the road to Gayaza and the road from Mukono, and people are worried that there will be a lot of accidents. So, I would like to voice this concern on behalf of the people of Kayunga. I thank you.

MRS SSENTONGO NABULYA (Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am standing to commend the Minister of Finance for the proposals and the estimates of revenue for this year given in the budget speech. 

I want to appreciate that the highest priority by the Government on the medium-term remains achieving accelerated economic growth that is adequate to eradicate mass poverty. I also want to welcome the Government’s approach, which allows room for the private sector to grow, by accepting privatisation of public enterprises. Through this, it is believed that there will be creation of employment for our indigenous people. 

It is depicted in the 2002 Uganda National Household Survey Midterm Report that 45 percent of the Ugandan population is economically active. It further states that within this sub-set, 79.6 percent are either self-employed or unemployed family workers. So arithmetically, that leaves a very small margin of paid or salaried people, or workers for that matter.

My disappointment is in some employers, and I want to mention some including the Education Service Commission and Stanbic Bank. Stanbic Bank is subjecting workers to HIV tests, or screening for that matter, which according to the International Labour Organization (ILO) Code of Practice on HIV/AIDS and the world of work, is prohibited.  Uganda is a member of the ILO under the United Nations, so this is not a welcome idea. 

To make matters worse, Stanbic Bank originates from South Africa, as we all know. But according to the information I have, there is a law in place in South Africa that says no worker should be subjected to the screening of his or her blood for purposes of finding out whether she or he is a victim of HIV/AIDS. I just wonder why the same employer, coming from South Africa, is subjecting our own people here to such a test. 

This is a global problem. It is globally known, and it is here to live with us. We just have to fight against it. And the Government has taken steps, which we all appreciate, to fight against AIDS. So, we think as workers we should not be subjected to this kind of screening. 

It was announced over the media, FM radio stations, that even the Government, under the Education Commission, wants to terminate services of teachers just because they are victims of HIV. I know the Government intends to protect our children because of the scandals that are going on, like raping and befriending these young girls, because they could transfer this virus to these young people. But still, we should find another remedy to protect this kind of thing and not terminate these people - (Interruption)

THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable member on the Floor. First, it is against government policy if any employer should require that anybody seeking work with them should first be tested. Anybody doing that would be violating government policy, and they should be dealt with once that is known. However, of course it would be good if people can voluntarily get to know their sero status.

Regarding the debate that was in the papers, it is true that some experts have recommended that teachers who are positive should be terminated. But again, I would like to assure Parliament that Government cannot accept that approach. We have better ways to deal with that.

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it not true - and I would like the hon. Minister to confirm - that in the Ministry of Defence, soldiers who are going for certain courses are compulsorily screened for HIV/AIDS before they can be accepted to go for those courses?  

Is it also not true that the President runs a personal policy of providing anti-retrovirals to certain officers of the UPDF, using a criteria that is not known to anybody in any ministry? Thank you Mr Speaker.

MR JAMES MWANDHA: I was relieved to hear that it is against government policy for any employer to dismiss anybody on account of AIDS. But I thought that the Minister was going to assure the House that the Government is going to take action against Standard Chartered Bank, who are actually practicing screening staff and maybe laying them off when they are found with AIDS. Is that the end of the matter? Can we be assured that actually Government is going to take action against Standard Chartered Bank and any other employer who does a similar thing? 

MR LUKYAMUZI:  Point of procedure. Mr Speaker, as we proceed with the debate one honourable member, namely hon. Byanyima, has made a fundamental statement, which demands an answer from an active government. It impacts on the Government policy –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, a number of clarifications are being sought. The Ministers are here; I think they just want to listen to the clarifications so that they would answer them at the same time.  

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The first, in regard to the Army, I think the biggest point we need to realize is that one of the areas, particularly Sub-Saharan Africa, which has been hit badly by HIV/AIDS is that of security. There are countries in Africa where you have more than 50 percent of the Army already infected with HIV/AIDS. If we do not come to terms with this, our security is going to be compromised. 

Indeed in the case of Uganda, as the President has said many times, many officers and men in the Army have been lost to this problem of HIV/AIDS. In general policy, as I said, no one should be denied employment on account of being with HIV/AIDS. However, when it comes to the Army, particularly training abroad - because we are being assisted by people abroad - even friendly countries to us like Cuba require that before we send officers there for training, they must be HIV negative. That is not for us to change that policy, when we are sending our officers abroad for training. 

The reason this testing is done, for those going to train abroad, is because it is a requirement of the institutions to which they are going. But also, particularly when it comes to the Army, important that we watch the HIV situation within the Army. We cannot be blind when it comes to the Army because otherwise, you will compromise the security of the country at some stage.  

Regarding treatment; as you know the cost of drugs has been very high. But as the price has been coming down, and particularly now that we got help from the Global Fund, the policy Government is examining is to see whether some sectors of our workers - like in the Army - could not be assisted on a selective basis. That is, as against other general workers, the Army could be assisted to access free treatment of HIV/AIDS. There is no policy to try and discriminate only for particular officers. With the money we have got from the Global Fund, we are trying as much as possible to see if the Army could access these drugs.  

Lastly, on the points raised by hon. Mwandha; yes, obviously once it is known - and it is good the honourable member has raised this point. If there is any employer in this country who is discriminating people on the basis of their HIV status, Government will be obliged to take some action. I thank you.

MRS SSENTONGO: Thank you very much, honourable minister. There is another type of discrimination I have come across from reports from some teachers. I want to mention the school, the Greenhill Academy School. What the headmistress does is that she discriminates against women who become pregnant. So far she has dismissed over 10 teachers from that school. This kind of discrimination is properly legislated for in the ILO Conventions and Standards that should guide us in our labour laws. It is terrible!

The other issue I want to talk about is the water and sanitation. I would like to express my appreciation to the Government for this endeavour to improve access to safe water and sanitation in the rural areas. But my question is: how much reduction in terms of tariffs is going to be offered to the rural poor, because these are people who have very little income? 

Secondly, I understand the Water Board is going to be privatized. That is going to leave the tariff arrangement to the discretion of the management who will take over. I am worried about that. I have already been warned, I would like to stop here. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR PETER MUTULUUZA (Mawokota North, Mpigi): I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the Rt hon. Prime Minister for having mobilized our frontbenchers. At first we used to debate without our honourable colleagues, the Ministers. 

Before I debate what I had prepared, I want to add to what hon. Ssentongo has talked about, the problem at Greenhill Academy. I have a pupil there but her teacher was dismissed because she was pregnant. Not only that, but there were also about four of them who were dismissed. So, I request the Government to look into that and help those unfortunate people.

Back to the budget, there is a chapter entitled, “Action to Promote Strategic Export”. This programme is allocated Shs 52.5 billion. I remember during the State of the Nation Address, His Excellency talked of some agricultural produce like okra, which have market in Europe. Mr Speaker, I happen to have mobilized my farmers in the constituency to grow okra and hot pepper, and this is actually what I target as a produce that will help my people overcome poverty. 

Unfortunately, there is no market and it seems the Government is not intervening enough. We have a few exporters of this produce but then they tend to control both the supply and demand. According to them, they are supposed to export about ten tonnes of chilli every week to Europe but of course there is not enough supply. Besides that, the Government has not intervened to encourage farmers, by way of contracting farming, forming farmers’ groups, or controlling pests. 

Mr Speaker, the European market will by 2002 ban our horticultural products if we do not improve on our pesticide control. I hereby request the hon. Minister in charge of Agriculture to make sure they establish a factory for testing levels of pesticides, because it will be a problem soon. It will be like what happened to fish exporters and we shall be in problems  

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Speaker, I have been here long enough to see people come and go. I would like to inform honourable members not to indulge in any mobilization for any farm enterprise for which there is no market.  

Secondly, the Government has intervened in horticulture by supporting those organized farmers. They have established export villages to the extent that a conferment of Shs 100 million was released in order that they get refrigerated trucks and shades. Some are in Kamuli, others in Wakiso and in other areas, and they are operating very well.  

Regarding pests, we have to be very careful. You are recommending building a factory of chemicals here. Perhaps what you are saying is that farm inputs are very expensive because we are importing them as a landlocked country. What is important, regarding pests and as far as the market is concerned, is that come 31st December, no grocery from Europe will source any produce from a country where no control system regarding pests and monitoring has been put. 

The Government is already working on this in collaboration with the European Union. We have already established a rapport and we are facilitating those organized farmers in Kasese, in Wakiso and Malilye so that we can participate in an organized way. We are employing more officials to go ahead to inspect and satisfy international standards. Because come 31st December, all the exports will be subject to 100 percent inspection, whereas now we have been sampling between 10 and 20 percent. 

Regarding mobilisation, it is important that you get to know whom you are joining in order to mobilise for the market, and you go into contract farming. But, if you just hear about chilli - chilli is seasonal. Some of the people are briefcase operators. If you mobilise the first time, he comes and buys; second time he comes and buys on credit or he pays; the third time he disappears. Then the whole problem will be left with you and I will not see you here next year.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, honourable minister for that information. Let me inform you that so far I have managed to export hot pepper and chilli twice a week, but I need your assistance. First of all, these people you are talking about, those who come and buy on credit and run away, it is because there is no policy in place so far. 

Yesterday, hon. Muntu was statistically telling us how many quantities of each produce was exported and Uganda is lagging behind. We agree we had problems but at least within these 17 years we have had a prominent government. We should have improved. 

The Uganda Export Promotions Board, in the last budget, was given Shs 1.593 billion. This is an organ, which is supposed to help us export, but it was given Shs 398 million - that is 0.98 billion. We have to see where our priorities are if we want to improve on export. We should assist the organization doing the work. 

Another problem I have is AGOA. I think AGOA should be under the Uganda Export Promotions Board, instead of fragmenting these organs. 

Lastly, the budget favoured only foreigners. Why do I say that? VAT on hotels was suspended, tax holidays on investors were suspended for ten years, taxes on repatriated dividends were also suspended; but then they increased the price of fuel, which is for us poor people. Airtime for telephones was increased. Vehicle licenses, which used to cost only Shs 150,000, have gone up to Shs 500,000. This is all affecting our ordinary people. Okay, it is good to attract investors, but I think we should consider our own people also. I thank you.

MR KIBAZANGA MBALIBULHA (Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much. I thank the Minister of Finance for this speech. I want us to look at page 11 of the Minister’s speech, under Pillar 2. Mr Speaker, with your permission I want to read paragraph 40 under Pillar 2: “Ensuring security and good governance”. 

Security and good governance are key to the creation of an enabling environment for economic growth and governance; including buildings, strong institutions and systems for the promotion of transparency and effective delivery of public services, for which the Government is responsible. 

Mr Speaker, I want to believe that these institutions and systems the Minister was talking about include cultural institutions and others. I am a strong believer in cultural institutions. (Laughter). In the State of the Nation Address, the President did say that matters of politics and good governance were resolved during the Constituent Assembly (CA). This time around, I want to agree with the President. Our Constitution, chapter 16, Article 246, the “Institution of tradition and cultural leaders” - I want to read clauses (1) and (2) then I make my point.  

246(1) “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the institution of traditional leader or cultural leader may exist in any area of Uganda in accordance with the culture, customs and traditions or wishes and aspirations of the people for whom it applies.” 

(2) “In any community, where the issue of traditional or cultural leader has not been resolved, the issue shall be resolved by the community concerned using a method prescribed by Parliament.”  

In my society, the community I represent, there is a strong demand, there is a wish; my people would love to have a cultural institution called the Businga. Knowing that, the President wrote to his good Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; I am not going to read the letter, I will lay this on the Table for this House to see. 

The Vice President of the Republic of Uganda wrote to the same Minister about the Obusinga. The Chairman of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs also wrote to the same minister, giving his legal understanding of the provisions of the Constitution that I have read. Mr Speaker and honourable members, where is the problem? Why can my people not have the cultural institution and yet the Constitution is very clear? 

What I am trying to say is that we could write the best constitutions in the world, we can have the best lawyers in the world -(Interjection)- I am not clarifying, this is the matter of the Constitution (Laughter). Mr Speaker, what I am saying is that we could have the best constitution, we can have the best lawyers, we can have the best institutions in the world, but if the culture of constitutionalism and the rule of law is not inculcated into our small heads, some individuals will paralyze the operation of the very Constitution. I do not have much to say, time is not on my side, I beg to lay these documents on the Table. Thank you very much.

MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (Buhweju County, Bushenyi): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the hon. Minister of Finance for presenting this Budget Speech, whose main theme is to eradicate absolute poverty among our population.

However, how easy is it to eradicate poverty without putting deliberate and focused measures in place? What do I mean here, Mr Speaker? When you look at the side of agriculture, it would be very good if the farming community was put in such a way that it is connected to some industries. The other day I was in Kabale where they grow wheat, and I found one factory, which makes bread. But I was surprised that that factory in Kabale, which makes bread, uses wheat from Canada, America and Kenya. You wonder how the masses in Kabale can fight poverty when they are not connected to this kind of enterprise, yet we have such farming. 

The same thing applies to our cotton. You are talking of AGOA factory here, I do not know how our farming community is directly connected and benefiting from this kind of venture. Right now, you look at the soya bean industry –(Interruption)

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much for giving way. Mr Speaker, a few days ago I visited Kapchorwa District under the auspices of ARMANI Forum. While there, we took interest in issues of our development, including agriculture. We asked the people from there why they were not engaging in wheat farming and what they told us was that they do not have the capacity to harvest. To harvest wheat they need combine harvesters.

I have been wondering why, as one of the strategic interventions in agriculture, the Ministry or the Government cannot provide harvesters to these communities. That way they will grow wheat, which is even a higher yielding crop than maize.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I thank you for that information. You will get time honourable minister –(Interruption)

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: It is a very important issue, regarding wheat. We have six companies in this country, which are now using wheat. They are saying that the type of wheat we are growing is not suitable for what they need. We are now introducing the varieties, which are suitable for their use.

Regarding Kapchorwa, the Members of Parliament there are in the know that the Government has all along wanted to intervene. I have been there almost three times, but because they had internal problems, they could not sort out with whom we should work in order to intervene. They already have a combine harvester, which was being run by the union, but the union had collapsed. This morning I received good news that they are overcoming the indebtedness and their union is going to be operational again. I hope we shall be able to work with this union in order to see whether the harvester is rehabilitated so that it is manned. 

It is because of the policies under which we are operating. We want to work in partnership with the private sector in such circumstances; but the point is taken.
 
DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have combed the policy statement of the Ministry of Agriculture. The Minister is giving us information that they are in the process of introducing accepted varieties of wheat, but there is no mention of that in the policy statement. Is that corrigenda being brought on the Floor of Parliament, or it will appear in the committee when we meet?

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I thank members for the information they have given. I want to be clear about what the Minister has raised about wheat varieties. In Uganda we have got wheat breeders and they have bred various varieties of wheat for various requirements. There are varieties for bread, varieties for beer, varieties for anything. The problem is that they are not valued. It is the dumping which we are focusing on, that does not help us to look after our people. In fact if we want to help our people, we need to be more focused.  

I am almost inclined to believe that this government listens more to, and cares more about foreigners. I will illustrate my case. Yesterday I alluded to the fact that I have raised, the issue of a tea factory in Buhweju where we grow fantastic tea. I wrote to the Minister of Finance, gave a copy to Prime Minister, but I have never had a response. But when this AGOA man came, he was assisted wholesale, and this is a project that is going to benefit the population of this country. It is going to benefit this country and we only require Shs 1.5 billion. 

Could I, at this juncture, invite our hon. Prime Minister to come and see what I am talking about? It is a wonderful crop, wonderful resource, why is it not cared about? Is it simply because the message is being given by a local Member of Parliament and I am not a foreigner? I am listened to less, so I am inviting the Prime Minister to come and look at that resource.

On the interventions, it is good the Government is going on with the interventions especially in the planting materials. But can I inform the Minister of Finance that one of the most dominating interventions for development is the provision of utilities like power and investment in capital goods. We should have capital investments like factories. If we do not have that, how can you stimulate production and development in this country?

Then there is the question of sciences in schools. Schools, especially those in rural areas, cannot promote science, which is very vital these days - because of lack of laboratory equipment and materials. Even now when you look at say the provision of computers, it is a preserve of the urban areas. I call upon the Government to focus on rural areas where the majority of the people stay, were the majority of our population are. They should provide the science and laboratory equipment so that we can all keep abreast of technology. Most of us are products of rural schools. 

There is this problem of UPE. The Government had promised to build secondary schools to absorb the UPE graduates, but I do not see it in the near future. I suggest, Mr Speaker, that Government looks into the possibility of assisting the private schools. They could for example second the teachers there, and facilitate them somehow. After all, they are also playing the role of educating Ugandan children. There is no child who is for Government and another who is private. They are all our children. Let us look at that possibility and assist these private schools so that we can observe these UPE graduates. 

Mr Speaker, I would have said more but in the interest of time, I thank you for the opportunity. I request the Government be more focused, be pro-people and put in place pro-people focused programmes for the development of this nation. I thank you.

MR ABURA PIRIR (Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is most kind of you to give me an opportunity to contribute to this motion on the Budget Speech that has been going on in the House for some time. I welcome the report but my expectation was that the Budget Speech would reflect what was done in the previous year, the impact of the budget that was delivered last year, and the success or the failure of those areas that were catered for. 

The budget being a national developmental plan, it should have wider consultation. We should have balanced regional development when it comes to the budget. To avoid the repetition of giving facilities in some areas every year, it would be a good balanced budget if research is done widely. When we talk of infrastructure like the roads, there are regions that were not mentioned for even any meter of road to be rehabilitated. For example, Karamoja. There is nothing reflected for Karamoja to benefit from this Budget. 

Similarly, when you talk about the health sector, the Movement Government is interested in giving people or in bringing services to the people. There are a lot of hospitals that have been upgraded to referral hospitals. Karamoja as a region with one million people, does not have any referral hospital. We are not reflected anywhere.

When you come to education, apart from the ten secondary schools we have in Karamoja, there is no tertiary education there. The highest institution of learning in Karamoja is a Grade III Teacher Training College. So, the Government could have thought of giving us as an institution that can train for a diploma or other certificates. Therefore, it can still be seen that we are lagging behind and we are deliberately left behind. 

I now talk about agriculture. Let me talk specifically about the crops. Yes, our country is an arid land, a semi-desert; but in 1976 when I traveled to Israel - I was invited for sports - I was surprised to see that their crops are grown for a short time. They get ripe in 60 days. This could be one of the provisions. The Government could import such crops for areas like Karamoja.

When you talk about security, I think that is the only part the Government is concerned about in Karamoja. The concern is the disarmament issue. However, when I look at security, there are so many dimensions. There is security from rebels and cattle rustling; there is security from fire, and there is security concerning accidents on the road. It seems in this budget none is tackling this issue. 

If I can talk about the rebels, a special force, which used to be here, is in a section of the Police. There is a provision for special force in Police.  Special force used to do a very good job for this country.  In Kenya they have it, it is called, Field Force Unit (FFU)  In Tanzania, they call it Fanya Fujo Uwon.  So, here in Uganda we have the special force, I do not know why we have scrubbed it off.  This could give a rest to UPDF, which is being tossed up and down.  So, a special force should be reinstated; at least if you recruit 3,000 special force, I think we shall overcome Kony.

Mr Speaker, much as we are developing Kampala, there are many petrol stations being constructed with no protective fire appliances.  The Fire Brigade Station, which is somewhere around the Clock Tower, does not have the appliances and equipments to fight fire.  The only fire engine we have is that of 1970s.  In the Budget speech, I do not see anything about fire and yet it is one of the most dangerous and destructive thing that can destroy this country.  There is nothing about it, and yet every morning, every afternoon, every evening, even at night, there is a report on accidents caused by fire. Besides that Traffic Cops are no longer deployed on the road except in Kampala.  We do not have the facilities like the motorcycles, which used to monitor and patrol the roads. 

The issue of ambulances, which the Police used to have are no longer there.  So, much as we are talking about rebels, the most dangerous one is these accidents.  You find a boy of 16 years driving a minibus while talking on a phone.  Every Christmas there is a statement on the radio which says, “When you drive, do not drink and when you drink do not drive.  Similarly, we should come up with a message, which says, “Never talk on phone when you are driving”.  

So, Mr Speaker, I want to talk about water. There is a saying that water is life.  I will never forget the support Government has given to Karamoja in terms of water.  The total of Shs 9 billion was given to us, but only 5 dams are holding water in Karamoja.  Where did the rest of the money go? The problem is that those implementers, surveyors, consultants, engineers and the constructors do their own things.  Government should put in place a technical team to monitor these people.  Each dam is costing about Shs400 million but nothing is there.  Government is doing a good job, but the people you give tenders are the worst people.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Because of limited time, I will concentrate on increased production.  I note in the budget that 46 million coffee seedlings were distributed to 20,000 families.  That will give an average of 230 seedlings for each family.  I do not know whether the minister has taken trouble to carry out statistics on what is actually on the ground, because we have information that there has been a lot of dirty work in the whole exercise.  Because when they give seedlings to farmers, a farmer will come up and say, “I have 10,000 seedlings”, but these people will tell him, “you get Shs30,000,” and the cheque will be made. They know how to share the money.  

Now this is demonstrated by the method of delivering these seedlings.  When they deliver seedlings in a given place, they will never count, they just dump them there and tell them, “We have given you Shs30,000”.  So, I request the honourable minister to take time and find out exactly what is on the ground.  Because I fear some of our money has been wasted. We also spend so much money on coffee seedlings, and yet coffee prices are falling on the world market.  Is it not time for Government to look at other crops, which can fetch high value?  

In the State of the Nation Address, the President referred to vanilla several times.  This season vanilla has been selling at about Shs80,000 per kilogram.  Now, why can’t Government promote vanilla as one of its national crops?  Why can’t Government promote honey as one of its national activities?  Why can’t we promote Aloe Vera because it is on high demand?

MR WADRI KASSIANO: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way.  I would like to inform you that- yes, I agree with you that Government has not been serious.  We are comparable to young ladies who go into shops; every other time they see a new fashion, they say, “Yes, I want that dress,” and as soon as that dress is bought, they go for another.  

I think we should emphasize crops that we have got comparative advantage over other countries.  Because over all these years whenever we go out we are saying, “Vanilla is the crop” even before we explore the possibilities and the opportunities that exist.  We are now talking in terms of Moringa, and next year we will be talking in terms of another crop.  I think, we need to put all our resources where we have got a comparative advantage over other regions rather than just going in the market and we talk in terms of a, b, c, d because we have seen it being lucrative.  Thank you very much.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: We are still promoting the traditional crops where we have comparative advantage, especially, coffee. If you compare the total value internationally and our comparative advantage, you will still find it is important for our people to continue planting coffee, or else we may fall out.  

As regards the new crops of high value, Government has really gone its way to promote flowers, vanilla and other crops.  Promoting is not just by distributing the seedlings alone, but also working with this private sector who identify researchable areas; all that is promotion. 

Secondly, the local authorities have really intervened; in many districts they have put in their budget the distribution of vines. Then if something is being done at that level, why can’t we do something? Otherwise, all high value crops must be encouraged as long as they have a market.

MR LUKYAMUZI: The information I wanted to give hon. Kalule Ssengo is that the fall of international prices for coffee should not discourage production of that crop.  In the olden days, prices of coffee used to fall and still the farmers were motivated to produce or to grow coffee.  The Government used to come in and subsidize the farmers, but later on as time went on they stopped. 

 The information I want to give to hon. Kalule is, Uganda Government needs to make new friends who can internationally take up the challenge so that we produce coffee.  But after the discouragement of cooperatives, the morale of qualitative coffee production has fallen.  Nobody is there to follow up that crop, and yet that crop is so important that it even futures greatly on our Court of Arms. Government should do something, do not leave the matter to rest.

MR SSENGO: I thank my colleagues for that information. Mr Speaker, I hope my time will be compensated.  I note that a lot of money has been put into capacity building through NAADS, and yet when you go to the ground there is nothing.  I wanted to propose to Government that instead of going directly to the farmers, why don’t we start introducing these capacity building programmes in our primary and secondary schools, because most of our schools are rural based.  Why don’t we give capacity to these children who are going to become farmers tomorrow?  Because, I fear that the large number of pupils in our primary schools may not have a chance to join secondary schools. But if you can give them capacity to grow vanilla, to grow Aloe Vera and to harvest honey, I think these children would be the best farmers to increase our production tomorrow. 

 I am also of the opinion that we should encourage production programmes in our primary schools, because most of our schools are rural.  You find schools having 20 acres of land, 30 acres of land, 50 acres of land and they are not using it.  Why don’t we have a policy and say, “since now Vanilla is on a high demand and it is labour intensive, let each rural primary school have 2 acres of Vanilla; 2 acres of Aloe Vera, because this is part of the national production. 

I also note that there is a lot of good technology at Kawanda.  Now this technology would be very, very useful to the farmers, but it is kept in Kawanda.  The common man does not use it, and yet he would benefit a lot from this technology.  It is kept in the walls of Kawanda; it is not coming down to our farmers.  So, I would request Government to make sure that this technology is passed on to our farmers so that they can benefit from it. 

 I also note that there is talk of credit, because I am convinced our farmers cannot do much unless credit is extended to them.  Unfortunately, most of these micro finances tend to concentrate around Kampala.  There are very few of them who are willing to go down to the villages.  I think we should entice these people to go down to the rural areas so that they can offer credit to our farmers to increase production.  With those few remarks, Mr Speaker, I thank you very much.

MS AMAJO ORIEKOT  (Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would also like to thank the Minister for Finance for the motion.  I am glad the Minister of Finance clarified the issue of the vision 2020 verses the vision 2025, because I was getting confused.  

Now in connection with that, Mr Speaker, I would also like to thank the minister for telling us that the board of the National Planning Authority will be inaugurated on the 21st of July.  It is my hope that the National Planning Authority will not be stuffed- I am not talking about the board- It will not be stuffed predominantly by just economies, because to most people the function of planning involves mainly economies.  

What I am saying is, I hope there will be other disciplines. Because, Mr Speaker, countries like Uganda suffer because most of the planning function is with economies.  That is why, for example, in this Budget speech we are being given only indicators of growth in terms of GDP, and yet we are talking about eradicating absolute poverty.  Now absolute poverty is not just about economic growth, it is about other indicators of development. That is why we have hope in the NPA. We hope that when the NPA is in place, we are going to be measuring economic development as well as other indicators of growth.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, when the budget was being read, I had hope that the Soroti-Lira road would be among the roads to be worked on.  The Soroti-Lira road- for those who have travelled on that road, I do not need to elaborate.  If this road is on any other programme, the minister should let us know because that is the only road that passes through Kaberamaido.  I think it is the worst main road in the country, and that is part of the great northern road which is impassable at times.  So, if the minister has that road on any other programme, I may have missed it in some of the other documents, I would appreciate.

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, one of my colleagues commented that this budget seems to be favouring foreigners.  I want to particularly talk about the incentive schemes with tax holidays and so forth.  Sometime back we had incentive schemes under the Uganda Investment Authority, and analysis of that scheme was that it actually favoured foreigners.  Right from the onset, in terms of the amount of investment which would be supported under the incentive scheme, it was very discriminative. It was from 50,000 dollars and above, and definitely it supported only foreigners. So, I call upon the ministries that will be implementing that scheme, we need to look at our own people also. The implementation of that scheme is very important.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to touch slightly on point 32 of the budget speech, which talked about strengthening the financial sector. I expected, under this section, to have something said about the revitalization of the co-operative movement, which was talked about so much last year. Has it fallen by the wayside? Is that not part of the financial system? There was no mention of that scheme, which was talked about so much last year.

Finally, I would not like to end my contribution without giving my own impressions about the security in the Teso region. I am going to make my comment without being very provocative. Mr Speaker, I would like to commend the support of Government in terms of military support and others.  But the impression on the ground is that much as the local vigilantes are supporting efforts to improve the security situation in the Teso region, there is apparent inadequate support from the UPDF in terms of their presence in some of these areas.  

The people are saying the vigilantes should only be there to supplement the efforts of Government, not to be left alone, like in most places. In Kaberamaido District, they are about the only security people around; there is no presence of the UPDF. Even when they are there, it is quite apparent that their welfare situation leaves a lot to me desired. Thank you very, Mr Speaker.

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity, and I thank the Minster of Finance.  

Mr Speaker, I take the opportunity to thank the Minister of Finance and his team for all the changes that have been implemented in the budget process. Starting from the introduction of the medium-term expenditure framework, all the changes that came with the Budget Act, the Public Finance and Accountability Act and also linking the budget more closely with the Poverty Eradication Action plan, I commend them.  

Having said that, Mr Speaker, I want this emphasized through an Act of Parliament so that public resources are used in a lawful way. After a very elaborate process of debating and approving the budget last year, the President and the Cabinet went ahead to cut the ministries’ budget by 23 percent and increased defence expenditure without returning to Parliament for our prior consent.  This amounted to the Executive writing another budget. It was a lawless act and it undermined the rule of law. 

Do we really have an assurance that after we have approved this budget, the Executive will not go ahead to implement its own budget – (Mr Rukutana rose_) – Is it a point of information?  Why don’t you take your notes and reply when we have all finished?

THE SPEAKER: She has resisted. Maybe it will solve a problem?

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Thank you, hon. Winnie Byanyima, for giving way. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. The cut that happened was necessary and is regrettable. But I am glad to say that under the new law, the Public Finance and Accountability Act, there will be no more cuts, no more supplementaries that will be undertaken by Government without the prior approval and consent of this House. So, the honourable member need not belabour this point, it is already properly catered for.

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA: I thank the hon. Minister for the information that we all know since we did make that law ourselves. I really want to emphasize once again that I hope the Executive will not engage in any act of lawlessness by neglecting the law, the processes of the budget, and making their own budget and implementing it.

Mr Speaker, I would like to comment on good governance and security. The Government has asked for more resources to end rebellion. I do accept we will give more money, but from my point of view is that, Government should seek political solutions to the problem of insurgency. I believe that an honest dialogue between the unarmed and the armed opposition, under neutral mediation, is a step in the right direction. 

I also would like to see more support to the victims of the insurgencies. Mr Speaker, if you read the Poverty Eradication Action Plan, it is disturbing to see that the Government focuses on fighting rebels and proposes to leave the work of caring for the victims of that violence to NGOs and non-state actors. I think that is deplorable. It is the responsibility of Government to take care of the consequences of their failure to protect the people in the regions where there is insurgency.  

Mr Speaker, even after many changes have been made in the justice, law and order sector, access to justice by the poor, particularly the women, is still not as it should be. A lot of attention has been given to the commercial courts and that is welcome, but for most poor people, their production is paralysed or curtailed because of unresolved disputes, which are mostly of a domestic nature.  This needs to be given more attention.  

In that respect, I welcome the amendments to the land law, and the provision in particular that strengthens women’s rights to resist irresponsible sales by their male relatives. 

Mr Speaker, where is the domestic relations law, though? A lot of advocacy by human rights’ groups has made it appear that this law is important only for strengthening the rights of women. But this is a law that will improve stability and harmony, and therefore, increase production, exports and accelerate the rate of development in this country.  It is time we debated and passed that law.  

Mr Speaker, I just have two more points; one, I am concerned that Uganda is still ranked among the most corrupt countries and impunity still prevails.  The poor are still being cheated by corrupt officials, who are not punished. We are still waiting for the high profile cases from the first plan of action to fight corruption to come to courts and be concluded. We also want to see action on the recently published Judicial Commission report.  

Mr Speaker, in the health sector, there is low utilization of the facilities that have been put in place, because of lack of staff. I welcome the proposals to reduce the administrative expenditure.  I really welcome them. I hope that we are going to see these Presidential Advisors retire. I hope we shall see these big security apparatus streamlined and rationalized - the DISOs, the GISOs, SISOs; all these idle people in the district who just try to instil terror in anybody who does not support the Movement. Their money could do well to pay health workers, so that our people receive help.  

Mr Speaker, it is women who are the greatest victims of the lack of health personnel. Thirty-eight percent of mothers still give birth outside health facilities because there are no personnel in these clinics. They have got beds, they have been given drugs, but there are no people to attend to women who want to deliver.

On education, Mr Speaker, I am disturbed. I am concerned that primary education is still not as accessible to girls as it is to boys, for many reasons that are not being addressed. Equally, secondary education is still pro-rich and pro-boys.  

The suggestion to increase the number of bursaries from 1,600 to maybe 3,000 countrywide is really a drop in the ocean. Most children are now not able to complete secondary school education. We here, or at least those who are my age and above, are here because we were subsidized at secondary school level and we got free higher school education and free university education. What about our children? What about the children of the poor? When is the money that is going to be saved from all this wastage and corruption going to come to pay for real service delivery for the poor? 

Mr Speaker, people are moving to our urban areas. We would like to see more money being channelled for urban renewal, particularly for water and sanitation, waste disposal, and construction of modern markets. For that matter, I remind the President that he promised, while he was campaigning for his favourite candidate, to construct a new market for my people in Mbarara Municipality. I would like to remind him to fulfil his election promise, although he was severely defeated in the constituency. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

MR MURULI MUKASA (Nakasongola County, Nakasongola):  Thank you very much Mr Speaker. I would like also to join my colleagues to thank the Minister of Finance for presenting an ambitious and fairly well focused budget speech. Given the situation, both national and international, maybe this is indeed a very good budget speech.  

Mr Speaker, I note that Government has paid due attention to water transport on Lake Albert and Lake Victoria. But Lake Kyoga has been conspicuously absent as far as water transport is concerned, yet that lake has, from time immemorial, acted as a link between the north of Uganda and the south. Therefore, it should also be given due attention. 

Certainly, water transport between the districts of Lira, Apac, Kamuli and Nakasongola would re-enforce these ancient links. It would also help in trade, improve on the economic potential of that area, not to mention the wide potential in tourism along that lake.  

I remember sometime ago, there was a promise to the effect that at least a ferry service should be established on that lake, and we were all very excited. This kind of thing was there before, but it is surprising that in this statement this year, that promise has disappeared. I hope it has not disappeared fully in the records and in the mind of the Minister of Finance so that – (Interruption)

MR ANANG-ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the member holding the Floor. The information I want to give is that if the ferry service that is being talked about by my colleague could materialize, it would cut the distance from Kampala to Lira, Kitgum, Kaberamaido and even Soroti by nearly 100 kilometres. This would save a lot of fuel, a lot of time, and other costs in terms of transport. And I am sure it would accelerate the development of this country. Thank you.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Thank you very much honourable colleague for that kind of information. You realize the importance of that vital service.  

Mr Speaker, I note on page 16 the effort that has been put in, in as far as rural electrification is concerned. It is quite commendable indeed. I was quite tantalized when I saw the line from Apac to Masindi. I thought, since Masindi is really very near Nakasongola, just a little loop from there to Nakasongola would help, and then we would be in business.  

Mr Speaker, I would like also to commend the efforts that the ministry has put in, and the various options available for rural electrification. But I would like to say that now there is some appropriate rural or micro electricity generation technology, even to the level of a household. 

I would like to request the Ministry of Energy to look into that aspect, so that while we have these big ventures like the Bujagali dams and so on, we also have solar energy. We could look at some of these rural micro technologies, which can be utilized for three or four households in a rural place. The area to go to for this kind of thing is India.  

Mr Speaker, I will not sit before I mention land, because this is vital. Land is vital for production, land is essential for this budget and for the alleviation or even removal of poverty. But in some areas like Nakasongola and Kibaale, land is still a problem, and Kiboga as well. It is threatening even these efforts, which the Minister for Finance is presenting before us. Unless the tenure system is clarified, unless people get confidence that what they are going to put on the land they will actually utilize and benefit from, then we might be indulging in an exercise of wishful thinking. 

Today there is a chaotic situation. Landlords, especially absentee landlords, are selling off their land to other people. They are in Kampala and they do not even take the bother to go down and see what is on the ground, they do not take care of the tenants and so on. There is this contradiction in the law. There is the law of enjoined properties. Somebody can say, “I am enjoining my property. If you are on it, whether you are tenant or not, you must vacate it.” 

Then there is also the land, which guarantees the security of tenants. There is no respect for this kind of thing. You find peasants really suffering. Unless this is solved quickly, it is going to jeopardize our efforts.

I would like to say that really the Land Fund should be given due attention. Something should be done; people should be compensated. Those landlords and the tenants who have been on this land should be given adequate security so that they enjoy their stay there and do some productive work.  

THE SPEAKER: Well, I thought we could finish this today but because of earlier items, we have not been able to. So far, 15 Members of Parliament have contributed to the debate but I still have the following: hon. Eriyo Jesca, Adjumani; hon. Kefa Sempangi, hon. Omach, hon. Kasigwa, hon. Wadri, hon. Besisira, hon. Pajobo, Capt. Matovu, and hon. Opange. 

These were for the day before but never turned up the following day: hon. Alonga, hon. Nyombi Tembo and hon. Ntacyotugira. I wanted to finish the backbenchers so that the ministers could come in to make a reply in respect of their ministry matters. I had hoped we would finish, but let us continue with the debate tomorrow. 

I appeal to you to be punctual so that we can start at 2.00 p.m. If we can start at 2.00 p.m., we will be able to cover many members who wish to contribute. With this, we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.54 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 10 July 2003 at 2.00 p.m.)


