Thursday, 3 July 2008

Parliament met at 10.38 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s meeting. We shall try to do as much as possible on the State of the Nation Address because we need to adjourn for committee work. However, I want to ask the Members of the Committee on Government Assurances to assemble on Tuesday morning, they know where they meet, to complete some urgent business. As you know, the work of standing committees will be suspended as the sessional committees are working. So, Government Assurances will meet on Tuesday morning to conclude some of their work. Thank you.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the Chairperson of the Committee on Local Government? He is supposed to say something but he is not here. Next item.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO APPROVE THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NO.2 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2007/08

10.41
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Madam Speaker, this morning I am sitting in for the Prime Minister who will be joining us in a few minutes. When I came here, I found the Minister of Finance who I believe might be checking his papers out there. Probably I will get an opportunity to go and check on him but he has been here so I believe that he is aware that number four is on the Order Paper. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we can defer that for now and proceed to the next item.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE ACCORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON THURSDAY, 5 JUNE 2008

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are due to continue the debate. However, I would like to inform you that every Member will have five minutes. At the end of five minutes, the microphone will go off automatically so please use your time. If you donate it to Members to give information, you will end up not completing your contribution.

10.43
MR JOHN OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in supporting the motion and thanking H.E the President for giving us a very pro-poor State of the Nation Address. I would like to make a few comments that I feel should be shared by all of us as Members of Parliament and particularly Members of the front bench.

The President talked of security and one of the issues he talked about was that of famine. On page 34, he emphasised that all those concerned with relief in Karamoja must ensure that our people get food and that nobody dies of hunger. Allow me to inform the House that we have a looming problem of famine particularly in Teso. I know that it is in the whole of Northern Uganda because when I talk about the North it encompasses Lango, Acholi and West Nile but I will talk basically about Teso because I have moved around quite a bit.

Despite having the floods about a year ago, we are now faced with heavy drought across Teso from Serere to Katakwi. Crops are drying up and in fact most people have given their crops to be eaten by cattle because some had planted acres of maize and groundnuts, which have dried up. I am sounding an alarm to the Executive particularly that there is a looming problem in Teso and most of Northern Uganda over food. The rains normally don’t stop until mid July and then restart sometime in August. However, the rains have stopped when the crops are in the flowering stage, which is a very big problem because when drought hits as the crops are flowering, we expect famine in the region. The Ministry of Disaster Preparedness should prepare to help Teso and Northern Uganda with that problem.

Allow me to comment further on security. H.E the President also talked about the fight by the Arrow Boys and Amuka and the contribution that they made in chasing Kony away from Teso and Lango. Although government has made a lot of progress in paying the arrears of the Arrow Boys and the Amuka, there is still a very big gap that has been left and we are asking the Ministry of Defence to look into it because it is causing a lot of problems in as far as security is concerned. Some of the Arrow Boys and Amuka still have guns and they are using the reason that they have not been paid not to bring back the guns. They say, “Unless we are paid, we are not giving back our guns.” 

I think government should make sure that all these groups are paid so that they have no reason to keep the guns that they were given. Again to the Minister of Defence, I think that is an issue that should be taken up.

On road units, I would like to thank H.E the President for reinstating the purchase of road units for districts. You could have heard or read in the papers that according to an assessment, local governments are the most corrupt. It could be true that one of the areas where there was a lot of corruption was that of contracts under road construction. Therefore, we should applaud H.E the President. I know the bell has gone.

Finally, I would like to comment about value addition. His Excellency, the President talked about the need to add value to our products and he talked about a fruit processing plant in Masaka – (Member timed out) 

10.48
MR FREDERICK MBAGADHI (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. First and foremost, I thank the mover of the motion, hon. Tubwita Grace and the seconders of the motion, hon. Denis Obua and hon. Nathan Igeme Nabeta. It is now two years down the road ever since Uganda underwent a multiparty political dispensation. In respect of that, I take this opportunity to congratulate His Excellency for having fulfilled his mandatory obligation enshrined in the Constitution in Article 101 Section 1. 

It is also pertinent to note that all the strategic and crosscutting issues that were highlighted in the State of the Nation Address were also reflected in the national budget that was read by the honourable Minister of Finance on 12 June 2008.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, at this juncture, allow me comment on one or two issues: The first one is concerning the economy. The President of the Republic of Uganda, I feel, should be highly applauded for having presented an elaborately impressive performance of the economy. The 9.1 percent rate of growth measured at market prices is a clear reflection of the good economic policies government has instituted over the years. It is a momentous epoch and indeed a big pleasure that in spite of the fact that there were so many obstacles - the obstacle of power and fuel shortage, the Kenya crisis, the bad roads we have - Uganda still registered a respectable GDP rate of growth. 

In addition, it is also good news that the minister hinted to us at the time he read the national budget that 70 percent of the national budget would be supported by the domestic revenue. I am quite optimistic that five years down the road if this kind of economic trend keeps afloat, definitely Uganda would be saved from even the 30 percent dependency burden on donor funds. Bravo the nation of Uganda! Bravo NRM Government! Long live the President of Uganda!

On the issue of Prosperity For All, it is pertinent to salute the President for having bravely advocated, spearheaded and even having relentlessly spent sleepless nights preaching the gospel of Bonna Bagaggawale amidst a world of sceptics. Madam Speaker and honourable members, a world of sceptics only leads to ruin and devastation. Pessimists always see calamity in every opportunity but again the optimists will always see an opportunity in every calamity.

10.53
MR PETER MUTULUUZA (NRM, Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I read two statements: the State of the Nation Address and the statement by the Leader of the Opposition. In the statement by the Leader of the Opposition on page 8, there is allegation that President Museveni caused the lack of electricity we have in Uganda by insisting that they build or construct Nalubaale Dam instead of Bujagali.

Some of us who were not here during the Sixth Parliament and have been hearing what His Excellency has been saying, all along knew that it is the World Bank, the donors, the environmentalists and some opposition Members of Parliament in the Sixth Parliament that frustrated government on the construction of Bujagali Dam. But when the Leader of the Opposition comes up with this information, Madam Speaker, I think the government should put this point clear so that we do not continue blaming people who were not actually responsible for this.

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform my honourable colleague that the statement that the Leader of the Opposition made is true because hon. Isaac Musumba was the Chairperson of the Committee of National Economy and some of us were Members. The government and the World Bank had guaranteed the level of Lake Victoria, that the government would pay the private operator even if the level of Lake Victoria went down and the company was unable to supply power. So, some of us protested.

MR MUTULUUZA: I thank you for that information. Madam Speaker, since we have people from the front bench, I think they will clarify on that. But it is a very serious allegation against people who are actually innocent.  

Madam Speaker, on the State of the Nation Address, His Excellency said on page 4 that agriculture now contributes only 21.4 percent of the GDP whereas in 1986 it was contributing 53.1 percent. Since I came to Parliament in 2001, we have all along been requesting government to put in more money in this sector of agriculture which employees almost 85 percent of our people but they have not been actually listening. It is only this time that they have at least answered our call to increase the budget for agriculture. I, therefore, request government to continue supporting this sector which employees most of our people.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of the six farmers from each parish, I personally oppose this and I agree with the statement by the Leader of the Opposition who said that actually this kind of support is going to deprive the poor of the little money that government would have used to assist all of them. I think that instead of supporting these six farmers from each parish, I would suggest that we buy tractors, put them at the sub-county and subsidise them so that all farmers get a chance of using them to till their land.

Madam Speaker, I have a problem with the poverty alleviation programme under the President’s Office. As I talk, there is somebody in my constituency who is well connected to State House and who got Shs 125 million allegedly to double production. She got this money saying that she was going to put up a model farm and establish a piggery, a model banana plantation and these other crops. However, with all this money even the people around her have not benefited. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are seeking an answer but you are not even telling us who this person is. How do you want the minister to respond? If you are sure about your facts say the name so that the minister can help you. Who is this person so that the government can answer you?

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, this is actually the principal private secretary to the President. She got Shs 125 million and then another person in Mawokota South got Shs 113 million allegedly to set up a fruit drying machine. However, up to now, in Mawokota South – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, do they have names?

MR MUTULUUZA: The names?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do they have names?

MR MUTULUUZA: The names are the former MP for Mawokota South, hon. Kityo Mutebi. This issue of dishing out money to individuals who use it for their personal -(Mrs Wabudeya rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ok. You have the answer?

MRS WABUDEYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to colleagues, and especially to hon. Mutuluuza, that these allegations he is making are not small allegations; they are serious issues. So, for us to be able to handle the problem or find out the truth, it would be better for a colleague who is aggrieved to approach the relevant minister so that we sort out this matter. Right now the PPS cannot come here to defend herself; hon. Kityo Mutebi cannot come here to defend himself. The hon. Member has no records to lay on Table to show that these people received that money and for what purposes. It becomes very difficult for us to either clear the names of people or to clarify the reason for which the money was given if we do not get the details. So, I would like to request that hon. Mutuluuza brings documentation to show that these people got this money and what it was meant for then we can follow up the issue.

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, if I can be given the opportunity, I can lay the document on Table. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yeah. So, will you come back and lay the document on Table? Ok. 

11.02
MR ISHAA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I was reading the State of the Nation Address issued on 5, June 2008 and I got concerned over very many issues which were actually missing from this statement from the President of the Republic of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, I had expected a lot of issues raised by the President informing the public about corruption in this country - [Mr Bahati: “Information”]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ishaa, complete your submission.

MR ISHAA OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was saying that when I read the State of the Nation Address, I was not convinced especially on issues that I thought the President was going to try to address to the people of Uganda. Corruption has been a big problem in this country but on page 26, the President said he was going to set up three audit units in his office to audit NAADS, NUSAF, civil work and he ends there. In the last year’s State of the Nation Address, the President said his government was committed and he was now taking of zero-tolerance on corruption. But you are aware what has been happening in this country. We, as a nation, have lost billions of shillings in the hands of individuals and institutions of government, including what is being laid now on Table that explains that the President was not serious to give us his take on corruption.

Madam Speaker, Article 163 of our Constitution empowers the President of this nation to ask the Auditor-General to audit any individual or institution of government. This is a power which has been vested in the President but he has not exploited it. I therefore wonder, why should the President now set up his own state house audit unit? Won’t this be a duplication of government activities? Won’t this clearly manifest that government has failed to control and contain corruption?

In Oyam district local government, I have raised a very serious issue on corruption. It is before the Local Government Accounts Committee and it is even before the IGG and investigations are going on. But, unfortunately, the NRM-O Government has not taken seriously the issue of corruption in this country and this is what has actually failed this government. The problem is not resources; the problem is corruption. The problem is that we are not determined; we are not prepared and we are not taking corruption in this country seriously.

Madam Speaker, why doesn’t the President use his powers to speed up the government funds investigations? Why doesn’t the President use the institutions of government like IGG and the Auditor-General’s offices to carry out audit of mismanagement of funds in this country? Why doesn’t the President ensure that these offices are effectively facilitated and politically supported? The biggest challenge we have in this country, which the President has always isolated from, is political will to handle corruption. That is why he does not want to mention anything big on corruption. What does it mean talking about setting up audit unit? If audit units have been set, what next? What happens?

Madam Speaker, last year, we had a lot of problem in NAADS and the President ended up suspending NAADS in the whole country. Why was that so? It was fundamentally because of corruption and that was an admittance that government had failed to control corruption in this country.

MRS WABUDEYA: Thank you very much, hon. Otto, for giving way. Madam Speaker, a few minutes ago or seconds ago, the hon. Member holding the Floor was castigating the President for not taking action, but he has just ended up by saying that the President stopped NAADS. I just want to get a clarification from him on whether the action of suspending NAADS was not way forward to fighting corruption?

MR ISHAA OTTO: Thank you very much. I am going to give a very clear clarification on that. Madam Speaker, for the President to suspend NAADS does not mean he has fought corruption within that sector – [Ms Amuge: “Information”] - thank you. I am taking it. 

MS AMUGE: Madam Speaker, when we were in Gulu about a week ago, the President told us his difficulty in handling corruption. He said he had found it so hard to arrest cadres who are corrupt. The President further said that wherever he gets information about somebody being engaged in corruption, he will later on discover that that person had been canvassing votes for him and that he was finding it so hard to handle such people. So, the President said he wants all the cadres not to touch money so that he can deal with people he does not know like the CAOs. I am sure because these are small people, they will be easy to arrest, but not his cadres. Thank you.

MR ISHAA OTTO: Thank you, for the information. The information has been very clear and I am not going to say anything on it. Madam Speaker, as I wind up on this topic, in China, if you are caught –(Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Otengo. Oh! Let us allow hon. Mutuluuza to lay the documents.

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, allow me to lay on Table a document, with the words: “Poverty Alleviation Programme State House. List of beneficiaries financial year 2005/06, 2004/05 and 2003/04.” The information I am giving here is contained on page 3 of this report. In Mpigi, there is a firm called Nakyesanja. It is owned by Amelia Kyambadde and it was given Shs 125 million. On page 5, in Mpigi again, hon. Kityo Mutebi was given Shs 113,413,000 million for purposes of buying driers and planting materials. I beg to lay. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Otengo – what is it? You want to speak on that? 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, in this House, the Speaker set a precedent when he said that every document – I am not really defending this and everybody knows that - which comes here should be certified by the ministry. So, I want to know whether this document was certified by the ministry or some source because this is what we set in this House.

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, you know very well that I am a Member of the Public Accounts Committee. As a committee, we requested the poverty alleviation department under state house to provide us with a list of the beneficiaries, and that list was given to us by the PS of state house.

11.12
MS REBECCA AMUGE (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Madam Speaker, I want to begin from page 5 where the President spoke of socio-economic trinity. The case in Lira is more related to what the other honourable has raised. I believe our President, by the Constitution, is the fountain of honour and whatever comes in and is purported to be done by him must be taken seriously. 

In lira, we have a lady who claims to have been sent by the President to handle bonna bagaggawale. She is known by the name Dolly Omolo Okulu. She has been going around in the five districts of Lango and parts of Pader District gathering money. The RDC has tried to intervene, but some people in state house are protecting her. We have tried to talk to some ministers like hon. Omach, but he said had no information about this. I believe the Minister for Presidency will be able to tell us something. We need this clarification because this has brought a lot of confusion in Lira.

One time over 20,000 women were invited to come and meet the President who never appeared. When hon. Salim Saleh was interviewed on radio, he denounced the lady. But the lady is still there claiming that she is working for the President. The people of Lira have tended to believe her because she headed the campaigns for the President in Lira, though in her own incapacitation, she delivered seven percent in the last elections. I therefore, would like to know who is in charge? Who is dealing with this lady because we are getting tired? 

Madam Speaker, the President talked of modern slavery. Modern slavery is happening in our industries, where our people are employed, especially the young. They are paid peanuts and nobody seems to follow that up. To me that is modern slavery in Uganda; we want the minimum wage to be debated in this House. 

Agro-processing – who are these people being supported? The President said that he is concentrating on it, but who are the beneficiaries of this, are they external people or our fellow Ugandans?

On the infrastructure, the President said that in 1986 we had 597 health centres and now we have 3,124. But I would like to say that most of them are non-functional. I thought the President would mention something on maternal health which has been a bit difficult. 

Madam Speaker, there are a lot of leakages in procurement. I expected the President to mention something on procurement so that we can be able to fight corruption. It has now been decentralised and re-centralised by having the President or the central government employing the procurement officers by themselves especially the chairpersons of procurement committees in the districts. If we have never lost money, this time we are going to lose. We wanted you to clearly come out as government to tell us the processes you are going through to make sure that the leakages on procurement are sealed off. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

11.17
MR ISSA KIKUNGWE (DP, Kyaddondo County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will only make one simple – I hope the hon. Minister of Finance is not going away. I listened to the President and I will only talk about poverty reduction. There are quit a number of conflicting statements within that one speech. But I will first of all register my dissatisfaction with whoever prepares the speeches for the President; it was unnecessarily too long. It could be done in a very short time with every fact put on the table. 

Madam Speaker, poverty eradication would aim at achieving four main things: One would be increasing exports, another would be to increase employment, and another would be to increase production and then taking advantage of available opportunities. But when you look at what is happening, it looks like we are moving in cycles. We have had opportunities; say expanded market in Southern Sudan and other places around Kenya, but when you hear the political statements coming from Sudan today, you know that sooner or later, this opportunity maybe eroded. 

The President talked about having cottage industries; some form of home farms and this could only achieve positive results if these farms are in rural areas. But the rural electrification programme is a problem. You will find that three percent of the people in the rural areas access power. That means that whatever we do, we might not be able to achieve the much needed goal of having power in the rural areas to facilitate these cottage industries. 

Leaving that alone, the cost of power is too high. I was talking to somebody here who told me that one generator down here in Lugogo uses about Shs 400 million per day to operate, and these are costs that are likely to erode whatever profits there could be for the cottage industries. 

The President talked about having an agro-based factory with Libyans in Masaka. But there was originally a factory for Creps soft drink which I would say died at his hands – yes, President Museveni knows well about what happened to the Masaka Union which owned that factory. 

MRS WABUDEYA: Madam Speaker, I raise on a point of order. We all know that that factory that hon. Kikungwe is referring to belonged to a co-operative union, and I am very much aware that President Museveni was not a member in that union, he was not even a member of the management committee of the board and therefore to say that he killed that project or the union is an allegation against the President which is not fare. Is the honourable member in order to allege that President Museveni killed the union and therefore the factory which was in Masaka?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kikungwe, you should really substantiate. 

MR KIKUNGWE: Madam Speaker, I come from Masaka. When President Museveni was still a rebel, the coffee, the money, and the trucks for the union all went to the struggle. But after the struggle, they did not come back to this union and so the collapse.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, hon. Kikungwe, for giving way. The information I want to give is short and very important to this debate especially at that area. At the time Masaka Union was robbed, the former Minister of Finance, hon. Gerald Ssendaula, was in charge of that area and he can be of great importance to the relevant committee investigating that particular assertion. So I want to confirm that the information given by the hon. Member is true and accurate and has not been substantiated by government.

MR KIKUNGWE: Madam Speaker, again on poverty eradication, it has been proved that the more educated one becomes, the more irrelevant that person becomes in business. So if we are going to fight poverty, we need to target the school-dropouts or the non-educated ones. But what is amazing is that, much of the money supposed to fight poverty is used to organise workshops and seminars for people who would really not create much impact. So we need to –(Interruption)

11.24
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Aware that I have got very little time, I will stick to only two issues. 

I want to thank the movers of the motion and I would like to go straight to page 18, paragraph two, where the President said that: “We expect traditional leaders to harmonise their role with the modernisation process and not try and revive the failed traditional parochialism. The whole of Africa was colonised under the watch of traditional chiefs. The chiefs betrayed Africa by failing to unite the Africans to defend our sovereignty. The fact that Africa was colonised under the watch of the chiefs was a vote of no confidence in those chiefs.”

I strongly believe that with these statements, President Museveni was trying to distort history. Madam Speaker, we should all know that present and modern day Africa has its origin from the concrete establishments of the traditional African –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, we are debating a very important subject namely, the State of the Nation Address and I do not see the Leader of Government Business in the House to take note. Who will do it? This is a very important subject. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister for Education is acting leader of the government side this morning. (Laughter and Applause) Please proceed. 

MR MABIKKE: Madam Speaker, in the case of Uganda, if the Kabaka of Buganda at that time, Mutesa I, did not invite the British, President Museveni would not be President because that was the spark for the modern Ugandan state. We would not have Christians and we would not have this Parliament. 

How different is that traditional African chief President Museveni is hitting at from the modern day African leaders who are collaborating with neo-colonialists? How different would these chiefs be from the so called blue-eyed boys of the West? We know the league of the blue-eyed boys in Africa. I would like to say that when President Museveni is pointing his finger at traditional African chiefs, the rest of the fingers are pointing at him. He too may in future be labelled as a collaborator with the neo-colonialists. 

The last point I would like to talk about is the issue of income disparity. I have always said in this Parliament that we have two nations; we have those people in Makindye, Kibuli and Namuwongo slums and we have those in the affluent places of this country. It is very unfortunate that President Museveni has reversed the gains that Uganda achieved under President Idi Amin. President Idi Amin could have had his problems but there is one important achievement for this nation: he put the economy in the hands of indigenous Ugandans. (Applause) The economy may be growing, but this economy is not in our hands. It is very unfortunate that less than 10 percent of the people own over 80 percent of this economy.

12.58
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start with our protocol. On the 5th June, we mixed up our protocol. Right at the beginning, the protocol was His Excellency the President, the next one was the First Lady, the Chief Justice, the Deputy Speaker and then the Prime Minister. Madam Speaker, the position of the First Lady is not a constitutional one. It should be put where it belongs. The Queen was very clear in November when she addressed this Parliament. She said, “Mr President and your dear wife…” Let us not put asunder what God has joined. (Laughter) I think we should get our protocol right. 

My second point is about the power shortage. The President has made it a habit to blame the power shortage in this country on the Sixth Parliament. I was a member of that parliament and in the last three sessions of that parliament, I was a member of the Committee of Natural Resources, which handled the power sector at that time. Madam Speaker, the committee struggled with the President to allow Bujagali and Karuma to be developed simultaneously. The President and his minister at that time rejected the idea. 

The Sixth Parliament did not stop there. On 8 November 1999, the Sixth Parliament approved the development of Bujagali by a resolution. The resolution is here. It is available for everybody to see. 

The Sixth Parliament did not stop here. It went ahead and approved the power purchase agreement, which it had not even seen. The moment this was done, my belief is that the matter was out of Parliament. I think it is unfair for the President to go around nationally and internationally peddling information which is not correct, which I could call lies, because the Sixth Parliament did everything possible. It was the President who rejected Karuma and yet Norpak Power Limited, which wanted to build Karuma, did not need anybody’s money. It had its own money but they were denied permission to do so. So the blame lies squarely on the President and the minister responsible for energy at that time, hon. Syda Bbumba. (Mrs Wabudeya rose_) Madam Speaker, in view of the left time, I would request the minister to spare me that information. I think I know it. 

The growth of our economy is about the highest in Africa - 9.1 percent projected to 9.8 percent - but unfortunately the projection in this statement has already been registered. If you read the State of the Nation Address, the President said that we have already registered 9.8 percent, which earlier on was a projection. My concern is, whose economy is growing?  

I was saddened to watch on the television a family in Busoga, I think it was in Kamuli, -(Laughter)– where the entire family, including school children, were marooned by jiggers - they were being assisted by the neighbours - in an economy which is becoming an African tiger! It is very unfortunate. (Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I always do not want records to be distorted. The jigger person was not from Kamuli; he was from Jinja District. That is the information I wanted to give hon. Okello-Okello. (Laughter)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank my brother very much. I said, “I think” but I knew it was from Busoga. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, there are families in this country which cannot afford a kilo of sugar or salt in this Uganda. Sometimes I am really tempted to think that I am not living in the same country with our President. Whose economy is then growing? 

Madam Speaker, my last point is about the seriousness of the State of the Nation Address. As a valuer, I believe in comparables. I have watched the President of the United States delivering the State of the Union Address within one hour. If you compare his content with ours that takes about four hours, you will not fail to sympathise with this country called Uganda. The Queen of England when opening the joint Houses of Parliament of Britain -(Member timed out)

11.37
MR JAMES BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion by hon. Tubwita, seconded by the two colleagues. I also thank the President for fulfilling his constitutional requirement. 

Madam Speaker, I will start with the structural transformation of the economy. When the President in his speech made reference to the contribution of different sectors towards the GDP, some people took it very lightly. When they started seeing the contribution by agriculture going down, they thought that it was not good for the economy. However, I think the President was making it categorically clear that we want to transform this country through industrialisation, development of services, urbanisation and then going on to commercial farming. 

I was very happy to see that the Leader of the Opposition, if you looked at his speech on page 10 of 12, also acknowledges that this issue of promoting agriculture only cannot transform this country from backwardness. There is no single country you can mention which has progressed through agriculture alone. So, the insistence of the President on showing industrialisation, social services, urbanisation and then commercializing agriculture is very commendable.

Madam Speaker, let me also talk about the roads. I was particularly happy when the President talked about the roads. All of us here are using national roads, district roads or access roads in the villages so his emphasis on this is very commendable. However, when you look at the speech of the Leader of Opposition on page 7 of 12, he expressed some reservations about delayed works and about the costing, but he forgot that fundamental changes have been made in the Ministry of Works. This Parliament brought into existence UNRA and has just recently brought in the Road Fund. These are fundamental changes which are going to address the issues the Leader of the Opposition expressed. 

I am also happy about the railway. The President is aware that the railway can only be developed effectively at a regional level. Uganda alone cannot do it. That is why he is emphasising going hand in hand with our colleagues in the East African Community. To me, that is very commendable.  

Let me talk about the social infrastructure - the schools, health centres, housing and accommodation for the police and barracks. The President talked about the renovation of some schools using a loan from ADB but what he was saying ahead, which was also reflected in the Budget Speech, was the PPP. I am not talking about Bidandi’s party, no; I am talking about Public Private Partnership (PPP). This is the way we are going to go. This is the only way we are going to develop faster. 

Through PPP, Government does not need to have the money at hand. You only get a service when the private sector has provided the infrastructure and other things. So, what we need to do now is to see that the Ministry of Finance brings a legal framework to put PPP in place so that we can enjoy this facility to develop this country very fast. By the way, PPP can also assist us in excluding purchase of expired drugs. It could be a whole package of building, managing and supplying of drugs so that everything goes on very well.

Let me briefly talk about health. Madam Speaker, 80 percent of the diseases affecting our people here in Uganda can be handled by what they call medical assistants, not doctors. These people are easier to produce and they are cheaper. I am sure if we produce them en masse, most of our people will be attended to. We can then have the few doctors and then move very fast -(Member timed out) 

11.42
MR ZAAKE KIBEDI (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern Region): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion in support of the President’s State of the Nation Address. I will start from the area where His Excellency the President was talking about the three arms for Prosperity For All. If these three arms through NAADS, SACCOs and value addition are effectively implemented, I think our economy will move a great step towards Prosperity For All. The only challenge we have now is that it should become a responsibility of all of us, the leaders, irrespective of the levels at which we are, irrespective of the political affiliations, irrespective of the age, to make sure that we support the implementation of these arms for Prosperity For All.  

The challenge is how are we going to help the young people, the youth, who constitute 70 percent of Uganda’s population to effectively benefit out of these three arms or Prosperity For All? When you look at the six families per parish, how are the youth going to be among the six? You find that very many young people have got land or homes that will qualify to be part of the six families. I think in this case also we should consider affirmative action, such that out of the six homes at least two homes should be identified as those of the young people to benefit out of this programme of the six homes per parish.  

For the issue of the SACCOs per sub-county, I do not know which criteria we are going to use to identify the beneficiaries of these SACCOs. Normally, out of my own experience, you find that when you go to get a loan facility from these SACCOs, at times they ask for collateral securities. Most of the young people have never seen a land title or a log book of a vehicle, so I do not know how we are going to help these people to access –(Interruption)

MRS WABUDEYA: Thank you, hon. Zaake, for giving way. Madam Speaker, last week I tried to give some information on this issue of Prosperity For All and the fear on the selection of the six households but the House was not very full. I think it is better that I offer some information so that those who are querying the same issue may have an idea.  We have set up a system in such a way that in every sub-county, there is going to be a committee which we shall call a sub-county committee, which will be responsible for selecting the six households per parish to be utilized as demonstration units for starting off the programme on Prosperity For All. The fears of hon. Zaake of how the youth will participate will be handled because if we have young people who have homes, they will be eligible for inclusion in the six households.  

Maybe the other issue which is worrying hon. Zaake is the issue of SACCOs; SACCOs are really savings and credit cooperative organisations and members to those organisations enjoy equal rights. The most important thing for us to do is to make sure that the young people join the SACCOs and then they will be benefiting from the money that will be given to the SACCOs and other benefits on equal basis.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think the concern of hon. Zaake is this one SACCO per sub-county. How will the entire sub-county access it and where do the young fit in? I think that is his problem.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister for the timely response. As you may well know, we are under a multiparty setting and Prosperity For All is a programme under the manifesto of the National Resistance Movement. What is the criterion that is going to include those people who are extremely known for views that are other than those of the National Resistance Movement in Prosperity For All? I thank you.

MS NAMAYANJA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister for giving way. 

I would like to comment on the issue that has been raised by hon. Zaake in as far as youth involvement and benefiting from these programmes of Prosperity For All is concerned. The first micro credit programme that came to this country was Entandikwa and there were so many others. In all those programmes, even when the youth were part of the communities they were left out. The youth have just started to do something here and there, so there is no way that the youth can be considered at the same level. 

I believe that we need some affirmative action to ensure that maybe out of five families, at least one must be that of a young person; at least one out of the very many young persons we say are redundant. Some of them are redundant because they do not even have capital. You will consider what this young person has done or what another person has done to be considered for credit; but what about a young person who has just finished whatever he is doing? He or she would want start-up capital but cannot access it because he does not meet the criteria. I just want to add to what hon. Zaake has said, that we need some affirmative action for the young people.

MR ZAAKE: Thank you so much, hon. Namayanja -(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Madam Speaker, that programme is so important that hon. Dr Wabudeya should at an appropriate time, which she will discuss with you, bring a written statement which you should internalise. After internalising it, then we can have a discussion because it is such an important paper. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I thank the Rt hon. Prime Minister for giving way. We have been demanding in this Parliament that the policy proposals for this programme should be brought here for our debate and approval. Up to now, there is no policy but Government has gone ahead; ministers and others are moving with the cash from the Consolidated Fund to go and dish out without any policy. How can a government do this? How can we give our public funds without any policy?

MR OCULA: Madam Speaker, the clarification I want from the Prime Minister is: where is the Minister in charge of Bonna Bagaggawale in the name of Caleb Salim Saleh? It is now about two years since he appeared here for swearing and he appeared again once. He does not attend Parliament and we hear him making some statements, which are not coordinated. Why doesn’t he come to Parliament?

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Zaake to say that there is a minister for Bonna Bagaggawale when in fact there isn’t? What we have, and what he appears to be alluding to in an improper way, is the Minister of State for Finance responsible for Micro Finance. There is no minister for Bonna Bagaggawale. Is he in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think Bonna Bagaggawale and micro finance have been used interchangeably, unfortunately, for a long time. (Applause) I think they have been used interchangeably and I think it is a fact that he is not here. Hon. Zaake, proceed.

MR ZAAKE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me hope my time was put on hold, and as a representative of a very big constituency I need some good time. 

I must thank my colleagues for supporting this programme. Normally, why we get problems in societies that majorly have young people is because when the young people are idle, they become a problem to society. Look at incidences that happened in Kenya. Wherever you see chaos, majorly demonstrations, the young people are manipulated easily because they are idle. So when we make sure that they are well catered for in this programme, then we shall not get problems.

I am talking out of experience. There is a book I was reading about a telephone farmer who was very good at programming activities for his farm. He used the telephone to coordinate activities in the farm. By the time he went to harvest, he found nothing feasible on the ground. So, however much you sit here and make these programmes which are going to benefit our people, when we are not going on the ground and involving the engines of national development, who are the young people, we are going to fail everything and eventually we shall not achieve much.
His Excellency the President also spoke about the five strategic programmes which are going to be looked at and one of them was human resource development. Under human resource development, he spoke about UPE and USE, but I was not very comfortable because we have always been discussing this issue. Besides UPE and USE, how are we helping the Ministry of Education to change the curriculum of Uganda’s education? 

Sincerely speaking, our current education is not helping the young people. I always say this, and I will always say it, the people are being trained to be job seekers and not job creators. Unless we change right from primary to secondary and institutions, our people are going to remain idle and disorderly. The only way forward is that as we are looking at this human resource development, we should also put emphasis and appeal the Ministry of Education to also change Uganda’s syllabus.

When somebody qualifies with a Bachelor of Linguistics, what do you expect that person to do in society, really? When somebody qualifies as an interpreter, we have very few jobs in that line. However, when we try to include entrepreneurship and vocational education in primary schools and secondary schools, we shall move a great step in empowering the young people. 

There was also another issue, which was very good, and this was value addition. The government has a programme of providing milk coolers, juice extractors, rice haulers, maize milling machines, animal food mixers to the people who are farming. This is very good. It is going to increase on the production of the country.

11.57
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, I beg for your indulgence. In the past our Hansard has been flowing properly and submissions of honourable members have been concluded appropriately. Wouldn’t it be procedurally appropriate that a bell rings a few minutes to the end of the member’s time, so that we end our submissions honourably? I beg for your indulgence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The bell has been ringing -(Interjections)– Yes, it has. However, I informed members that everybody will speak for five minutes and at five minutes the microphone will go off automatically. I also cautioned that please do not donate your time. At three and a half minutes, he will ring the bell.

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also wish to support the motion but with a number of reservations. Personally, I do not want this thing to be a ritual, so that we always come and praise the speech of the President and yet nothing is implemented. (Applause) I am happy that a number of our senior brothers and sisters on the front bench are here. Please, listen to me. I think enough is enough. We cannot continue having a leader who has a good vision for the country but we do not see programmes being implemented. 

He said something practical about roads, but I can optimistically say that we shall end this financial year before we even see the road equipment at the districts. When you talk of Prosperity For All, forget about these handouts; just make roads all over the country, people will sell their goods and they will be rich. (Applause) 

On this issue of giving money to those sub-counties, we have many sub-counties in this country and we cannot cover them all. What is hurting most of us here is unequal distribution of services in our constituencies. When members said here that we should have money for each constituency for the roads, somebody said we should have a scientific formula. What scientific formula? Just give the same amount of money to each constituency; after two years, we shall assess and move on. (Applause)

The President talked about the railway. It is unfortunate that we had a concessionaire who is- (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform hon. Byanyima that in Kenya, because of inequality in distribution, the Kenyan Parliament moved a motion and that is what the Ugandan Parliament calls constituency development fund; each constituency, each MP, gets one billion shillings annually out of the district budget. It is high time we came up with a law here so that for each constituency, the MP gets one billion shilllings, which will be administered by the CAO but under the control of the MP for roads, boreholes, schools and so forth.

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, hon. Ekanya. Of course, as Members of Parliament we do not want to continue kneeling to ministers saying, “I want this and I want that.” I want ministers this financial year - hon. Tibamanya please listen to me - to put the map of Uganda in front of your desks, look at it, look at the constituencies, take time off and leave your offices to go around the country so that in whatever sector you lead, there is a service to every constituency. 

Why should we still have this confused city where we all reside and we keep quiet? Kampala is our city but look at the confusion. I see some of the ministers in the traffic jam reading newspapers and by the time they reach their offices, they have already finished reading the whole newspaper. Why does it have to continue like this? Does it require money so that all the taxis should have designated places for embarking and disembarking? Can’t we have this kayola from Kampala to the eastern side in the morning and in the evening? 

It is simple, but we have brothers who are sitting here and doing virtually nothing. I respect you but this financial year if you do not work according to this speech, I am sorry I will revive my behaviour –(Interjections)- No, I will not resign; I am very thorough. We shall make you people resign. We are not threatening you but we want you people to look at this speech and let it be like a Bible. We want to change this country. 

Two years down the road, what can we say that we have achieved? Somebody stood up and said we shall have a new chamber next financial year; we are still squeezed and we approved the budget. I want this speech to be something that can guide us. 

The President talked of power in the Sixth Parliament, and I still maintain that the Sixth Parliament helped this government. It was hon. Musumba and hon. Migereko who were part of the Sixth Parliament and they know what we did. Aren’t they ministers? Let them go and tell the President the mistake we made. There is no mistake we made, Madam Speaker. You were a member here – by the way one of the senior Members of Parliament here is hon. Kadaga together with hon. Kiyonga, hon. Nasasira and hon. Omara Atubo. The four have been here for long. Tell the President about it. We should not be seen as enemies. (Applause)

They say we have Shs 280 billion for hydro power. If the Minister of Finance has been a very good custodian, he is keeping Shs 280 billion but we do not see anything besides Bujagali, where else is the money going? Why can’t we have Karuma starting tomorrow? We continue giving money to Agrekko, buying thermal power and paying for nine billion litres of fuel every month. That is a big cost. I would request the Minister of Energy to tell this Parliament when Karuma is starting. It is not fashionable to keep the money and claim it is safe. We are so poor that we cannot afford to keep the money. If there is no hydro-power being built, let us put some money somewhere else. 

12.05
MS CATHERINE MAVENJINA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to contribute on the State of the Nation Address. I would like to thank the mover of the motion, who is the Woman MP for Nakasongola District, and the two seconders, that is, the Youth MP for Northern Uganda and the MP for Jinja Municipality. 

The President talked a lot about poverty, which is very rampant in our country, and the plans the government has in eradicating it and improving the quality of lives for the people of Uganda. He explained the concept of poverty eradication by using the trinity in the homestead: using one part of the homestead for sleeping, another part for food security and another part for commercial purposes.  If this programme is to succeed, we must all go down on our knees and implore the intervention of the real holy trinity, who is God the Father, God the Son and God the Holy Spirit. That way, we will also be fulfilling the motto of our country, “For God and my country”. 

Under Prosperity For All, the President explained how the six homesteads in parishes will benefit from the SACCOS programme. In the selection of the six homesteads, I would like special attention to be given to the women-headed families so that gender is taken into consideration. I would like to appeal to all colleagues that it is our duty to monitor the programme very closely and ensure that it succeeds. If we do not put in our efforts, our women and our youth will be left behind. So, we must combine forces and go down to the parishes and join those committees that are there to do the selection, so that we move together as a team. 

Many times government programmes, which are meant for the poor, fall into the hands of those who are already rich at the detriment of the poor. So, this good programme must be genuinely for people who are poor, who are still very many in our country. 

It is very important that the money injected in the SACCOs at the sub-counties goes to the hands of the people who are well trained. It is important that money goes to people who know how to do the selection of the enterprises and how to add value to their crops so that they do not lose or misuse the money which they borrow from the SACCOs for drinking and marrying.

On bee keeping and fish farming, I would like to particularly bring out the example of West Nile where the best honey in the country comes from. The people of West Nile should be empowered to do bee keeping on a large scale because the best honey comes from West Nile region. Fish farming is another very important component of agriculture. I appeal to government to put special attention on West Nile because the best fish like angara and masoni, which is only eaten by the royal family, comes from there. That fish is only found in Lake Victoria and River Nile and it cannot be found in any other part of the world. I appeal to Government to pay special attention to West Nile region. 

Furthermore, the best simsim comes from West Nile region. It has been proved that the black simsim from West Nile and maybe other parts of Uganda has the best oil content and so the farmers should be encouraged to grow this black simsim on a very large scale.

12.10
MR JOHNSON TOSKIN (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very much for giving me this opportunity in joining my colleagues to thank H.E the President for this clear address to the nation. I take this as a time when the President gives an accountability of what Government has done for the previous year and what we plan to do in the next years. 

I was one of those who was very impressed with the message of the President because there is a ray of hope. This speech was made at a time when I was not here but travelling. I have been out for official duty and when we picked the message, it gave us a lot of hope. In particular, the report that our economy has been doing quite well and that there are prospects that the economy will continue to do well really encouraged us.

I thought the most important thing, as the President said, for this country is how we can strengthen trade and investment. This country, as we all know, is one of the most blessed with so many resources but on our own, we may not be able to transform these natural resources into the funds that we need. So, we need investment and we need to open up trade links with other countries. To be able to do this, our challenge is how we can produce enough to trade. 

As we speak, there have been negotiations on the Economic Partnership Agreements between African, Caribbean and Pacific countries together with European countries. The markets are there and overwhelming. My only worry is whether we can be able to satisfy these markets. We have coffee and all that we need to do is encourage the coffee producing areas, give them all the support and of course add value to our coffee and sell it. Coffee is needed everywhere. I, together with some other colleagues here travelled to over seven countries in Europe and wherever we went, coffee is the food that is needed. 

Europeans drink coffee more than anything else and all that we need to do is prepare ourselves and be able to open up to these markets. To do this well, we must strengthen the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. This ministry is actually under utilised. We need to utilise it because there are people who are actually skilled in trade matters so we can be able to benefit from this area. We have coffee, flowers, fish and textiles but my biggest worry is that we are not producing enough.

You are aware of the AGOA arrangement. How much are we feeding into AGOA? How is it benefiting us? Our President was the very first person to talk about AGOA but how much are we feeding into the markets in the U.S? Is it enough? We need to do much more. The WTO is willing to support this country and it is a challenge to us to take up the support so that we can prepare our farmers to produce what is needed, improve on the standard and the quality.

I want to link this to the programme of Prosperity For All. I must thank the President most sincerely because for the last 13 or so years, he has traversed the entire country, talking to our people on how they can generate funds. There is no way we can talk of our economy growing when our people are still poor. It is our responsibility, all of us, to see how best we can help our communities and societies to get out of this poverty. The poverty that we are going through is artificial and not necessary. Our people should not be going hungry but what a mess! 

Even as regards the agriculture that we are talking about, look at the tools that we are still using; we are still using the hand hoe. How will you feed the markets externally when you are still using the hand hoe? How shall we make our people rise up from this? This is very important.

The programme to open up SACCOs is in the right direction but we still need to educate the people. Even if you get six people per parish but you don’t go ahead to help them educate the others and copy from the others -(Interruption)

12.16
MR PIRO SANTOS (Independent, East Moyo, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for the opportunity. I would like to add my voice to congratulate H.E the President on the State of the Nation Address. I have three points to raise. 

The Prosperity For All. The President, on page 7, quoted tobacco grown in Arua in particular as being one of the enterprises that is not paying. I would like to disagree with this statement because I think that the investors are more exploitative instead of saying that tobacco is not paying- I am saying this because if you look at the economic mathematics of the revenue generated from tobacco growing, you find that BAT for example invests Shs 5 billion per annum in financing the production of tobacco. At the end of the season, BAT pays Shs 40 billion in taxes to Government and gets Shs 120 billion as profit. How can somebody convince us that tobacco is not paying? I think that the investors are cheating us in pricing the tobacco crop instead of saying that tobacco is not a paying enterprise -(Interruption)

MS BAKO: Thank you, my brother for giving way for this information. Madam Speaker, West Nile and Arua in particular is one of the greatest tobacco producing regions in this country but the simple analysis is that the farmer is not getting a fair price for his crop. One tobacco leaf produces almost ten cigarettes and each cigarette costs at least Shs 100. However, one kilogram of the best tobacco leaf is not bought exceeding Shs 4000. The statistics are clear that the farmer who is not bargaining for his or her crop is being cheated grossly. 

BAT and other leaf companies have a more exploitative campaign to the extent that they supply fertilizers; they supply other inputs at prices that are far beyond the market price. That gives the farmer a disadvantage to the extent that some farmers only produce their crop and give it to the companies without getting any shilling. At the end of it all, the farmer is even told that they have an extended debt to clear to the extent that even two seasons may not be enough for the farmer to offset debts with these companies. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I informed you that if you donate your time, your five minutes will go very quickly. 

MR PIRO: I am not taking the information if that be the case. Yes, Madam Speaker, what I was trying to say is that Government should put in place a mechanism to control the pricing of these commodities. Even if we go for Prosperity For All, we should encourage our peasants to go for commercial farming but as long as the foreign investors and the industrialists go and dictate the prices of their crops, we shall never see the peasants prospering through their efforts. This is very important. We have seen it in Cotton growing; Cotton is a national crop but its growth has reduced because of the free riders - the private sector - who go directly to the peasants and dictate the price of the crop. As a result, you find that Cotton is not heard of yet this is a very important crop. 

Madam Speaker, we have had in West Nile the Northwest smallholders. They have never been supervised and as a result you find that roads for agriculture have been abandoned by contractors; bridges are not completed; you find the DFIs have been abandoned without equipping them with mechanization. So, how do we talk about ejecting a lot of money for Prosperity For All when there are no supervision mechanisms in place? This is very important for Government to take seriously. 

On the issue of security, Madam Speaker, we are very happy that His Excellency the President actually praised the UPDF and there is peace in this country; but psychologically, the movement of Kony in Southern Sudan actually influences the behaviour of people from IDP camps in their places of settlement because whenever the news comes, these people have to run back to the IDP camps. So, why can’t Government really conclude this agreement with Kony - engage him through international communities, because hanging the agreement to that level still disturbs the mind of those people who suffered for 22 years in the insurgency. 

The President talked about disarmament in Karamoja and we are very happy. But is the government aware that some sections of the Karimojong continue to acquire arms from neighbouring countries because the Pokot from Kenya is attacking them? The government should look into this very seriously so that security is for all. But insecurity is not only in form of armed struggles; insecurity can be in form of what we discussed yesterday. Our children in schools are insecure because of arsonists torching schools. This is also a serious security threat for the nation. So, the government must put a mechanism in place to control these kinds of things – like the Operation Wembley.

On the issue of energy, the President talked about the Sixth Parliament having failed the government in putting place rural electrification - the Nalubaale Power Generation Dam – but in the end it was constructed. What happened? Is it generating enough electricity? Because of corruption, it was poorly constructed. So, the government should now look at Bujagali and closely supervise it so that these international constructors do not do a shoddy job. 

About Karuma, the discussion has been going on for the last 15 years but without its construction. Nyagak has been lying there for a long time; we are suffering in West Nile without power and up to now, it has not been generating power. When will it be in place? Government should look at these things as serious issues but not sweet-talk people in such papers -(Laughter)- in newspapers or addressing conferences. We are tired of waiting for development that never reaches the rural people. One time, the proletariat will rise up and tell Government through votes that “If you don’t do this, we are going to vote you out.” (Applause)

Though we support the government, the government should be genuine. I am a supporter of this Government; I am on the side of the party but then we should be seen doing the real thing which brings hope to our people. (Applause) The proletariat are very strong people who supported the Government in power and when in the bush, and are supporting the government in power now through votes, and they will continue to provide support through the ballot but the government should be seen protecting them economically through service delivery. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I just want to restate this matter of the energy and the Sixth Parliament. I was the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs. I can confirm that we actually assisted the government –(Applause)- we spent two months haggling over those agreements in this House. The Sixth Parliament did its work; we made the resolution and whatever happened was after our resolution. So, please, stop alluding to that matter. The Sixth Parliament did not disturb the power supply in this country; we assisted it. 

12.25
MR TOMSON KYAHURWENDA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity. I want to thank the President for the speech he gave and I support the motion. Personally, I have got four issues to talk about: One is on minerals; I will talk about energy, and about schools. 

On minerals, I have two points to say; just like hon. Nathan Byanyima said, I think there is a gap somewhere in the cabinet. I am a member of the committee on Natural Resources. Two or three months ago, we had a mission to tour Tororo and Busia and Madam Speaker, one thing surprised me, the ministry has issued licences of prospecting for minerals. A lot of areas have been zoned; licences have been given out for prospecting for minerals but when you go to Busia and Tororo, there is no prospecting taking place. People have got prospecting licences but they are mining. While prospecting licences are cheaper than the mining licences, you find that people are given prospecting licences that run for about 10 years. You will go to Busia and find a lot of pits where actual gold has been mined but people are selling it because they say they are on trials. When will they ever mine? By the time all the Gold is finished in Busia, they will then say that there is no more Gold for which to give licences for mining and the country is losing out. 

There is Gold in Busia and Tororo. Madam Speaker, when you personally go to Busia, you will find very many pits by illegal miners and by licensed miners; but everybody at the end of the day is an illegal miner because the miner is a prospector. But what is the difference between the Gold that we mine and the Gold that we prospect? So, this one gives me cause to worry that at one time, even for the oil that we are proud of, we may continue prospecting and never mining it. So, I really think that the Minister of Energy and Cabinet should give out mining licences for the Gold in Busia so that we can get more money.

The second point, Madam Speaker, is about petroleum. (Interjection)- Well, I am talking about minerals in Busia, not in Katakwi. 

Madam Speaker, on minerals, I want to talk about petroleum.  I wanted to interest members, if they could really get interested, in following up this petroleum in Uganda.  I come from a constituency with hon. Beatrice Byenkya, where we have been privileged to have the oil. I have seen the drilling going on as well as the prospecting- However, when you see the rate at which we are going as a country, and the knowledge we have as Members of Parliament, I feel we may not be competent enough to debate issues of petroleum.  

Can we have Members, perhaps on the Committee on the Economy or Committee on Natural Resources, more exposed and given more knowledge about petroleum so that we can debate about petroleum at a time when it comes from an informed point of view? Because now we are talking of an early production scheme and we have started to build a mineral refinery for petroleum, which petroleum we have no law about.  Many Members of the committee do not know about the oil agreements we have signed; many people have not even seen the policy on oil.  Where are we?

At the end of the Seventh Parliament, this country spent a lot of money to build electrification schemes under the Rural Electrification Scheme.  Very many schemes, about 70 of them, were finished in the country. But many of them are not energised. We have almost seven schemes in Hoima District, four of them in Buhaguzi, but they have not been running electricity for the last two years.  Why can’t the ministry go ahead and energise, and no body tells you the reason why?  The schemes are there, all transformers are in place, but they do not have electricity. What is the reason, Madam Speaker?

My last point is about schools. Sincerely, we have had a lot of schools built in Bunyoro, in Hoima, in Buhaguzi, but there is a problem which came with the policy of the 2006/2007 financial year when they suspended the School Facilitation Grant Programme all over the country, except to the new districts and the Northern region of Uganda.  But many schools in Hoima were not built. So we thought, can maybe the Ministry of Education once in a while be slotting in some districts for at least the School Facilitation Grant?  

In Buhaguzi now, we have got almost ten schools where pupils are studying in the grass house, schools have no latrines and we are told the President says, “No parent should be charged even one shilling for primary education.”  So when you call parents under the P.T.A to contribute money, say for building a classroom, they say, “No, our president says we should not pay any money.” – (Interruptions) - just let me finish.  We do not have any schools.  I have said in Buhaguzi, ten schools or more are not built. The children of Uganda are studying in the grass house while others are studying under trees, but because the School Facilitation Grant programme was suspended in Bunyoro, except Bulisa and other new districts. (Member time out)

12.31
MR BADHUL KATONGOLE (NRM, Kyaka County, Kyenjojo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  First of all, I stand to support the motion and thank the President for having fulfilled his constitutional obligation of delivering the State of the Nation Address to Parliament.  

I am gratified to note that he indicates that the East African nations were to read their budgets at the same time.  However, I feel that they should not stop at reading budgets at the same time only, but they should also compare notes on how to prevent the leakage of the sources that are mobilised for running these budgets. Of course we have got a lot of other areas in which we can compare notes. As a region for example, I envy the Tanzanians on matters involving integrity while handling public office.  

In his speech, the President alluded to visiting Okoro County which he says is going to become Zombo District.  How I wish all the other districts that are supposed to be created were mentioned, including one that is supposed to be curved out of Kyaka County. It would have enhanced transparency in the whole process, given the fact that transparency in respect of how new districts are going to be created is lacking. I can assure Government that if it is not handled well, it could come at a political cost.

The President also talked about value addition and the provision of things like, milk coolers, juice extractors and others that are supposed to be provided to our people.  I find this very important and I hope the presidential pledge of milk coolers to my people which was made about five years ago will be fulfilled.  

Madam Speaker, I find a lot of wisdom in the President’s position on making sure that fish are domesticated so that we move from the gathering and hunting for fish from the wild. So I would request Government to put a lot of emphasis on fish farming so that this area can be improved.

The President said in his speech that as political colleagues, we should cooperate in encouraging investment.  We are ready as Members of Parliament to cooperate with Government on the matter of investment in the country.  However, we should be fully involved because about a year ago, I got information that land was supposed to be allocated to an investor in my constituency.  A year later, it is out of my own initiative that I approached the minister after I had heard complaints from my people that those interested in the land had started inspecting it; I got information that actually an investor is coming to my area. Therefore, for us to be able to cooperate with Government and support it, we should be fully involved.  

I would like to say that the President in prioritising energy, defense, roads and industrialisation, he got his priorities right.  However, I am making a suggestion that all political players plus accounting officers sign performance contracts so that whoever fails to fulfil the contract that he has signed should either resign or be fired.  That is how we shall be able to develop and make progress in this nation of ours.

Madam Speaker, I also support the initiative of the President, particularly in the road sector where he says he is going to increase lanes on major roads and where he is going to provide road units for all districts. I have heard information that there is new technology which can be used for recycling tarmac roads and that it is cost effective.  However, I understand there are officials in Government who are frustrating it. While the President is asking questions in his speech about the cost of roads in the country, I wish he could also find out as to who could be frustrating the introduction of that technology that could be able to allow us to improve the condition or our roads in the country. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Namayanja, hon. Amongi, hon. Akello and hon. Aol. The ladies will speak first –(Laughter)– yes! Let us get done with hon. Namayanja, I will come to you.

12.37
MS NAMAYANJA R. NSREREKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and to thank the President, for reiterating the national priorities particularly on Prosperity For All. 

Madam Speaker, this is a 32-page document, but 13 pages out of it are all on Prosperity For All and microfinance. So, to me, this depicts Government’s commitment to this programme. It is my prayer that we give it the seriousness it deserves as Parliament, and as part of our oversight functions. 

I also want to thank the President, for the infrastructural development that has been talked about. Though I will not go into much detail, I want to register my disappointment, Madam Speaker, on one road, the Semuto-Matuga road. On the 16th Day of June 2001 - my first time to come to Parliament - in the national Budget of that year, this road appeared. But it has been appearing in the subsequent budgets including the recent one, and nothing has been done. 

The first pledge was made in 1991 when I was in senior one –(Laughter)– I finished A’ Level, joined the university and I am now a national leader, but the road has never been made. This is a disappointment! The message the people of Nakeseke are sending is that this should be done so that it gets out of the way. Otherwise, Madam Speaker, we are hopeful that this time, since it has appeared for the seventh time in the Budget, it will be implemented.

Madam Speaker, the other sector I want to comment on is the defence sector. I want to agree with the President in support of his programme for completing the equipping of the UPDF and the Police forces. Given the geo-political nature in our region, we really need to enhance our defence capabilities. 

As far as Police is concerned, Madam Speaker, we need to match the level of sophistication that criminals are using. The criminals are getting more sophisticated than the Police, who are supposed to curb what they are doing. So, I really support him on that and would encourage Parliament to support him too. 

When we look at the relative peace that is prevailing, we would imagine there is a peace dividend, but that cannot lead to a reduction of the defence budget; it would only lead to a change of priorities. For example, what has been going to fighting, Madam Speaker, can now go to the welfare of our soldiers who are getting meagre salaries yet the cost of living has gone up. This has left them with nothing in as far as disposable income is concerned. So, I want to support that.

Madam Speaker, another issue that I would like to inquire from Government is the impact the relationship between defence spending and development. In international defence economics, there is what is called defence offsets –(Laughter)–what happens is that importing countries benefit in one way or the other from what the arms traders get. 

I will just illustrate with an example from Saudi Arabia. This country one time bought equipment from UK and the offset was that, if they bought this equipment from there, then UK would encourage commercial investments to a tune of £1 billion. In that effect a pharmaceutical industry and sugar factories were constructed. This provided employment and taxes to Saudi Arabia. I am just inquiring to know whether we also have such a programme out of defence spending programmes. It may not reach that level, but percentages must be there. If we have defence offsets, we must know there are guidelines to follow it up and if Uganda cannot do it alone, then the rationale for having regional blocks like the East African Community of five countries can come up together to ensure that we get civil offsets out of primary defence contracts. To me, that will encourage everybody to support increased defence expenditure.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, let me talk about Government spending on the sports sector in this country – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, we will have hon. Amongi, Maybe, before hon. Amongi contributes, I would like to announce the outcome of the Business Committee meeting of today in which appointments were made to constitute the select committee to investigate the Uganda Police Force. The following are the names:

1.	Hon. Peter Nyombi, Chairman
2.	Hon. Remegio Achia;
3.	Hon. Bukeni Gyabi
4.	Hon. Alex Byarugaba
5.	Hon. Faridah Kasasa
6.	Hon. Zaake Kibbedi
7.	Hon. John Arimpa Kigyagi
8.	Hon. Wilson Nokrach
9.	Hon. Rose Namayanja
10.	Hon. Maj. Sarah Mpabwa
11.	Hon. Frank Tumwebaze
12.	Hon. Abdu Katuntu
13.	Hon. Hussen Kyanjo
14.	Hon. Angiro Gutmoi an 
15.	Hon. Winfred Kiiza. 

The members are expected to report within 40 days.

12.44
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been listening to Members still quote the figure of economic growth, which was stated by His Excellency, but I would like to start from the correction that was made by the Minister of Finance. 

Whereas the President, on page 3, stated that the economic growth in the fiscal year 2007/2008 was projected at 9.8 percent, the minister corrected it in his Budget Speech on page 3 to say that the President was wrong and he mentioned that the economic growth for fiscal year 2007/2008 was projected at 8.9 percent. That is a variance of one – the Chief Whip is shaking her head. Can you make a reference to the book I have already indicated, page 3 of the Budget Speech says- I am quoting- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that document is written, so you will respond.

MS AMONGI: The quotation on page 3, on the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President states that: “The economy is more over projected to grow by 9.8 percent in the fiscal year 2007/08”. On page 3 of the minister’s speech, he says: “Mr Speaker, real GDP growth in financial year 2007/08 is estimated at 8.9 percent- Mr Speaker, to a void -(Interjections)– I am not receiving the clarification, go and consult the books.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members of the Cabinet, those books are written, please synchronise them and when you come to answer in the afternoon, you can correct it – but she is reading from the Budget Speech and the State of the Nation Address – they are printed, they are here. Please proceed. 

MS AMONGI: Madam Speaker, I want actually to start from that premise that even the growth being quoted needs to be examined. There are other studies carried out, for example by the World Bank and an Economic Research Institution called Gini Co-efficient Study which indicates that this growth which is estimated is not balanced. It states that inequality continues to increase between the rural and the urban, between the regions and between the gender. 

It also further indicated and examines the people, who benefit from this growth, and it concludes that income and growth continues to increase in the hands of the richest twenty percent of the population in Uganda.

It states that the purchasing power of 69.2 percent of Ugandans is still below poverty line. Therefore, when we come to talk about growth, we should not talk about it thinking that our voters in the villages are benefiting from this growth. 

Furthermore, the World Bank continues to state that this growth is continuing in manufacturing and service which the President articulates. And it states that manufacturing and service employs less than 15 percent of the total population of Uganda and yet agriculture employs 73.3 percent of the total population of Uganda and therefore concluding that unemployment is going to increase in Uganda due to neglect of agriculture. 

And talking about this negligence in the Budget, much as the President spent over one hour talking about agriculture which he describes as backward, it is only 4.29 percent of the total budget allocated to agriculture and yet he goes a head to talk about agriculture for over one hour on NAADS, Bona Bagagawale and so forth. 

Madam Speaker, this leads me to my point on agriculture, I disagree with the President describing it as backward. He also states that he does not believe in subsidies. In 2006/07 – it is unfortunate the Minister of Finance is not here- This same research states that agriculture contributed about US$1.5 billion on foreign earning for this country and that the top six foreign earners for this country are:

1.	Coffee
2.	Fish and fish products
3.	Tea 
4.	Flowers and horti-culture products 
5.	Cotton 

12.51
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start right way from what my honourable colleague has been talking about. My main concern is on page 4, where the President says: “Already, structural transformation is taking place in the economy. As a consequence of that transformation, the contribution of agriculture to GDP has declined from 63, in 1986 to 21 percent currently”. He goes ahead: “The contribution of industry and services has increased from 10 percent, 36 percent and 24 percent to 49 percent respectively”. 

Madam Speaker, this is a very bad indicator for our economy because of the fact that, as my hon. Betty has alluded that almost 80 percent of the population of Uganda still engages in agriculture, this leads to the fact that about 80 percent of Ugandans will not have access to these services; they will not have money to engage in industrial production in order to benefit from the profits of this sector. That actually indicates that the industries and the services that are provided in this country are not mainly owned by Ugandans. That is a very bad indicator that I do not want to be proud of, instead, since a bigger percentage of our population still engages in agriculture, we should spend a lot of money to empower the agricultural sector because the fact still remains that the percentage of the country that still depends on agriculture is still engaged in subsistence agriculture and not commercial agriculture.

Madam Speaker, allow me also to make mention of an issue that H.E. the President left out of his State of the Nation Address, which I feel is very important; those are the social evils done against women in this country.

The President talked about one social evil that is corruption which was also not handled very seriously. But the social evils against women in this country are being ignored every financial year. Such social evils like rape, defilement and domestic violence, which are very high in this country. You have heard over the last two months cases involving high ranking officers of this country; for instance, a health worker was gang raped and a wife to a high ranking Police officer was bartered. This is domestic violence. Many women are being raped in the villages and they cannot access justice. Statistics indicate that last financial year, less than one percent of rape cases in Uganda were tried.  

Since the women of Uganda cannot access justice in this country, since the President cannot come up and speak about the injustice and the social evils in this country against women, then we are left with only one option - to refer such cases to international war tribunals such as the ICC. Our own country has become too expensive for women to access justice and yet these are social evils that are against women and the President is not ready to speak about them.

Allow me, Madam Speaker, to talk about the PRDP. The President has not talked about it, but last year, he launched the PRDP programme. A lot of things are being said about the PRDP. We have read so many documents about PRDP, but he has not said anything about it, and yet in the budget there is already projection of some finance allocated to the PRDP programme. We also hear that about 40 districts of Uganda are to benefit from this PRDP and yet the PRDP is actually supposed to benefit the war ravaged region - the northern region. I expected the President to come up and speak about this programme so that we hear from his own mouth before we could go ahead to discuss it in the budget.

12.57
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, District Woman Representative, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I thank you. I want to go straight away to the PRDP and look at the economic growth. This economic growth, which has been put forward clearly by the President, is a myth in the North; it is not a reality. For us in the North, when His Excellency the President talks about the mushrooming buildings, the houses, the motorcycles and vehicles, I do not think that this is a reality for my people who are in Palaro and Odek. 

It is also important for the President to take into consideration the population growth. The comparison between the development growth of 1986/87 to 2007/08 is not bad. However, there are a lot of yardsticks which the President decided not to take into consideration. When we compare the buildings, the vehicles and the roads, we should also take into consideration the population growth. 

We also know right now that the President is not taking into consideration the per capita income at all; he just considers the rich people of Kampala putting up a lot of buildings and then he says, “You know, Kampala is growing, Uganda is growing”. We also have mushrooming buildings in Gulu, but the people who own those buildings are so few. We want to see transformation in its true perspective, not just a myth where they are owned by very few people. We want to consider the real population of Uganda.  

Let us look at these Prosperity For All and Poverty Eradication programmes. When some people took the President to look at their households or inspect household incomes, he got to one place where a household had surplus of Shs 20 million. A surplus of Shs 20 million is a lot, and I think that is not going to be attained by our people of the North in the very near future. 

I said that I wanted to talk of PRDP because this programme was supposed to be for affirmative action, to try and let the North catch up with the rest of the country. Right now, we see vehicles labelled PRDP yet nothing has been approved and passed in this Parliament. When you talk to the minister in charge of PRDP, he tells you, “No, PRDP is not yet in place”. 

Some schools or buildings which are given out to the communities are said to be under PRDP. Other times they say Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme (NURP) is part of PRDP; NURP is a European Union programme and it is under PRDP and it is being implemented. There is NAADS, which is PRDP, and sometimes you hear NUSAF is also part of PRDP. I think PRDP was supposed to be a focus in this State of the Nation Address if we are to be happy with the President. Some of us are not very happy because we see our people still in abject poverty.

Let me touch a bit on corruption. If corruption is still being condoned by the big leaders of the country - there is a saying that a fish starts to rot from the head. I want to confirm what hon. Rebecca said, that the President said that it is very difficult to fight his own cadres who are corrupt. That means then that he is condoning corruption and corruption is very rampant in Uganda. He makes us even doubt what is supposed to be the plan for the people to transform Uganda. Money is going to end up in few hands, in few pockets. This is very unfortunate. 

Corruption is not just about diverting money but it is also about misuse of our offices and the powers we hold. This is very unfortunate because it is here and it is not going to go very quickly. So, the President should address this squarely. If he wants to fight corruption, he must fight his cadres first who are corrupt before he goes to fight others. If he is not going to fight his cadres, then it is very unfortunate and I do not think we are going to make any breakthrough with this.

1.03
MR PETER OMOLO (FDC, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I listened to the President very attentively and I have taken trouble to read through his speech. On Page 13, he says that Sango Bay in Rakai needs to team up with others that may help to utilise for sugar production the land of 228 square miles leased to them in 1933 for 99 years. In my mind, I wondered why there is a struggle over Mabira when there are 228 square miles ready to be used for sugar production and they are looking for people to team up with. If the issue is sugar, bridging the tax base or creating employment, I think we would achieve this through these 228 square miles; unless there is a very special reason as to why Mabira is being longed for, which I think we should be told. 

Madam Speaker, I listened to the President labouring to explain to us how we can achieve Prosperity For All. He talked about enterprise selection, processing and SACCOs. To some extent, I support him on enterprise selection. I have moved round my own constituency, talked to my constituents and nobody is informed as to what he should do to get money. Nobody has a target whenever he goes to his gardens. People just pick up hoes because it has rained, and that is all there is about it. He goes to sow millet because the neighbour has sowed millet but nobody has a target. I support him in that and I think we should take it up to ourselves as MPs to explain to our populace what they should do to get some money. 

Somewhat, however, I do not agree with him because he missed out on a very basic fact; you cannot think of processing agricultural products if you do not produce them. So, there was a very basic factor on production which he missed out. Right now as I am talking, I whispered to the Prime Minister that famine is very imminent in Teso because there is a lot of drought and first season crops have already withered off. So, minus water for production, we shall never be able to commercialise our agriculture. 

Uganda has a lot of fresh water flowing, even underground, but countries that are deserts produce more fruits than Uganda. It is because we have not taken the trouble to avail water for production to the people. I would like to cite for you an example. If you have oranges and you watered them, you would be able to harvest three times in a year. If you are getting Shs2 million per harvest, you would be able to get Shs6 million per year. However, today people harvest only once when we have the first rains and that is all they get; that is, Shs2 million. I am sure we would have achieved the target if we had water for production.

The other aspect is that our social utilities are very expensive. If you are to transport your goods from Soroti up to Kampala, there is no alternative but to use a lorry, and you can still be charged Shs10,000 per bag for whatever item you are carrying. Now, if you have got your bag of rice and you are transporting it from Achoa to mill it in Soroti, you are charged Shs 5,000 from Achoa to Soroti. Milling charges are Shs10,000 and transporting it to Kampala is another Shs10,000, so that is Shs25,000 handling charges on your products. What about the production charges? You will find that you will be doing the agriculture for others and not yourself. So, it would very difficult to achieve Prosperity For All minus social utilities whose prices are not okay. If we had the railway line, as least one would be able to pay only Shs 2,000 or Shs 3,000 to transport that bag of rice up to Kampala but because of lack of that, we are facing such problems. 

I think we also over privatised. People who are running the electricity today are just out for profit making. They do not bother about offering services to the people. They target their own profits and they do not care what others face. You will find that with social utilities that are expensive, we shall not be able to achieve this Prosperity For All. 

Madam Speaker, he talked about SACCOs and it posed a question in my mind as to what the basis is for choosing a sub-county as a centre for operations of SACCOs. They go the extent of training chiefs and LC IIIs to handle SACCOs issues! This creates a fear in me that we could be over politicising SACCOs and yet I remember cooperative movements in Uganda were banned because they thought that they were so attached to politics. I think we are replicating exactly what we did not like. So, it may not be able to help us much. 

The other question is how much money these SACCOs are going to give a farmer and for what duration is the money going to given. If you are giving me a loan this morning and tomorrow you are asking me to begin paying the loan, what crop can I grow overnight and begin paying that loan? 

1.09
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this golden opportunity to respond to the State of the Nation Address.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I will start with what my colleague alluded to, that is page 13 of the State of the Nation Address, which is a very pertinent issue which I will never get tired of talking about. On page 13, the President said “Mehta and Madhvani asked for more land to increase sugar production by 100,000 tonnes and increase employment by 16,500 jobs. Some confused groups tried to interfere with this expansion. With patience, these problems will be solved.” 

Madam Speaker, when my colleague was talking about this phrase, I felt very disappointed that two years down the road government has not come out clearly to explain the issue of Mabira Forest. Instead, the President refers to Ugandans who came out and showed their displeasure on the decision as a “confused lot”. This is very unfortunate. 

When we read about what came out in the papers last week, there is evidence that the government is patiently looking for a strategy on how to ambush Ugandans over Mabira Forest. I want to make it categorically clear that this government must realise that among the few very important issues in Uganda and the world today is Mabira Forest. Therefore, to take it so lightly and try to play with the psychology of Ugandans and the world by not coming up clearly with a statement is a way of undermining what we Ugandans are saying about Mabira Forest. 

Madam Speaker, I have evidence of a letter, which is a Cabinet Paper, under Minute 53, Sitting 2008, dated 18 April. Allow me to quote one thing before I lay it on Table. It says – (Interjections) Madam Speaker, I need to be protected. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order please. 

MS ANYWAR: It is addressed to the Executive Director of National Forest Authority and it states: “It is agreed that an aerial video recording of Mabira Central Forest Reserve and its general outlay be carried out and be used to educate Members of Parliament and the public on the actual facts about the status of Mabira Forest.” 

In another one it says: “It is noted that His Excellency the President has directed the Minister of Water, Lands and Environment sometime back to propose a master plan for forest reserves in the country detailing their location, the rationale for their location and their current status to determine the feasibility of maintaining them as a reserve with a view of conserving only those on high ecological sensitivity among other points.”  

Madam Speaker, these are all going on underground in the Cabinet. The issue of Mabira has remained unsolved or unexplained, even to the members of this House, for two years down the road. People are kept anxious without knowing what is going on. The President equally says with patience and with time he is going to solve this. I would want it to be directed that the government comes up very clearly over this issue. 

With your permission, Madam Speaker, I would like to lay this document on the Table because this is an underground plot to take Ugandans for granted and Mabira be given away. (Applause) Having said that on Mabira, I hope the Government will be given short notice to respond immediately.

Madam Speaker, I also rise on a very important issue, which has happened in my constituency. Honourable colleagues, we have been talking about the security of the country and according to the statement it is excellent. Unfortunately, last night in Kitgum District, in the sub-county of Omiya-Nyima, three Special Police Constables (SPCs) supposed to be guarding the headquarters of Omiya-Nyima went out with their guns to where people were dancing - there was a disco - and killed five people. Ten people were seriously injured and are in the hospital. This has been going on and it causes a lot of insecurity. I wish the government could come up and own this misbehaviour. It should be noted, if you give out guns to people you are not monitoring and they go out and do havoc, as it has happened here and elsewhere in the country, it raises a lot of concern. Therefore, government should own this, take responsibility, compensate the dead and treat those who are hurt. 

1.15
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Independent, Kapelebyong, Amuria): Madam Speaker, in concluding his speech, the President had this to say: “Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good works and glorify your Father in heaven”. He went ahead to say that “Our good deeds - NAADS, schools, health centres, roads, security, the Police - are exposing the lies of the ill wishers.” 

There is no way we can expose the ill wishers unless we expose the activities of the government. I would like to take a short time to expose what the Government did in the last financial year. The core of government activity was economic transformation and they did expansion of energy and roads. On page 22 of the statement, you will find the roads and the power extensions that were made: Arua-Nebbi, Kakumiro-Kibaale-Kagadi, Rukungiri-Kanungu-Kayonza-Kihihi and several community roads. If you stood at the shore of River Nile and put a seesaw to weigh these roads, you would find that these roads and power extensions are on one side of the Nile and not on the other. 

Madam Speaker, this is what we are going to do this financial year, on page 22: Rugombe-Kyenjojo, Fort Portal-Bundibugyo-Nyahuka, Mbarara-Kikagate, Kabuyanda-Ntungamo, Masaka, Budaka, Bukakata-Kasensero. On the other side you only have Kaliro-Itanda, Bugiri-Iwemba, Kamuli-Bukungu; that is all. Who are the ill wishers? 

I really wondered if the Minister of Energy sat in these meetings because he should have seen that there is a total imbalance in the allocation of resources in this country. No wonder in some parts of this country, you find people talking about village banks that have Shs 2 billion. People are forming national banks whereas on the other part of the country people are forming orphanages, people are forming jiggers’ associations -(Laughter) I would like this message to go to my friend, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda; the ill wishers of this country are the people who are not balancing the resources of this country. 

Ugandans are awake and they are seeing what is going on and they will hold us accountable at an appropriate time.  No wonder there is a very high NRM political mortality in some parts of this country. This is the explanation. Why do you have the majority of new members of the party coming from only one side of the country whereas in the other part of the country they are stable? It is because they are not helped to maintain their constituencies. You will doubt this, but 2011 will help you to explain what I am talking about now. (Laughter)

The other point I would like to talk about, Madam Speaker, is the social economic trinity that the President talked about. The President gave the example of Madi-Okolo where he explained what a homestead should be. He said that it should be for food production, commercial production and residence. I felt very acute nostalgia for the Teso homestead before 1986. Before 1986, what the President was trying to explain in this paper is half of what the Teso homestead was at that time. Today the President is coming to explain what my grandmother should have explained very well. How do you come and tell us you should have rice here, goats here, chicken here? This is what was there before. What is new? 

This Prosperity For All Programme I think should change the title to “Poverty for All.” What we need is what the whites had indicated to us; in Teso if you revived the meat packing factory, you could be able to sell as many animals as you would wish and you would not tell people to produce animals –(Member timed out) 

1.22
MR HUSSEIN GODI (FDC, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to the President’s State of the Nation Address. 

I want to start from page 32 where the President talks of the security of this country, which he says is now excellent. To the greatest extent that statement is true, but on behalf of people of West Nile, Arua Municipality particularly, it is true the security of this country has now improved - the war is over. There are many people who lost businesses because of the Kony attacks on that Karuma-Pakwach road. Hon. Piro Santos is here; he lost his bus from the Royal Bus Company. There is a businessman from Arua Municipality, Abdullah Iman, who lost eight buses. 

The President has been promising every time he goes to the region that those people will be compensated. The last time he was there on 18 May 2008, we even made an effort to make the man meet the President and the President gave orders - he had issued notice that the buses must be compensated and he was surprised that up to now he has not got his buses. He even promised a package for people who lost businesses and lives during Kony attacks on the Karuma-Pakwach road. I pray the people who are holding these pledges should make sure that they are expedited. I am happy the Minister for the Presidency is here.

On page 10 of the President’s speech, he mentions poverty eradication through Prosperity For All. I am surprised that the President of this country claims that he was helping hon. Godi understand the concept that if you produce children and they die, you do not stop producing. On that day, I was actually helping the President in Arua Municipality to explain to him the concept of enterprise selection. My contention was that when the programmes like NAADS came, the concept of enterprise selection was hurriedly not taken to the common farmer at the grassroots by the technocrats. My concern was on the issue of vanilla. I gave the President the example of vanilla. I said technocrats came and brought the issue of elite crops like vanilla. People in Kayunga and Kabale have been growing vanilla but after some few years the price of vanilla fell globally. We all know vanilla was being exported to Madagascar but at that time there were political contentions in Madagascar

To corroborate my statement, the President, when he was going to talk, appreciated the fact that he does not doubt that I am bright. He said his only problem is that I like walking on panya roads; I do not want to walk with him on the main road. I am one of the few materials for this country, which FDC has nurtured, and I want to thank my party for bringing me up to the extent that the President is able to appreciate my efforts. Leader of the Opposition, I think you take note of that. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, on this issue of enterprise selection, my contention was that as much as the enterprise selection has been granted for many sub-counties, there is the issue of urban areas like municipalities, for instance Arua Municipality; you cannot give us a crop. We gave the President an alternative. We said maybe we could venture in things like poultry. Even the President knew that the aspect of piggery cannot take root in Arua Municipality because the majority of the population is Moslem. So, ours was only that one.

On page 21, energy infrastructure, it is true in this country usually some people give advice in good faith but sometimes the advice is overridden. I do not know whether it is because you come from a wrong region; I do not understand. By the time of construction of Bujagali, I remember very well Eng. Hillary Onek giving advice to the Government that instead of spending resources on Bujagali, they should put these resources on Karuma so that the water flow and the volume of water from the first falls cannot be interrupted. This advice fell on deaf ears and 10 years down the road, there is an electricity crisis in this country.

On page 17, the President says there are people in this country, if they do not support Government they say they do not want development to be achieved. For us we say, if it is a matter of development, people should turn up to listen to the President. That is why when the President was coming to Arua Municipality, I helped to mobilise people and I even told voters to put on yellow T-shirts so that they can provoke the President to tell the truth. (Laughter) After that, you remember the presidential adviser went on writing that there was a bumper harvest in West Nile. After the President left, we demobilised the wanainchi and as I talk right now, they have gone back to their right places. All that we are saying is that in development, we are together as Ugandans. We only disagree on ideologies. Thank you.

1.28
MS EUDIA KWIZERA (NRM, woman representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute. I thank our President for his wonderful State of Nation Address, which he delivered to the Eighth Parliament on 5 June 2008. Before I deliver my concern, I want to urge this House not to always look at negative things or things which are not done. At least appreciate the few things which have been done in different sectors. (Applause)

Due to limited time, I will just comment on roads. On behalf of the people of Kisoro, let me take this opportunity to thank our government, Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Works and Transport for having put aside some funds to tarmac Kabale-Kisoro-Kyanika-Bunagana road. Kisoro has been undeveloped and marginalised. I have the pleasure to inform this august House that soon Kisoro District will rise and shine like other districts. As I talk now, Government has introduced many programmes in our district. Many NGOs and civil society organisations have come to work for us and this is because they can easily monitor and evaluate their projects. So I have this opportunity to thank the Government on behalf of Kisoro people.

Madam Speaker, I want to urge Government always to make sure that they sensitise people before programmes and projects are put in place. As far as I am concerned, most of our programmes and projects fail because the beneficiaries do not usually have a sense of self ownership. On this note, I am urging the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Agriculture to work together and plant trees along our road. Trees contribute so many things to our country. They can act as shades and they can prevent some accidents in case vehicles roll off the roads, especially for Kisoro since we have a meandering road. Trees can also act as a tourism attraction. On behalf of Kisoro people, I am urging government to plant trees along our road so that at least it can be hard. Otherwise, I am very grateful and on behalf of my people, I want to tell this august House that Kisoro is willing to work with our government. We know how to appreciate. We do not look at negatives only but we appreciate the little that is in place.

I would like to inform this House that Rome was not built in a day. It is a process, and I have the pleasure to say that the President is our Moses. We are in transit like the Israelites were when travelling from Egypt to Canaan, the land of honey and milk. It is a matter of working together. I urge this House to work together. Let us not blame the President. It is only the system that is not good. He cooks the food but then it is not well served and the resources are not evenly distributed. Even when you are a mother and you cook food but you do not serve your children well, they cannot appreciate and they start developing some conflicts. I urge our ministers and all in the system to make sure that the few resources we have are well utilised so that all constituencies and districts benefit. 

I got annoyed when our brother laid on Table a paper which stated that a few people got a lot of money. If all that money was distributed to our constituencies, all of us would be happy. I urge the Government to make sure that all people benefit. I pray that Uganda will rise and shine again. Thank you.

1.33
MR WILLIAM NOKRACH (Persons with Disability): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I support this motion and I encourage everybody to do the same. 

The issue I want to raise is on page 32 of the State of the Nation Address. I want to quote the last part of the last sentence on that page: “I decided to accept His Excellency Salvir Kiir’s idea just in case it worked, although I thought that it would not work nor was it necessary or correct to allow impunity to continue.” Knowing the military background of our President, aware of the reported improved capacities of the Amuka, the Arrow Boys and the UPDF, and realising that one option alone would not be enough I sincerely thank the President for accepting peace talks. Peace talks have contributed quite a lot in changing the lives of our people. If you go to the North, even before you reach there are so many lorries coming from the central region going to trade in Sudan. There are so many lorries carrying cows from different parts of the country going to Juba for trade. This was not possible before. I think the President made the right decision to go in for peace talks. 

I thank the President for choosing Ndugu Rugunda to lead the peace talks’ delegation. Without Rugunda, the peace talks would have stalled long time ago. He chose a wise person, very capable, one who carries the nation at heart, and he conducted the negotiation in a very good manner. That is why it progressed up to this time. I think some people in Northern Uganda have special thoughts about Dr Rugunda because of the good work he did, and the choice was made by the President.

I thank the many people who participated in the peace talks. There are many parliamentary groups that went to Juba: the Teso Parliamentary Group, Lango Parliamentary Group, Acholi Parliamentary Group. Even a few committees of Parliament like the Equal Opportunities Committee went there to participate in confidence building so that the peace process bears fruit. I think this was very wonderful. I want to remind the House that going to Juba or Garamba is a real sacrifice. It is not like going for a Christmas party. The climate in Juba is not nice at all. If some people can sacrifice their lives and be there to ensure that peace comes to the country, we must thank them for what they have done.   

Allow me, before I conclude, to comment on Prosperity For All. This is a wonderful project. I think when a new project comes on board, you try many options. They may not work but at the end of the day, we have brains that are going to improve on it. I appeal to members that it must be Prosperity For All. I am not aware of an area for persons with disability, the poorest of the poor. I appeal that this will include everybody. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.37
REV. PETER BAKALUBA (NRM, Mukono County North, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion and I thank the President for his State of the Nation Address. A lot has been said in support of the NRM government and the President for what they have done. However, we also stand to correct government where we still have a lot that has not yet been done. 

On page 5, the President mentioned the spirit of the trinity and in his exegesis, he talked about the socio-economic trinity, which he would like translated from the dual to become the socio-economic trinity that embraces our residences, that is our homes; food production, that is food security; and the family commercial production. 

Analysing the residences where our voters are in the countryside, I think a lot remains to be done and to be desired. We have homes in our rural areas where poverty is at its peak; people cannot afford sugar or even salt. They cannot afford paraffin or even buy meat on Sunday or a kilogramme of rice. They have no mattresses - (Interjections) - I do not want information; I am informed - no blankets, unclean water, jiggers. Looking at that category, can they go and engage themselves in productive agriculture to serve the dual purpose of the socio-economic trinity? 

When you come to food production, people are using the traditional hoe and poor quality pangas; you just cut a tree and it breaks in pieces. This is what is being sold in our markets. Can those people engage in economic food production? There are poor soils and land is being bought left, right and centre by the rich leaving our people with almost nothing. Can they manage to engage in food production and food security? They have no money to clear the bushes, to cultivate and do the weeding. Will this serve a dual purpose? Even when they realise a bumper harvest, the roads are very poor and there is no market. I am not saying this to cross to the Opposition, but I am checking and challenging my government to understand that we have a challenge. 

We are here to serve this nation; that is why we are here as legislators. Most of us, however, stay here in Kampala and spend months without going back to our areas, but a lot remains to be done. The DP just wants to hold rallies here in Kampala, confusing businessmen, when we have a lot to do in our rural areas. (Laughter) People just want to come to Parliament and talk about Nabilah being beaten when we have many other people suffering. We have a challenge and we need to support our President and this government if we are to serve and fit in this social and economic trinity. 

The President also talked about economic growth that has been seen in towns, but in rural areas little has been done. We want something to be done as we prepare for 2011. I am one of those people who have not fully supported Bonna Bagagawale because you are going to give Bonna Bagagawale to very poor people who will not be able to use this money maximally. We are remaining with about two years to 2011; what kind of accountability are we going to have? We have those challenges.

When we get to roads, I am glad that the President proposed that we need road units in all districts. This business of tenders and contractors has left a lot to be desired - shoddy work, kickbacks and government officials getting back the money when our voters have received almost nothing. So, these road units are going to help, together with the workers, to maintain these roads. I own a road unit. I have a grader and the rest of the equipment and I know what it costs to make a road, but you find contractors over charging when actually some of these roads can be worked on if Members of Parliament could participate and monitor what is being done.

1.43
MS FARIDAH KASASA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the President for the address he gave to this Parliament. I think we have to applaud him for being constitutional because he fulfilled his constitutional mandate. He could have decided to do otherwise by saying, “I always talk about these things; do I have to come to Parliament”? 

I am going to comment briefly on three issues from his address. The first is the notion of the trinity that most of us have talked about. I think that as leaders, we should support His Excellency on this. Hon. Malinga said this is something that has been around and so there is nothing new. I have a feeling, however, that there is something new because many people have forgotten their responsibilities. Right now in the countryside, homesteads are simply being used for sleeping, so if His Excellency comes up and says, “No, we have to remind our people that they have to have food and an income”, I think we should support him.

When I go back to my office in Mubende, over 90 percent of the communication that I get consists of budgets for weddings, graduations and the like. However, what hits me most times is that the first item on these budgets is always bunches of matooke. It beats me that even in Mubende, people have to contribute to buy 20 bunches of matooke. Gone are the days when people had enough food in their households. Therefore as leaders, we have to help His Excellency by picking up this notion and reminding our people that neither government nor Members of Parliament are going to provide the food for them. I think we have to pick this up and help our people. If we do this, as leaders we will have helped them a lot.

Many of our people have lost hope. You know Africans are very pessimistic. People are saying in the villages, “My great grandfathers were poor, my grandfathers were poor, my father is poor, who am I to be rich”? I think when we pick up on this, we are going to restore that hope that is lost among these people and we will see their lives getting better.

The second issue is that of industrialisation and vertical integration that His Excellency advanced. I think we all agree that we have to support His Excellency. Gone are the days when in a sub-county you would look for a graduate and it would take you years to find one. Now every L.C has many graduates. Where are these people going to work? Therefore, if His Excellency comes up and says we have to industrialise this country, we have to support him because this is where our daughters, sons and grandsons are going to work. We are not going to look up at him and say, unemployment is so high when we are not helping him. Of course he has to do it in the right way and as Parliament we will be guiding him on this. 

I also appreciate what His Excellency said about vertical integration and the emphasis he put on indigenous cash crops. I remember when we were growing up, there was a lot of coffee, tea and cotton but along the way many cash crops came in like vanilla and moringa. As Ugandans, we always jump for anything that we think is more viable. As such, many people ended up cutting their coffee and cotton plantations and moved to these crops. However, His Excellency is saying that we have to see to it that these crops continue being grown. I think we should support him because these are the cash crops that people have gained expertise in. 

If government comes in to help smoothen issues of technology and is aggressive in looking for markets, I think it will make the lives of our people better because that is what we want. If people can earn from what they are doing, it will be good. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, there is the issue of security. I appreciate what the President told us that generally, the country is peaceful. My heart goes out to our brothers and sisters in northern Uganda. At least now they have something to smile about. Save for a few exceptions that we are seeing here and there, I think that is very good, and he promised that he is determined to see that this country remains peaceful.

Allow me to applaud all the stakeholders who are involved as far as peace in this country is concerned, like UPDF and the others. When most of us are out there running things here and there, they are there seeing to it that the country is peaceful. On that note, allow me to appreciate the UPDF in particular. His Excellency always talks about professionalizing the army; I come from Mubende District and we happen to have three barracks in Mubende. We have lived with the UPDF all our lives in Mubende. In fact, a person wearing a uniform or carrying a gun is not something new; it is not something serious because it is a people’s army. 

1.49
MR HENRY BAGIIRE (NRM, Bunya County West, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to contribute towards the State of the Nation Address. The speech that the President gave was so good and it covered the real issues that touch our people in this country. It was a sense of direction on how government intends to move and how our country should be developed. However, there are issues that I wanted to comment on, like the issue of energy infrastructure. 

Madam Speaker, electricity is an index of development. You are talking about value addition; value addition can only be achieved if we have electricity in the areas where we intend to put these factories that are supposed to add value to our crops. In the President’s speech, he talked of rural electrification where the percentage of people who had electricity in this country was one percent and it increased to five percent. They were proceeding very well as government but because of the issue of the Bujagali dam, money had to be channelled to buy heavy fuels. Even then, work is still going on in other areas but when you give an example of Mayuge where I come from, we have no electricity. 

In 2001, His Excellency promised to extend power to Bugoto landing site, to Rwanika landing site and to Bwonda landing site but when you look at the speech on the areas that are being considered in this financial year, you do not see any of these landing sites being talked about. The President said that Kakira Sugar Works is producing nine megawatts of electricity, but much of the sugarcane that is being used to produce this electricity comes from Mayuge. It is the farmers of Mayuge that grow the sugarcane from which the nine megawatts are produced and put on the national grid. So, it is not fair for Mayuge not to be considered for electricity. 

I will also say something on the issue of roads. I want to thank His Excellency for coming out robustly to address the issue of the bad roads in this country. One sixth of the total of our national budget was committed to roads, but I think it is painful and unfair for Busoga region not to be given a single road yet the President promised to work on the road from Musita to Majanji. Also, the road from Jinja to Kamuli to Bukungu is almost impassable. I think it is not fair. When you look at some other programmes in this country like SNV, EU, AAMP and CAAIP which are helping in road construction in our region, in Mayuge we have never benefited from them. So, I ask the planners in this government to consider areas like Mayuge and Busoga at large. I am not trying to sound sectarian but I feel it is not fair. 

1.53
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the President for the statement and I rise to support the motion which was moved by my sister, hon. Tubwita. As I support the motion, I just have a few comments to make on the President’s statement. 

Last week, I was with His Excellency the Vice-President touring Kanungu District on Prosperity For All. What is very clear is that the people do not know what Prosperity For All is, including Members of Parliament. Hearing the submissions of my colleagues, I think the Members of Parliament are not on board with regard to Prosperity For All. So there is need for Government to really explain and mobilise the population to understand what Prosperity For All is. 

Madam Speaker, I think we need to review the development framework in this country, especially when it comes to how resources flow. The money which we appropriate, how does it translate into interventions at community level? I think there is a challenge there. 

When you look at some of the studies done to look at the trickle-down effects of the money we appropriate, there is a problem. One study which we did on HIV/AIDS, for instance, showed that much as Uganda has the highest per capita expenditure on HIV/AIDS in Africa, only around seven percent of the money was reaching the grassroots’ beneficiary communities. So, there is a lot of constipation when it comes to the flow of money from the centre to the communities, and this is an issue that the Prime Minister and the Government must look at. 

When you look at the North, there are complaints. Studies show that a lot of money has been spent on northern Uganda on paper, but when you go to northern Uganda, you do not see the evidence. (Applause) Therefore, the issue of corruption and the issue of flow of resources must be looked at. 

I was instructed by the people of Kanungu to tell this Parliament that Kanungu has been forgotten with regard to the roads. Madam Speaker, on 11th March last year, you visited Kanungu and I am sure you still suffer the backache because of the bad road from Rukungiri to Kanungu. I am sure the Vice-President right now could be sickly because of the nature of the road. Since 1986, this road has been one of the priority roads. It has been part of the budget until the mid-90s when it disappeared and we do not know why. 

The appeal I am making to Government is that –(Interjection)- There is reference to my colleague, the honourable minister Amama Mbabazi. I wish he were here. However, I was instructed by the people of Kanungu, in the presence of the Vice-President, to tell Government that people are not happy because in the recent budget, the tarmacking of the Rukungiri-Kanungu-Ishasha road has disappeared and we do not know why. 

Lastly, on page 28 of the address by the President, he says that we are going to utilise the ADB loans to repair the old secondary schools and the district hospitals. How I wish this would be true and it would actually be done. The Minister of Health has just moved out, but we have been touring the country. I have specifically been to Apac Hospital, Gulu Hospital, Mityana Hospital, among others. These hospitals are in a sorry state. I visited the theatre in Mityana Hospital and I could see more cobwebs than surgical instruments in that theatre. I think there is a problem. We want to challenge the Ministry of Health to clarify whether they have started the process of getting money to have these institutions rehabilitated. 

In addition to that, the repair of the infrastructure is not adequate. We also have to look at the issue of the health workers. It is very difficult for some of our communities to attract health workers. Kabale regional referral hospital for my region has only two medical doctors. So how do you expect the people of Kigezi to get quality health services when there are no health workers? Therefore, we would like to request Government to get more serious and improve the quality of health services in this country. More so, we request Government to prioritise rehabilitation of the infrastructure, both schools and health facilities, especially the hospitals which are in an appalling situation. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

1.59
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity to also contribute to this motion on the State of the Nation Address. 

I would not like to sound like an alarmist, but I would like to right away point out that the ministers who are in charge of translating the President’s wishes into reality are not doing the best. Leader of Government Business, you should be listening to me attentively like you have listened to the others. These are concerns that indicate that the people supposed to translate the presidential wishes into reality are not taking keen interest. 

Madam Speaker, to begin with, I am really surprised that last financial year, the President had a wish under his Bonna Bagagawale programme or Prosperity For All that we have SACCOS at the sub-counties. There are only about 1,000 sub-counties in the whole country and the programme has not reached even half of these sub-counties; not even half of the sub-counties of the nation! Now, we are coming down to implement a programme considering six homesteads in a parish. We are talking about 5,000 parishes and yet we are failing to handle 1,000 sub-counties; is this reality? Next time we shall go to villages and say we are handling 30 families in a village. We are just not being realistic in our planning priorities.

Madam Speaker, I waited passionately under the Prosperity For All programme thinking that we were possibly going to gauge the achievements that we have made under the SACCOs. Many people have talked about the SACCOs but even the few SACCOs that managed to take off, all their monies were swindled by the administrators and the cashiers that were put in charge. This brings me to the aspect of checking corruption and condemning impunity against corruption in this country, which was not highlighted in the President’s speech. 

Under social infrastructure, the President talks about - like Dr Chris Baryomunsi did mention - the health units. However, my major concern will be the education bit. He mentioned having constructed so many schools. Yes, they have been constructed and the students have gone there, but are we mindful of the quality of the pupils who are coming out of these structures that we are spending much on? We would be concerned with the quality and not the quantity.

Madam Speaker, we have the Universal Secondary Education Programme. I was patiently waiting for Government to come up with a policy to say that all schools in Uganda, private or not, as long as it is educating Ugandans they are all going to benefit under the Universal Secondary Education programme. This is looking after Ugandans. There are living examples where Government is working in sub-counties where they did not have secondary education and they are only taking one school in a sub-county. Given the terrain of some of the constituencies where we come from, a school that Government has taken on is located almost 100kms away from the pupils. Now, telling a child to move around three mountains to go to attend a government school is next to impossible. What do we have under the education for all programme? 

You will recall that the President, on page 28, talked about being invited to a secondary school where his voters brought only menvu to the fundraising. We are talking about a category of such citizens the country over who cannot even raise 10,000 towards the contribution of fees. That is why we even have contradictions as to whether children should be suspended from schools for not meeting their contributions or not. Madam Speaker, a lot still needs to be desired- (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery we have teachers and pupils of Kisa Primary School, Bugema, in Bamunanika County, Luweero District. They have come to observe the proceedings. You are welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, I wish to suspend the House for one hour so that members can go for lunch. We shall reconvene at 3.00 p.m.  House suspended for one hour.

(The House was suspended at 2.09 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.43 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am sorry for what has happened but we are only going to sit here for 15 minutes. The Conference Hall is being arranged for us to transfer there. So, we will sit here for a short time, a maximum of 15 minutes. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you remember that in the morning we had to receive the special investigation audit report on KCC land and local revenues from the chairperson of the Committee of Local Government Accounts but we were unable to do that. I now invite the chairman to lay the report on Table.

3.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Geoffrey Ekanya): In accordance with the Constitution and our Rules of Procedure, I take this opportunity to lay on Table the Special Investigation Audit Report on KCC Land and Local Revenues from the Local Government Accounts Committee. I want to state that this report of special audit conducted by the Auditor-General highlights that over 20 billion shillings has been embezzled in Kampala City Council between the period of 2000 to 2007 resulting from uncollected revenue, unpaid VAT to URA and fraudulent compensation and sell of land.  Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the committee will consider and then come back to us to give a report.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON THURSDAY THE 5TH OF JUNE 2008

(Debate continues)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we proceed I would like to invite you to welcome district councillors from Butaleja District. They are up in the gallery. You are welcome. (Applause) 

I am also extremely excited to ask you again to welcome the students of St Catherine Secondary School, Lira where I did my O’level. They are also in the gallery up there. You are welcome. (Applause) They are this side. When you see them in yellow, you know they are the ones. (Laughter)

3.49
MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala District): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Permit me to compliment the Leader of the Opposition’s remarks on the state of the Nation Address. (Applause)  The Leader of the Opposition cautioned President Museveni to leave traditional leaders alone. You all heard what the President said about traditional leaders; he referred to them as chiefs. Without the traditional leaders like Kabalega of Bunyoro, Kabaka Mwanga, Kabaka Mutesa I and Kabaka Mutesa II, Uganda would not be what it is today. 

The President said, in the State of Nation Address, that traditional leaders betrayed Africa by failing to unite Africa in defense of our sovereignty. He added that Africa was colonised when the chiefs were watching and he said that that was a vote of no confidence for those chiefs. I would like to ask His Excellency the President, where were his forefathers by then? – (Interruptions) - Yes! Where were his forefathers? Do you mean that they did not know what was taking place? Why did they not defend? Why did they not do something during that time? His forefathers would have provided an alternative at that time. I will not waste so much time -(Interruptions) - No, do not waste my time. 

I would also like the President to know that our Kabaka did a lot in order for the President to win the Luweero Triangle war. If it was not for the Kabaka, perhaps he would not be the President now. This is why we need a federal system of governance in order to meet the needs of traditional leaders. I would like to inform the President that if he is not ready to give us the federal system of government - because he is strongly opposing it - let us wait for the Conservative Party government -(Laughter)- which will provide for the federal system of governance.  

Madam Speaker, before I wind up, the President said in his State of Nation Address that the fish sector fetches US$ 110 million per year in exports. He also said that it employs about three million people. He added that the tea sector contributes about US$ 34 million per annum and it employs about 50,000 people. However, I would like to inform the President if he is saying that the fish sector, the coffee sector and the tea sector markets are flourishing, his government should not again be the one to fidget with the use of DDT. I can give you an example. Recently in Oyam District they sprayed DDT but I can assure you that a child died instantly after swallowing remains of DDT –(Interruptions)– No, I will not allow that information. Please do not waste my time -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we did outlaw the discussion on that issue because it is in court. Please leave it. Move on to another point.

MS NAMPIJJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On page 5, the President said that he inspected a number of homesteads in different parts of Uganda that are already generating household incomes in excess of Shs 20 million per annum. However, he did not tell us which areas he inspected. We do not know if it was western Uganda or northern Uganda.  Now the same President is saying that he is going to support six homesteads per parish to commercialise their agriculture. I do not think it is prudent to commercialise agriculture without guaranteeing market for the products of the farmers.  

In order to realise the three dimensions for Prosperity For All, we need to look into this deeper. This would be meaningless to Ugandans or to farmers in the villages; it would be a dream. Right now, NAADS is doing nothing to help the farmers increase their productivity. Right now in Netherlands, they are producing 13,000 kilogrammes of maize per year -(Member timed out) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Bako and thereafter we will have the Prime Minister.

3.57
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want to restrict my discussion of this subject to page 27. 

His Excellency took a lot of pride in the number of classrooms that he has generated since he came to power in 1986. He said that the previous presidents had a total of 44,106 classrooms in a period of 24 years and in his 22 years he has generated an additional 43,700 classrooms. When you differentiate the number of classrooms with respect to His Excellency’s stay in power, that number turns to zero. That is the basic statistic.

Madam Speaker, it is not about the number of classrooms; it is about the functionality and usefulness of those classrooms. We are seated here but when you go back to our former classrooms, it is almost impossible for teaching and learning to take place, particularly in the rural areas.  You cannot be an effective instructor when you have over 200 pupils seated in one classroom. In one primary school in my district, it has become impossible to have desks to the extent that desks have been removed for the children to have accommodation in the classrooms. So, there is no way we can take pride in the structural setup of the education system when the functionality is not in place.  

Madam Speaker, that now brings me to the quality of education. Because we have this mass that we cannot accommodate, we are of course to automatically promote. So, the mission of automatic promotion –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you very much for giving way. The information I would like to give is that in 1997 when UPE started, there was one class at Acholi-Bu Camp with 906 pupils. (Laughter) I came and complained about it in the Sixth Parliament, people disputed, and I went back and I was given the same figure – 906 - and they were sitting under a tree.  

MS BAKO: Now that gives you the extreme position of the problem, Madam Speaker. However, taking on this seriously, we are talking about automatic promotion as a result of trying to clear room for others to come. If we cannot have quality, if we are going to have a benchmark at P.7, I can assure you this nation is going to lose the strategic advantage it has in education. We will not be, in the short-run, able to compete in the global and regional economy effectively as we used to pride in in the past.  

Madam Speaker, there is no way a nation can develop unless this nation has a developed human resource, and the only weapon is education. So when we undermine this education in its formative state, there is no way we can pride as a nation that we are going to develop. The disparities we are seeing in the educational chain now will link us to the income disparities. That means, in the short run we are going to have a nation stratified into the educated who can be able to afford the basics of life and therefore prosper and those who will never attain any minimum basics of life. This is unfortunate. I wish His Excellency can take this seriously.  

Madam Speaker, as far as health is concerned, the President categorically takes pride in structures too. He said that in 1986, there were 579 health units and today we have 3,124 health units including the 40 general hospitals and 11 regional referral hospitals. As I talk now, I have no ultrasound machine and scan in Arua Regional Hospital, which serves Southern Sudan and Eastern Congo. Apart from the very good structures that he has set up - there might be those parish health centre IIs - how many of them are functioning? In the health centre IVs where we expect to have trained doctors, I do not have them in my own district. Structurally, we have 3,124 but they are not functioning. So, what are the structures for?  

Madam Speaker, it is even worse for us mothers. At the basic unit where you expect to have a trained mid-wife, the mid-wives are lacking. It is unfortunate that we can sit here and discuss this document faithfully while mothers better prefer to be treated by the TBAs than their own people who are supposed to be there for them and we have budgets to this effect. What is happening?

This country has the highest number of personnel flight-outs in the health sector. In our history, health personnel have never fled this country at the rate it started in 1986 until now.

4.04
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I do have enough copies of my statement for all Members of Parliament and as I speak they are being distributed.  

I rise to support the motion moved by hon. Grace Tubwita thanking His Excellency the President for the State of the Nation Address. I wish to thank hon. Prof. Latigo, Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, for his statement in reply to the State of the Nation Address and other honourable Members of Parliament for their contribution –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the problem?

MS OGWAL: Thank you. Madam Speaker, we are still debating the very important speech made by the President and I think we should be given time to raise some of the pertinent issues which are of great concern to this country. After the Prime Minister has spoken, it becomes very difficult for other ordinary members like me to speak. So, I am rising on a point of guidance or procedure to find out whether the Prime Minister should speak before some members are given a chance to make their contribution. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I believe that when the Business Committee sat, the Speaker came here and informed you about the programme. We issued a programme to all the members. The State of the Nation Address has to be concluded today and I have been saying this since last week. 

Also, honourable members, it is not possible for all the 300 members to contribute on this matter. Some members will contribute and some will not. Those who do not contribute now will contribute on the budget. You can raise the same issues on the budget. We have to close this matter - it is 4 o’clock – and that is why we had to sit in the morning so that we could hasten the process. We have to close today. Do not worry; the way I conduct the business is my business. Let the Prime Minister make his statement. (Applause)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I wish to thank hon. Prof. Latigo, Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, for his statement in reply to the State of the Nation Address and other honourable Members of Parliament for their contributions. I will deal with a few issues and allow the sector ministers to respond to specific issues raised in Parliament. 

I agreed with H.E the President that the media must act and behave responsibly; for example, when the Red Pepper published a story describing the private parts of H.E the Vice-President, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and some ministers, it was highly irresponsible. (Laughter) 

It is not true that the President’s speech was preoccupied with general elections in 2011. On the contrary, the President’s speech focused on the real issues that affect the country including Prosperity For All, industrialisation, energy and minerals, roads, railways, health, education and security and the recovery of the north and east. Therefore, the President’s speech was focused. 

I thank Prof. Latigo for commending government for creating an environment, which enabled the Opposition to carry out their political activities without hindrance. (Laughter)

The allegation that the President made a pronouncement in Luwero that he would not have handed over power to Mr Ssemogerere, the then President General of DP, if he had won the 1996 election was a media story which should have been ascertained. I wish to reiterate government’s commitment to observe constitutionalism and the rule of law as we have always done. In fact, I rung him this morning and he did confirm that he never made that statement. 

Peace and security: whereas UPDF and Police have done their best to restore peace and security in the North and North East, the following interventions have been made and they are being coordinated by the Office of the Prime Minister:

1.	Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF I)
2.	Peace, Recovery and Development Programme (PRDP) which also covers the implementation of MAYANK work plan i.e. the development framework for the districts of Moyo, Adjumani, Yumbe, Arua, Nebbi and Koboko.
3. Karamoja Integrated Disarmament and Development Programme (KIDDP)
4. 	Northern Uganda Rehabilitation Programme (NURP)

I will just give a brief on each of the above programmes:

NUSAF I, which we are completing in March 2009, was US$100 million under which the following activities were undertaken: 
1. 	Construction of schools and teachers houses, laboratories and libraries, and construction of boreholes and other water sources. 

2. 	Support to vulnerable groups such as orphans, youth and people with disability to acquire cattle, poultry and other interventions aimed at reducing poverty.

3. 	Training youth in life skills such as carpentry, brick-laying, welding, tailoring including provision of tools. 

However, we have had some challenges in assessing these projects. Some people ignore the fact that because of LRA insurgency and armed cattle rustling, the rate of absorption capacity in North and North East was limited.

Furthermore, insecurity weakened the monitoring capacity of the district local government and sector ministries. We are however, happy to note that the insecurity in the North and Northeast of the country has been greatly reduced.

The government would like to make it clear that whether or not the peace talks with Kony succeed, Government will protect the people of Northern and Eastern Uganda against Kony’s terrorism and armed cattle rustling. 

As a result of high demand from the population, including honourable members of Parliament from the affected areas, and appreciation by the development partners, Government is now formulating NUSAF II and we are likely to change the design in order to overcome supervisory problems as well as sub project enterprises selection, for example, the activity to be sponsored. 

NUSAF II will address the demand from the people who did not benefit from NUSAF I and who as a result of not benefiting under NUSAF I had been wrongly condemning the performance of NUSAF I. 

Peace, Recovery and Development Programme

In October 2007, His Excellency the President launched the Peace, Recovery and Development Plan to provide for an overall strategic framework for the interventions in Northern Uganda in which 14 programmes will mainly be implemented by sector-line ministries and district local governments. US $606million, are required for this programme, 30 percent of which will be domestically provided for under the respective line ministries. His Excellency the President has included energy and industrialisation in the programme. Consequently, the required budget will be higher than $606 million.

Karamoja Integrated Disarmament and Development Programme 

On 18 April 2008, I launched the Karamoja Integrated Disarmament and Development Programme, which is a component of PRDP but which takes into account the unique situation in Karamoja. KIDDP has an estimated budget of Shs445 billion. Through this programme, Government intends to concentrate on the following areas: peace and security, health, education, roads and agriculture. 

Moyo, Adjumani, Yumbe, Arua, Nebbi, and Koboko (MAYANK) MAYANK is a regional initiative that brings together the districts in the West Nile for a common development agenda of the sub region.

Arising from the peace agreement between the Government of Uganda and Uganda National Rescue Front II, the West Nile development programme objective is to highlight the development needs and challenges in the West Nile region and propose various interventions and required resources to implement them. The Office of the Prime Minister was assigned the responsibility of steering and linking all the stakeholders and harmonising their efforts and resources for the initiative. Since the beginning of the last financial year, the following actions have been undertaken:

The Office of the Prime Minister released Shs184 million to the Chief Administrative Officer, Yumbe district, to establish and facilitate the activities of the MAYANK coordination unit based in Yumbe district. 

Procurement of basic equipment has been made including a double cabin motor vehicle.

The Office of the Prime Minister has released Shs816 million to the CAO of Yumbe District to implement the eight schemes or sub project for the work plans submitted by the MAYANK coordination unit. 

Shs70 million has been provided to the MAYANK Secretariat by the German agency, GTZ under the coordination effort by the Office of the Prime Minister. 

The MAYANK has undertaken a sensitisation and mobilisation drive of all stakeholders in West Nile.

Northern Uganda Rehabilitation Programme (NURP)

The Northern Uganda Rehabilitation Programme is a joint Government of Uganda and European Commission (EC) 20 million Euro funded initiative. The objective of the programme is to improve living conditions and protection of civilians in Northern Uganda as well as to contribute to poverty reduction and good governance and to promote reconciliation at community, regional and national levels. 

NUREP also aims at improving the capacity of Ugandan stakeholders to respond to conflicts and disasters. NUREP is therefore a component of PRDP. 

Among the projects that have been undertaken by NUREP are: construction of district feeder roads; construction and equipping health units in the districts of Northern Uganda; construction and equipping schools, provision of safe water through construction of boreholes; sponsoring individual youths for skill training; supporting agro based projects by provision of seeds and seedlings; supporting farming by provision of hybrid goats and cattle; construction of administration headquarters, for example in Amuru District.

The special economic and social interventions in the Northern and Eastern parts of Uganda are meant to uplift the war ravaged areas economically and politically so that they can catch up with other parts of Uganda.  

In order to make these projects sustainable, we have involved all the stakeholders in their formulation and monitoring. Stakeholders include honourable Members of Parliament, development partners, NGOs, religious leaders, and LCV chairpersons. 

You will recall that when we were formulating PRDP I, I circulated to all these groups copies of the government draft. We wish to thank all stakeholders, including honourable Members of Parliament, for their input in the formulation of the projects. 

Madam Speaker, one issue was raised by hon. Okello-Okello concerning the constitutional status of the First Lady. My position is very simple or Government position is very simple namely that the First Lady is an honourable Member of Parliament and also a wife of His Excellency the President. (Applause) I do not see any harm when she sits next to her dear husband. (Applause)  I also rest that case. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to request through you the following ministers to respond to the issues concerning their sectors raised by hon. Members of Parliament: Education and Sports; Health; Works and Transport; Energy and Mineral Development; Finance, Planning and Economic Development; the able Minister in charge of the Presidency; Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; and any other minister who may wish to clarify the issue because since I made this statement, many issues affecting other ministers have arisen. I thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament.
(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Now, hon. Members, before I invite the ministers, I now confirm that the students of St. Catherine Secondary School have arrived; they are up there. Okay, thank you very much. They were in yellow dresses. (Laughter) Honourable members, before we adjourned I had received a rumour that the President of Zambia had died. I now wish to confirm that President Mwanawasa of Zambia has died. So I want to ask the House to stand up for a minute of silence in his honour.

(The Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

4.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Emmanuel Otaala):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the contributions from hon. colleagues as they reacted to the State of the Nation Address. But I would like to say out rightly that not many issues were raised regarding the health sector. Suffice it for me to start with the most recent issue raised by the hon. Woman MP for Arua namely that there is no ultra sound in Arua and that there are no doctors in the Health Center IVs.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that the issue of lack of an ultra sound machine in Arua is something that the honourable member has already reported to me. Indeed previously until about two weeks ago, we had an ultra sound machine in Arua. Unfortunately, this machine was stolen and the matter has been reported to us. This is an administrative matter and I think it should not have been raised here as if – (Interjection) - the ministry had not done anything. The ministry took it upon itself –[Hon. Members: “Order.”]

MR GODI: Madam Speaker, the issue of the ultra sound machine that got lost from Arua Hospital, I dully reported it to the minister in his capacity because he had just been to Arua some few days ago. Therefore, I believe this is the right fora for me to raise the issue because it is Government property. Therefore, for the minister to say that I needed another opportunity when they have already closed the State of the Nation Address debate, I do not think it carries water. 

May I know whether the minister is in order to say that I seek another opportunity when it is a serious matter that I informed him about? And by the time I informed him, he was assuring me that he would take charge. Is it in order for him to begin referring us to another thing? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I think what he meant was that you had reported and that he has started taking action. I think that is what he meant. 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, it is good to know that the ministry has begun taking action but what I would like to really understand is what is happening with those patients in the whole of that region, which Arua Hospital is their referral hospital for the last two poor three weeks since this matter came on paper? So, has the ministry treated this as an emergency and acquired a machine? We want a definite answer because- (Interjection) - Madam Speaker, if my colleagues on the other side of the House respect you and your chair, they should keep quiet. Honestly because you are in the chair and they are all murmuring. If we are told that something is being done, it must be specific. This is a very delicate matter. Patients who need to be scanned; where are they getting the attention from? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I think this same House is the one which passed the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets law. I do not know whether the minister can really have a machine. But let him tell you. You are the ones who made that law here. Minister, you answer.

DR OTAALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker for your wise ruling. I would like to assure hon. colleagues that the ministry is actually in the process of making sure that we get another ultra sound machine for Arua Regional Referral Hospital and we expect this to be provided under the Orate II programme.  Under this programme we are working hand in hand with the Netherlands Government to get most of the equipments that we need in our health facilities namely; ultrasound machines, x-ray machines and other equipments required by our health workers to provide quality heath care to our people.

Madam Speaker, another issue that was raised was with regard to lack of doctors at the Health Centre IV levels and particularly for the Health Centre IV in Arua. But over all, I would like to say that the Ministry of Health has been helping the districts to recruit health workers for the lower level health facilities, that is the district hospitals, Health Centre IV up to Health Centre II levels because we realised that since we are operating a decentralised system of care, sometimes some districts are unable to attract health workers. So what we are doing now, is to advertise centrally so that when we get applicants, then the district service commissions can interview these people. 

Previously we had realised that whenever vacancies are advertised locally health workers do not turn up. So, now we are helping districts to advertise centrally and also this goes a long way in helping to avoid a situation where health workers apply in multiple places. So now when we -[Mr Dombo rose_] Madam Speaker, can I first finish my point?

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When you look at the health sector, the biggest problem with the district hospitals is the ability to recruit and retain medical workers because of the unattractive environment under which most of these medical workers are working. When the minister proposes that they are now going to help district hospitals to advertise centrally so that they can be sent to the districts for interview, how will this help the districts to retain medical workers if the ministry is not coming up with an incentive to help the districts retain these medical workers? How will this help?

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, I would like to inform you that it is not about the districts advertising the vacancies. Even when they advertise they do not attract applicants. Take an example of Kayunga; I was there three weeks ago. They have so far advertised three times for medical doctors and no applicant turned up. Now they have given up.

Most of the health centres do not have medical workers. The issue is that because there is competition in the private sector, the doctors are highly paid there and Government does not increase the pay for our health workers and that is why we cannot attract the health workers. And another thing is that even when these doctors are recruited, the ministry awards them scholarships to go for upgrading. When they upgrade on our own money they do not come back to serve our health institutions; they instead go for better paying jobs. 

Honourable minister are you aware that the health system is being run down because of that big problem? Thank you. [Members rose_]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are not really going to reopen the debate. Also we are going to have an opportunity – this time we have agreed that you go first to the committees, run through the policies and then we come back for the debate on the budget. These issues of pay and so forth you can continue handling them there. [Mr Okumu rose_] Okay, only one, briefly.

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question of referral hospitals is a very serious matter in this country and I do not want the minister to play a game here. All referral hospitals in this country are now self-accounting but there is a problem. Whenever the Ministry of Finance releases funds for development for these referral hospitals, these funds are always retained by Ministry of Health.

Recently, the Ministry of Health invited referral hospitals to tell them how these funds should be distributed but eventually when these people came back to get their share, the money had already been used by Ministry of Health. So, something must be done so that development fund goes directly to the referral hospitals because they are now self-accounting. It should not be retained by Ministry of Health.

DR OTAALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I start by clarifying the issue of money retained – money for regional referral hospitals. Last year, this Parliament voted money for renovation of regional referral hospitals. At that time, these regional referral hospitals had not attained a self-accounting status and they had not developed the capacity to monitor the construction works that were meant to be pursued. What we did was to keep the money at the Ministry of Health and with our technical people, the engineers, we were able to send this money to the regional referral hospitals and we got the money monitored properly. But this financial year we have specifically, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, the question I have just raised is a very serious matter. We have been meeting referral hospitals’ accounting officers in Public Accounts and they have not received any single money voted for them, for development budget. Is it therefore in order for the minister to stand on the floor of the House and shamelessly announce to the nation that money has been sent to referral hospitals for rehabilitation when actually not a single coin has been sent to all the referral hospitals in this country. Madam speaker is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But for which period?

MR OKUMU: For last financial year, Madam Speaker- we are already in the new financial year.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you tell us whether you have sent the money or not.

MR OTAALA: Madam Speaker, I want to state categorically that a number of regional referral hospitals have been renovated -(Laughter)- partial renovation has gone on with this money and I want to mention Mbale regional referral hospital has undergone renovation, Fort Portal regional referral hospital, Arua, among others.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe, I do not know- was it the ministry directly undertaking the renovation or was the money supposed to go to them? I think that is what they are quarrelling about.

MR OTAALA: Madam Speaker, thank you for your guidance. I think most of these issues we shall scrutinise them again when we are discussing the budget issue but I wanted to -(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I have listened to the minister attentively answering to the queries we raised. I would like to get clarification from him. Last year in November there was a Hepatitis outbreak in Kitgum district at the same time we had outbreak of cholera in Bundibugyo. There was some allocated money which was supposed to be sent to Kitgum to help to do the work of sensitising the community and the medical personnel up to tomorrow they are still waiting for that money. 

Secondly, even when we went down in Kitgum with the honourable minister himself that is since last November up to date, the Hepatitis control has never been effected and as we talk right now, we have a cumulative number of cases to 4034; the dead are already 50. I would want the minister to clarify how far they have handled these and why the money which was allocated to help was never delivered.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us deal with the State of the Nation Address and then we shall deal with the policy statements and the budget. And also we have created a special meeting for the medium term expenditure framework where you can go into all these matters. Please let us respond to what was raised earlier.

DR OTAALA: Madam Speaker, with your guidance I am now going to summarise this and I hope my colleagues will allow me to answer the issues that they had earlier on raised. But allow me to say that regarding the issue of hepatitis E in Kitgum, we sent Shs 25 million to help in the sensitisation exercise. Initially the district authorities gave us an account number, which was stale and because we were using the electronic fund transfer system, the money bounced. 

But later on after about two weeks, when we got in touch with them and they confirmed that they had not received the money, we followed up with the banks and the whole issue was rectified. 

I want therefore to assure this House that the Shs 25 million sent to Kitgum District for the sensitisation on hepatitis E reached the district. We are continuing to do our level best to fight this problem of hepatitis E but the main issue is prevention. We must put all the efforts to prevent more people from catching hepatitis E because there is no definite treatment. We need to observe that our people drink clean water and they observe hygiene and sanitation in their homes. 

I will now address myself to the issue of attraction and recruitment and retention of health workers. I was explaining that because we operate a decentralised system of health care delivery and it is the responsibility of the districts to recruit, many times we find health workers applying in more than one district and because of this, they also sit interview in more than one district. One district may recruit them not knowing that the same person has sat interviews elsewhere. That is why we think the Ministry of Health should advertise centrally after getting the submissions from the various districts so that interviews are conducted at ago. This way, we shall overcome the problem of health workers sitting multiple interviews and ultimately choosing one place to attend and we shall save a lot of Government money which was going to waste.

The other issue is that we are addressing the problem of attraction and motivation of health workers. Government is looking into modalities of motivating health workers so that they are able to stay in the hard to reach and hard to stay districts. We are working hand in hand with development partners and indeed last financial year, we gave a one off settling allowance for those health workers who accepted to go and work in the districts of Northern Uganda. We felt that this is one way of motivating them but we are also working on modalities of motivating health workers in kind, like providing the necessary social services that they need, providing accommodation for them and this is what Government is doing. 

I would like to point out that our Government has tried its level best to make sure that the issue of access to health care is addressed throughout the country. This is also addressed in consonance with the fact that we need health care to be equitably accessed by all the people of Uganda. It is on this basis that we came out with a system of a decentralised health care where the lowest level of care at the Health Centre II is at the parish level within a five kilometre walking distance. I know –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: There is an issue which the people of this country would like to know. National Social Security Fund has put it publicly that with the savings that the workers of this country have been making for the last many years; they are ready to provide health insurance. The information is that the Ministry of Health is sabotaging this free health service that the people of this country would obtain. Can the minister clarify and defend this issue?

DR OTAALA: Thank you. My ministry is in the process of establishing social security services with regard to the health sector. Initially, most of the workers perceived it as a double taxation and they were complaining that they were already contributing to the National Social Security Fund so they would not contribute to another fund to the health sector to address health issues. 

But I want to inform this House that we have been holding negotiations with the National Social Security Fund and other agencies to make sure that we harmonise our positions and we are now in agreement that the social health insurance in the Ministry of Health can go ahead. My colleague, hon. Nduhuura, has been very keen on this, pursuing it and is in advanced stages towards the implementation process.

The issue of equity and universal access to health care: Of course the problem is that because of limited resources, we have not yet functionalised all the health centre IIs within the parishes as required. But this is our policy that we stand by and we shall continue to make sure that each and every parish in Uganda gets a Health Centre II. 

Our task this financial year is to fully functionalise the health centre IIIs at the sub-counties and the health centre IVs at the county levels. I would like colleagues to stand rest assured that we have allocated a reasonable budget to make sure that we fully functionalise the health centre IVs and IIIs this financial year. Next financial year, we will look into taking services closer to the people of this country. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I thank you very much for your cooperation.

4.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr John Byabagambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I first want to thank honourable members who raised issues concerning roads on this floor. Our ministry has been undergoing a restructuring process and I am happy to inform members that we have a Uganda National Road Agency, which started on 1st July. 

It is well known by everybody that the Ministry of Works was extremely under funded but as we talk, I am happy to inform the House that our budget has substantially increased and because of that, we have had meetings to see how to absorb this money. A Cabinet Paper is being finalised and all Members of Parliament will be informed on which roads we are going to work on this financial year and which ones will remain for the next financial year.

I will appeal to honourable members to wait for the finalisation of our policy statement, which is in the final stages. Soon we shall submit it to Members of Parliament. It has delayed a little bit and the reasons are clear; we have to plan seriously on how we are going to absorb the funds that have been released to us.

I want to answer some specific issues that were raised by honourable members especially those from Busoga. The complaint was that among the roads that are going to be upgraded, there is none from Busoga region. Upgrading roads is a process that does not take two or three years but several years. 

I want to assure colleagues from Busoga that this region is included although some of our priorities were those roads that are connecting our international borders. Secondly, we have prioritised to rehabilitate those that have deteriorated exponentially. We have a programme for Jinja-Kamuli and this road is going to extend to Budiope. Therefore, Jinja-Kamuli-Budiope are among the roads that are going to be upgraded.

There is also a road that is parallel to the main line; that is to the Northern corridor. This road helped us a lot especially when we had a problem on Jinja-Bugiri where a culvert collapsed. This is the Musiita-Mayuge-Busia road. We have considered it to be part of the Northern corridor and it has been brought on board. (Applause)

Another specific issue was on district road equipment, which was mentioned in the budget. My ministry has been with this programme for a long time and we have been purchasing road equipment. Although the money has been little, we have been purchasing road equipment. This financial year, I am happy to inform members that there are some districts that have benefited like Bundibugyo that got a good grader. I think in Kitgum also- you haven’t benefited? I think it might be coming. 

This programme has been ongoing except that this time the President has decided that all districts should have road equipment. We have initiated a study to see how this road equipment, which we had purchased -(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and the honourable minister for giving way. I don’t come from Busoga but I am a neighbour to Busoga and go through Busoga when I am going to my place. The clarification I want to seek from the honourable minister is that recently the President, while on a by-election campaign in Bukhooli, specifically promised the people of Bukhooli and Busoga about Bugobi bridge, which connects Buwesa and Bukhooli area. I wanted to find out from the honourable minister whether his ministry has already captured this pledge and whether the people of Busoga should begin celebrating that that is one of the issues that Government is going to work on. 

The second clarification is that during the State of the Nation Address, the President gave a speech, which indicated a shift of policy. This is because until now, the government has been remitting money to the districts and the districts have been getting private contractors. The President said we are going to procure equipment for every district so that every district can use their own equipment. 

I wanted to seek clarification from the honourable minister. Should the districts now begin planning for the new equipment? Has it been ordered? Has there been a policy shift? How are we going to proceed because the districts need to prepare but also, we who handle the supervision in the districts need to know the policy guidelines so that we can make follow up later.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members don’t re-open the debate. You are going to have an opportunity when you are discussing the policy statements. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will be very brief. It is true that most of the issues that were raised are within the policy statement and I believe they will be debated exhaustively. On hon. Dombo’s issue about the bridge, I have been discussing that issue with our Deputy Secretary General this morning and it is already captured. Hon. Dombo, constructing a bridge does not happen overnight but it is already captured.

DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Is that the new one or the old one?

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, thank you very much and I wish to thank my opposite member for his submission. In his submission, the minister has made many promises. He has promised the people of Busoga a number of roads. But I want to call the minister’s attention to roman VIII of the policy statement for financial year 2007/2008. Most of the pledges that have been made by the ministry do not regard maintenance of roads. I understand that the Shs 42 billion that was removed from the ministry and given to CHOGM roads was specifically for road maintenance and not road development. In the page I am referring to, the minister –(Interruption)

DEPUTY SPEAKER: Shadow minister, you are diverting this debate. He is responding to the issues raised in the State of the Nation Address by the President.

MR AMURIAT:  Madam Speaker, I am coming to that.

DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. To the best of my recollection, when you meet in your committees you are first going to ask the ministers to account for what they said last year in their policy statements before you go for the new ones. But now you are jumping the gun and I will be forced to allow members to contribute. You are causing me problems. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With all due respect to my colleague, I think we shall discuss this when the new policy statement comes. You have got all the time.  As regards the bridge I have mentioned, yes there is a shift in the policy- It may not be a shift as such but a readjustment in the policy because the Minister of Works was sending money to districts and the districts would then hire contractors. 

However, we have been having a problem with this method. First of all, most of the contractors were councillors or district officials. Also, the people working on the roads were almost getting nothing and as such, we were not realising value for money. There is a bit of a shift this time, as money will go directly to the person who is working on the road. In other words, we are going back to gangs who were controlled and hired by a contractor. However, we want to remove the contractor so that the one working on the road gets the money directly.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I understand that this is where we are coming from. Before the new policy came into place, we had road gangs and all these people were under the supervision of area engineers.  Now somehow it appears that Government noticed that there was a problem with this policy. I want to know from the minister what the problem was with this policy that caused it to be changed and why specifically you think you should go back to a policy that you abandoned, to begin with.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I think policies are not static and I do not think that there is a policy, which cannot be changed or amended. I know very well that we used to have gangs that were housed in PDA or PW, something like that. Let us first formulate the new policy, which we are working on now and then bring it here for debate. We shall then have your input because when a policy is debated, you will have your own input -(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, we need to be serious about this because the moment you say that there is a policy shift and there is a law; the PPDA Act, which allows the contracts committee at the district level to take place, there is no way you will say again that you are providing equipment at the district level when there will be no law in place unless the law is brought and amended. Therefore, is the honourable minister in order to say that there is a shift when no law has been brought here to amend that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the President has received complaints from the population and is considering providing road equipment for every district.  The law will follow but didn’t you want him to state what he is intending to do?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you for your guidance, Madam Speaker.  I did not know that laws are cast in concrete. Laws are not cast in concrete and that is why we are bringing a policy here. They can be amended. So if I may continue, the Ministry of Works this financial year is taking over some district roads. We are taking over about 8500 kilometres of district roads to national roads in order to reduce the burden on the districts. The details will be in the policy statement and I cannot give them now.

I think I have exhausted the issue of equipment, let us wait for them to come. As for the rest, Madam Speaker, I will comment on them when the policy statement is on the floor. Thank you very much. (Applause)

5.07
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like to thank members for the contributions made in regard to the President’s State of the Nation Address. I must also take the opportunity to commend Parliament for the support that you have extended to my ministry in addressing power supply problems that the country has been facing in the recent past. My view is that at this rate, we should be in position to overcome the power supply problems given the interventions that we are currently pursuing 

Madam Speaker, there was the issue of the role of Parliament in facilitating quick investment in the energy sector and other sectors. Our view in our ministry is that the role of Parliament is particularly crucial and is well appreciated by my ministry and the entire Government.  

Madam Speaker, it was only unfortunate that there was a delay in undertaking amendments to the Electricity Act by the Sixth Parliament, which therefore affected requisite investments in the energy sector at that time. You will agree with me that this must have also been compounded by the e-mail that was sent to the World Bank to deny requisite funding to the Bujagali Project. (Interruptions)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I stand up on a point of order.  It is known, it is very clear that hon. Okello-Okello this morning produced a copy of the Hansard where the Sixth Parliament passed a resolution authorising the Government of Uganda to enter into a power-purchase agreement with AES Nile Power. It is also on record that the Sixth Parliament amended the law. It is also on record that hon. Migereko, who is now the Minister for Energy was a member of the committee of National Economy; and so was hon. Isaac Musumba, who investigated and found that there was fraud and that the Government of Uganda was going to lose billions of shillings, had Parliament not intervened. Is the honourable minister, who was a member of the Committee on National Economy now in order to state that it was the Sixth Parliament and members who sent e-mails to the World Bank that caused the delay?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, he was on the Committee on Natural Resources. But let me state that the clumsiness of the government caused the delays in the negotiations and deliberations to this House. (Applause) We agonized for two months over those agreements. It took us two months because of your clumsiness. So, please stop blaming the Sixth Parliament for your mistakes. We made the resolution and it is a few members of the Sixth Parliament, after our resolution, who interfered. Please, really I beg you to stop castigating the Sixth Parliament (Applause)

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, your guidance is well taken.  But I just wanted to correct the record that I was never a member of the Committee on National Economy; I was a member of the Public Accounts Committee at that time.  

Madam Speaker, our view is that reference to mistakes made in the past is normally made in good faith to ensure that we can be in position to avoid those mistakes and make sure that we speed up decision-making particularly in regard to critical decision of the day and for the future. 

Madam Speaker, regarding Rural Electrification, I would like to say the following. His Excellency the President clearly pointed out that we had a clear plan for extending power to the countryside all over the country. This however suffered a temporary setback due to the need to utilise the available funds to generate electricity using diesel whose prices are all the time increasing. I would like to assure members that given the short-term and medium-term interventions we are pursuing to improve power supply and the situation will soon change for the better.  We shall be –(Interruptions)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want clarification on whether the statement from the minister is different from the statement, which was made when Nalubaale Dam was finished. The honourable minister then responsible is in the House and when the dam was being inaugurated, we were assured that load shedding was now history. You are now making a similar statement. Can you assure us that your statement is truly different from the one of that minister whose pronouncement was immediately followed by very serious load shedding?

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister is talking about a very important issue, which directly touches the lives of everybody - rural electrification.  Right now, I am aware that one of the operators has made an application for a tariff review.  He has made an application to the regulatory authority, to review the tariffs. The reason I am raising this question is that I know should there be such a review, it will directly impact on rural electrification because it will pull some of the money that is intended for rural electrification into subsidising the tariff further on that sector. 

I wanted to find out from the honourable minister whether he is aware that this tariff review has been applied for and whether he is in support of this review given the current situation that power in Uganda is the most expensive within the region? Is he aware and are you in support of such a review and how will it affect the rural electrification should it be granted?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let the minister respond to the questions raised in the State of the Nation Address; let us not go into these other things. 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker -(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He hasn’t finished; why don’t you let him finish? 

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, I am scared. When I came in, we found that we could not sit here because water had drifted everywhere. And now, I can hear some funny noise and the Minister of Energy is here, could it not be like a short circuit? We do not want to burn in here, Madam Speaker. We need to be rescued. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Members we are checking for the source of the noise. But please respond. I think the other Minister for Energy is going out to ensure the –

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, as my colleague checks out on the source of the noise - Eng. Simon D’Juang assures us that there is no problem –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I understand the noise is from the loud speaker and not from a fire.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, as I indicated before, we are pursuing a number of interventions and our view is that this should help improve generation capacity in the country, and this should enable us to deliver our mandate particularly in regard to rural electrification. The instructions that we have been given in Government are that we should focus on productive areas such as fish landing sites, mining areas, agro-processing centres and civic headquarters. Added to this, we shall be singling out competition of the uncompleted schemes which are in many parts of the country. 

I would like to assure Members of Parliament that we shall keep on updating you on the progress that we shall be making in regard to completing the uncompleted schemes, but also in regard to the extension of power to other areas of the country that are within the ambit of the centres that I have pointed out above.

Madam Speaker, there was the issue of Karuma. I would like to assure Members that a decision was taken by Government to fast track the development of Karuma. We are currently working with NORPAK, the company which holds the intellectual properties to this site.

There was also the issue as to why investments were not made in Karuma as opposed to Bujagali. Our view is that we need two power plants and we shall therefore be moving to developing the two power plants. And I would like to assure Members that Government has put aside the necessary resources and the necessary funds to ensure that this work can be undertaken in a manner that is desired by all of us.

Madam Speaker, there was the issue of prospecting licences. Under the Mining Act of 2003, we can issue five types of licences. The first one is prospecting licence, the second one is exfoliation licence, the third one is location, the fourth is retention and the fifth is mining lease. We as a ministry have therefore been issuing any of those five licences. 

In the Tororo/Busitema area, we have got a number of companies that are operating in that area. Some are operating, for instance, Nile Force has an exfoliation licence in the Tororo area. In Busitema area, Rolima holds an exfoliation licence, while in Busitema still, Busitema Gold Mining holds a mining lease and this one is meant to run for 21 years. They have used up a couple of years, but the licence is supposed to run for a total of 21 years. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker is the issue of the oil and gas policy which was passed by Cabinet early this year. I would like to give an undertaking that we shall be presenting copies of the oil and gas policy to all the relevant committees of this House so that Members can be brought on board in regard to what is contained in our new oil and gas policy. I thank you, Madam Speaker. [Mr Johnson Malinga rose_]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Has he left out something?

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is that?

5.23
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria):  Madam Speaker, the minister was not here when I was presenting. He has pointed out very clearly that he has some instruction to take the power lines to productive areas and landing sites. I did point out here that if you divided Uganda into half, the extensions were only on one half. Does that mean that the landing sites are not on the other half of the country? Productive areas are not on the Eastern side of the Nile? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was it in relation to the roads or to energy? I remember you were talking about the roads.

MR MALINGA: Energy. I gave you the lines. Kakumiro, Kibaale, Kagadi, Rukungiri, Kanungu, Kayonza, Kihihi, Kalangala, Fortportal, Bundibugyo, Nyahuka, Rugombe, Kyenjojo, Katooke; all these.

5.24
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, he did not realise that when we were contributing, we raised these concerns. And just today hon. Aggrey Bagiire did raise the matter of lack of power in the whole of Mayuge District despite Mayuge being near the source of the Nile. He had wanted assurance from the minister, commitment from the minister, that when Mayuge, which is now going to become one of the sugar producing areas will have power extended to it.  

I remember very well raising the issue of Kasilo power line to be rehabilitated from Serere to Bugondo for five health centre IVs. The minister in 2003 even made a commitment in Teso on Voice of Teso that we are supposed to have the power extended. Up to today, the theatre in the Health Centre IV is not operational because of that. Could the minister explain why his policy is loop sided?

5.25
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The minister has talked about landing sites and productive areas. Can he define those areas to this House? I am asking this because my fear is that whereas power is necessary for production, it is also necessary for the provision of other services like those required in hospitals, security and so forth. When he talks about productive areas and looking at the map of this country, a place like Karamoja has been deprived for a long time; a place like Teso, because of the problems not caused by the people of Teso, has been rendered unproductive - it means that if this approach is adopted then those areas are going to suffer. I would like a clarification on this matter -(Interruption)

MRS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, the areas where power is going to be extended to, are clearly indicated on page 22 of the State of the Nation Address. But I am surprised to notice that Members selectively read the areas. And let me read this part. I will start with Fort Portal, Bundibugyo, Nyahuka, Rugombe-Kyenjojo-Katooke, Corner Kilaka-Pader-Abim, including Kalongo and Patongo areas, Katine-Kalaki-Kaberamaido, Kamuli-Bukungu fishing sites and others. (Laugher) Is it in order – (Interjections) – I can read all of them. There is Munteme-Kagadi-Muzizi tea factory, Mbarara-Kitagati small hydropower, Kabuyanda-Ntungamo, Masaka-Bukakata fish factory, Kansensero fish factory and Mutukula, Bugiri-Iwemba, Kaliro-Itanda. The address goes on to state that once electricity is at Abim, it will later be extended to Kotido. So, is it in order for the Member to mislead this House by quoting the speech selectively thus implying that there is selective distribution of electricity, yet the plan is very clear? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you should read the full text of the areas, which have been planned for and if yours is not there; that is different. Otherwise, according to what she has read, a good part of the country is covered.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, actually if one continued from page 22 to 23, it will be realised that there is this: “In addition, Government has purchased three robust diesel generators to be installed at Moroto Municipality, Adjumani and Moyo Town Councils as interim solutions while Government completes planning the execution of grid extension power projects in Eastern and Northern Uganda. 

The planned grid extension will cover Soroti-Katakwi, Moroto-Nakapiripirit and katakekile, Gulu-Adjumani-Moyo, Nebbi-Pakwach and Arua-Koboko-Yumbe. The insinuation –(Interruption)

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Madam Speaker, the government makes plans for the country for short, medium and long terms. I have been following plans of Government and those places that are not going to benefit are always put in the long terms. When hon. Syda Bbumba was the Minister for Energy, she was in Katakwi with the President and when the President was asked when power would reach Katakwi, the minister assured us that by the 1st January of that year, the Government of Uganda together with the JICA Project were going to start extending power from Opuyo to Katakwi. This was in 2001 – this is just a plan to blindfold the country; to keep telling you of the long run –(Laughter)- when other people are benefiting in the short run all the time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I have a proposal – the Business Committee has arranged one more session next week to deal with the medium term economic framework discussion only. So, during that meeting, you can bring up these matters. We planned that specifically to address those issues. That is a special meeting.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry for speaking aloud, it is because of the problems of these machines. But two weeks ago, the Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, directed the Minister of Energy to make a statement in this House on whether UMEME was complying with the terms and conditions of the agreement. As we speak, Madam Speaker – and I have documents - the Government of Uganda is losing power to a tune of 45 percent, yet when UMEME was brought that company to manage, the loss was only 19 percent; the purpose of privatising was to reduce the loss.

Madam Speaker, may I, through you, know when the minister will make the statement and lay on Table the three agreements that have been renewed fraudulently and through corrupt means; when will the minister lay those documents and inform the country.

MR AKENA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister in regard to the Karuma Hydro Power Project. In the previous plans for a year ago, they included, as part of the pre-programmes, the construction of third cement factory in the Murchison area. In the State of the Nation Address, there was concern about the high cost of cement due to the problems at Bujagali and exports to Sudan. If we add on Karuma, we are going to put a lot more demand on the little cement that is available. Has that been considered before you start the project at Karuma? Thank you.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to correct one thing. When I was responding, I did not say that power would only be extended to fish landing sites. I said that the instructions are that we should focus on productive areas such as fish landing sites, mining areas, agro-processing centres and civic headquarters. My view is that this really ensures that we take care of all the deserving centres in the country.

Madam Speaker, regarding the issue of supply of cement, I would like to say that it is true the demand for cement has taken on an exponential curve both within the country and in the neighbouring countries. What we are trying to do is to ensure that more cement factories are constructed in the country. As I speak, there are arrangements to expand on Tororo cement production. The production had been doubled but the capacity is being further enhanced. 

Hima Cement has been granted lease of Adura so that they can also be allowed to increase their production capacity. One of the reasons why we are pursuing extending a 132KV line to Karamoja is because the government has taken a decision that this power should among other things facilitate cement production in Karamoja. Previously, we had focused on a 33KV line but now we are talking about 132 and work in regard to the studies is being pursued at a very fast pace.

It is true that the demand will remain a lot higher then the supply for the time being. But our view is that we cannot wait to construct or to expand cement factories before we embark on development of the hydro-power stations. At any rate, the cement factories on their own consume a lot of power. 

Therefore, as we develop the power stations, we shall also be addressing increasing cement production capacity in the country. I hope that answers your question – I cannot say that the cement factories or the power stations will come first, because our view is that all of these were reacquired by the country yesterday. What we are trying to do as government is to make sure that we sort out the backlog that we are currently faced with in regard to cement production and power production, and I know all of us we are beneficiaries of these arrangements.

Regarding UMEME, there was a petition presented to Parliament and this was passed on to Committee on Natural Resources. The UMEME agreements were passed on to the Committee on Natural Resources and I know the committee is holding hearings- unfortunately hon. Dombo has walked out, he would have helped me out on this. 

My view is that as a ministry, we shall appear before the Committee on Natural Resources and we shall make a submission. Nevertheless, if you give alternative instructions, we shall also comply with your instructions. I thank you. 

5.39
MS JOYCE KWEBIHA (NRM, District Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the NRM Government for having made a lot of effort to provide electricity especially for our people in the rural areas. And as I stand here, I know Kyenjojo District is one of the beneficiaries. I thank the minister in this connection.

Madam Speaker, there is a concern for the people of Kyenjojo that the project is behind schedule; it has been behind schedule for many year and now when they have started on the project, they have started on the side where they should have finished from. I thought they should have started at the source – I am here to inform the Minister that the people are wondering why they start where they should finish from. I hope that the concerned people will take it up. 

Madam Speaker, I have another concern about power –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, I think the balance should be taken to the committees. 

MS KWEBIHA: Madam, one more small thing about hiking prices of power by UMEME. Some times they do not even read the metres, but each day the prices are increasing and it seems this is the only country – I support those who said that and I request the minister to follow it up on behalf of the community. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, hon. Babiha has raised pertinent issues particularly in regard to UMEME. I would like to assure this House that the matters she has raised in regard to UMEME are being attended to by my ministry and the Electricity Regulatory Authority. We shall be updating you on the outcome of the work we are currently pursing in regard to sorting out some the problems to do with billing and other issues to do with UMEME.

As for the extension of power to Kyenjojo, Bundibugyo, corner kilak, Patongo – all these fall under the same line of funding. First of all, I appreciate the gratitude that has been expressed by the Member to the NRM Government because that has been a long standing promise and it is something we are trying to follow to see to it that power reaches the various centres in Kyenjojo. 

As regard to where to start from and where to end, I think this is something we can discuss with the hon. Member, but I want to assure her that ultimately, power will reach all those centres for which it is intended. 

5.43
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I would like to comment on a number of issues raised by honourable member during the debate, particularly issues concerning the rate of economic growth, issues concerning Prosperity For All and issues concerning poverty. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to preface my remarks by indicating to hon. Member that our economy, like other economies, has both the private sector and public sector. And this should be clear to every one. The private sector is by far the biggest sector. The Government collects approximately 13 percent of the total income of the country and the remaining 87 percent is in the hands of the private citizens, to do as they wish, to save and to invest. 

Madam Speaker, the government supplements its 13 percent it collects in taxes with some borrowing from outside and also some borrowing from inside as well as some grants. So this raises the total amount of money available to Government to about 20 to 21 percent.

The approach of the NRM is that the government should use its revenues to maximise opportunities for the citizens of our country. The portion of money that it has should maximise opportunities for the citizens. So, the fundamental issue is, how can Government use its 20 percent or so of GDP to maximise opportunities for the citizens of Uganda? Clearly there are some areas which are at the province of the government, which it must do such as the defence and security of the nation, such as keeping law and order, such as infrastructure, particularly roads and energy and ports and so forth. These are the first priority of Government; we call them public goods. And so, no one else would do them if the government does not do them. But by doing them well, it increases opportunities for private citizens to move, to communicate and to do the things that they have to do in order to maximise their prosperity. 

So, the issue of Prosperity For All needs to be seen in the context of the strategy of government to improve infrastructure; to improve credit facilities; to improve financial infrastructure, so that citizens have access to credit; to attempt to reduce interest rates; to maintain a stable economy so that citizens can plan ahead without fearing that their money will lose value, they can save confidently and for the future, for old age and so forth. This is the context in which Government is attempting to formulate its policy.

Madam Speaker, having said that by way of introduction, there has been a continuing confusion about the meaning of economic growth or specifically the rate of economic growth. This is understandable because it is a difficult concept. The GDP or the Gross Domestic Product is an attempt to measure the value of all the goods and services produced in a country in one year. Now, measuring the value of all the goods produced, and all the services produced and then adding them up is a very complex process. It is done by the Bureau of statistics; It cannot be done by everyone because it is very complex and difficult, and they are dedicated to doing that. 

To many people, when you talk about growth in GDP, they say “where is the growth?” Because, many people – let me ask for example, how many honourable members know how many cabbages were produced in Uganda this year compared to last year? Probably nobody knows because that is not your work. But it is the work of the Bureau of statistics to know. And perhaps before you criticise, you should go and have a chat with them and see how they are doing their work. (Hon. Nandala-Mafabi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, please leave the minister to – he is responding to – no, no, no.

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, before I came here, I was a Professor of Economics not only in this country but even in the United States. (Applause) So, I am sorry if the honourable member still has difficulty in my attempt to explain. 

But it is important that we really appreciate the difficulties of interpreting the meaning and intention of what we call economic indicators. The Gross Domestic Product, and a change in it from year to year, which we call economic growth, is an attempt to indicate the rate at which the production or the value of goods and services is increasing. It does not mean that everybody and everything has increased in wealth. It is an average number, and with an average some people will go low and some people will go high but it is simply an indicator that on average the total value of goods and services produced in the country has increased by that average number. Unless you have scientifically carried out your own work and found that the actual growth is greater –(Interjection)- I know what I am talking about, I do not need clarification. Madam Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you gave your positions, the minister is responding according to his understanding, please leave him. 

DR SURUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The rate of economic growth is an indicator of the direction of the economy on average. For example, the financial sector grew by 29 percent. This is very high. The expansion in the financial sector is extremely fast. The construction sector grew extremely high. But some sectors grew less than 9 percent but overall, when you take all these numbers together, you have the average of 9 percent.

Madam Speaker, the second area of concern was the attempt to say that the numbers that I gave were different from those which were given by His Excellency the President in his State of the Nation Address -(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is what he is coming to. Are you talking about the disparity? Let him finish first. 

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, in his State of the Nation Address, the President referred to the rate of economic growth measured in market terms. And one of the Members read from – (Interruption) 

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I have been listening to the distinguished economist and I am very impressed. However, as a learner in the field of economics, I would like the hon. minister to be humble because that sector is very important for all of us and these things we are discussing really anchor on that ministry. 

Now, when he is talking about economic growth, what concerns us as Members of Parliament is how we can translate that growth into the reality of what we feel. So, we want him to tell us in terms of those indicators, in terms of whatever, how is the wealth being distributed? And the President has been very humble to say the growth is only being experienced in the urban areas but the bulk of us are from the rural areas. So, I want to know how relevant is this fast economic growth of over eight per cent? We are almost reaching the developed country level. Now, how can wealth be distributed so that the rural person in Dokolo can actually feel the fast growth of our economy?  That is really what I want to be guided on. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Members, you are not allowing the minister to talk. You cannot raise a point of order and then you serve meat; no please, do not smuggle. I think that you should allow the minister to answer the issues which have been raised. If there is something left out, then you can come up. Let him answer the issues which were raised from the State of the Nation Address. 

DR SURUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. I would like to assure hon. Members that the debate on the Budget will start very soon and I think there will be a lot of opportunity to go over these issues. So, please, be patient while I attempt to answer what you raised earlier. 

Madam Speaker, the measurement of the gross domestic product on which the economic growth is based is measured in prices and prices change every year because of inflation. This means that the prices of this year are not the same as the prices of last year. But since we are trying to compare the production of last year with the production of this year, we cannot do so until we have taken the effects of the inflation out of the production numbers. 

So, what we do is we take a certain year and we use that year as the base year and all subsequent measurements are in terms of that base year that we are using. We have been using 1997 as the base year but after five years, that goes out date and we change the base. Now we have changed the base to 2002 and this is why we found that actually we had been underestimating the growth because we were comparing with prices of 1997 instead of the new base that we have established. 

I want to assure hon. Members that even before we come out with numbers, we consult with international bodies and have them check our statistics to make sure that we have used the correct methodologies that are comparable to what are being used   in the rest of the world. I want to assure hon. Members that this we have done and we believe that the numbers we are giving you are the best numbers we can come up with.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, hon. Minister. We appreciate that you must base your calculation on some year. What I would want to know is that, do you pick the years randomly or not? If you decide on 2002, what are the key parameters you consider in saying that 2002 is the right year for calculating this? Because you could as well have said all these years have passed, let us use 2006 and then continue from there. Is there any specific value in the parameters you use to pick those years so that we are clear? 

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, I said that we change the base every five years. So, from 1997 we moved five years ahead to 2002. That means after another five years we shall rebase again. (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_) I do not think you have the Floor; I have the Floor, Mr Mafabi. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, he is using five years, let him explain how he uses his five years. No, hon. Nandala do not intimidate the Minister of Finance. 

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, more importantly the number which was given by the President of 9.1 was based on the current market prices and he said so. It is clear in his speech that he was using the current market rates. After taking out the inflation what we call the real growth, which means one has to compare it with the previous years those are the numbers that I gave and I also said so. So, if one wants to be confused I cannot stop them. But in both the President’s statement and in my statement the point of current market prices and real prices has been given and is clearly stated, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to move onto the issue of Prosperity For All-(Interruption)

MS AMONGI: Madam Speaker, I want to re-quote page 3 of the State of the Nation Address where it states: “These robust figures show that our economy grew by 9.1 per cent per annum in the calendar year 2007 measured at market price.” The President goes ahead to say, “The economy is more over projected to grow by 9.8 per cent in the fiscal year 2007/08.” 

The point of contest is the market price the President quotes at 9.1 percent. The President quotes projected growth at 9.8 for fiscal year 2007/2008. In your speech on page 3, you say,”Mr Speaker Sir, real GDP growth in financial year 2007/08 is estimated at 8.9 percent.” So in this case the President’s projection for growth for 2007/08 excluding market price is 9.8 while yours is 8.9. So my point of order is that the President talks of the one of market price for last calendar year not this year, the projection differs. Is the minister in order to say people who raise the issue are being confused while he should actually tell us whether it is him or the President who is confused? (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please explain the disparity between those figures.

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, it would have been appropriate for the honourable member to read the whole paragraph rather than reading one sentence and stopping there because in my speech, after stating what she has read, I went on to say that the figure of 9.8 percent growth which the President cited in his State of the Nation Address was the market rate of growth. So the President’s figure of 9.8 is the projected for this year – the year we have just ended a few days ago, is the market rate and 8.9 which I stated is the real rate. (Applause) So, if it was not clear before I hope it is now. 

Madam Speaker, the issue of Prosperity-for-All is in the context that I explained before of maximising opportunities for our citizens. I beg honourable members to take the prosperity issue in its full context of maximising the wellbeing of the average citizen. The purpose of economics is to maximise the wellbeing of the average citizen. And because we are limited in our measurements, we tend to approximate this in terms of the income that the average citizen is earning or average income of the citizen. So, there are many ways in which we can attempt to improve the prosperity of the average citizen. 

I think one of the most important ways is in investment in individual himself in terms of education and in terms of health. When we make an opportunity for the average Ugandan to have a minimum of primary education or extend that even to the minimum of secondary education, we are investing in the capacity of the individual himself or herself to earn an income to maximise his or her income.  This is an important input in the Prosperity For All. You have to begin with what can the individual do for himself and for his or her country?

We follow up with improvement in the infrastructure and this is what we are doing. We follow up with investment in security, law and order. All these constitute the environment in which the average citizen can maximise his or her prosperity. We follow up by extending services to rural areas. Never in the history of Uganda had any one brought financial services to people in rural areas. It is NRM Government which for the first time, is bringing financial services to every sub county. It had never been done before and as I speak, there is more access to financial services than ever before in the history of this country and we are not only that –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, if you recall, there was a bank called Uganda Commercial Bank (UCB) and this was in every district and in almost every trading centre if not every where. If you talk of commercial banks, I come from a district called Sironko. That district does not have a bank. Before that we had a commercial bank in Sironko town and commercial bank in Budadiri town. This one I have evidence and currently that is a full district without a bank. You go to Manafwa there is no bank, you go to Bududa there is no bank, you go to Bukedea, mention it.

Madam Speaker, the minister is talking about having a banking financial sector in our villages and I have not seen any. Is the minister in order to come and parade lies here that there are commercial banks in every place in Uganda?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the minister did not say that there is a commercial bank in every place. He said financial services. (Applause)

DR SURUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. It so happened – (Interjections)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, you do not need to debate over this matter. If it is not there you will catch him in the policy statement, “Are there financial services in the sub counties?” He is not talking about commercial banks. 

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, I was a managing director of UCB and I think I know more about it than hon. Mafabi. (Applause) When NRM came UCB had only 60 branches. We are the ones who increased the number of branches in UCB to 189. However, we were undergoing structural adjustment and one conditionality of structural adjustment was that UCB should become a profitable institution and in order to make UCB profitable I had to take the painful decision of closing some of the branches in order to make the bank profitable. However, the point is this we are talking about –(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when the Leader of Opposition was presenting your joint statement, he was accorded respect. Please, listen to the Minister of Finance. Let him answer from what he knows. (Applause)

DR SURUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  We patiently listened to Members of the opposition. They should have the courtesy to listen to us also. When we talk about financial infrastructure what we mean is that, we have as a policy decided that we should increase access to financial services to all our people. That is our objective, that is our vision and we are moving steadily towards the fulfilment of that vision.  The institution of savings and credits co-operatives is a vision that in the end all our people will have a safe institution in which they can save their money and from which they can access credit. I believe that this is a fundamental contribution to the economic development of this country which should be embraced by all, including the opposition.  

Madam Speaker, financial accessibility is one arm of Prosperity For All; access to agricultural inputs is a very important aspect of Prosperity For All because it recognises that majority of our population is engaged in agriculture and it is difficult for them to improve productivity and therefore, income unless they can access agricultural inputs such as better seeds, seedlings, fertilizers, hoes and so on even small agricultural tractors. 

So, the key point of the financial infrastructure is that, government cannot hand out these things to everybody. But if credit can become availed from the savings of the communities, it makes it possible for them to access that credit and buy the inputs they need. So, these are tied together; increase in productivity comes from access to savings and credit institutions.

Madam Speaker, the issue of poverty and whether poverty is increasing or decreasing is a contentious issue. We have been attempting to measure the trends in poverty through household surveys which we do every two years.  The bureau of statistics carries out every two years a survey of households and tries to check on the types of houses that people are living in. Whether they have mabaati or not; whether they have cement floors or not; whether the walls are built of bricks or not; whether children have accessed breakfast; what kind of income they have and so on.

And from these surveys which have been going on for the last 15 years or so, we know that the percentage of the population who are above the poverty line has been increasing or if you put it conversely, the percentage of the population who are below the poverty line has been reducing. When the measurement was done two years ago, we found that the rate had fallen to 31 per cent. Before that, it had been 38 per cent and many years before that, I think 1997, it was 56 per cent. So, there is no doubt that the proportion of the population living above the poverty line has been increasing. 

But I want to be sober about this, Madam Speaker. Our population has been growing rapidly so even as the number of people above the poverty line has been increasing. Because of the increase in population, the number of people in our country has been rising so that you find that even if the percentage is lower, the numbers are higher, the absolute numbers.  So, we have had work to do. We have to, as my text book used to put it, run faster to stay in the same place because of the increase in population. We have to have a very fast rate of growth and I am happy to say that with the kind of rate of growth that we are now registering, which I hope every Ugandan would be happy about - but I tend to sense that some people are not happy, Madam Speaker, that we are growing at the same rate as China and fast growing countries. I would wish everyone to clap and be happy that we have a nine per cent rate of growth and we hope to get even higher but some people seem to be unhappy with it, and I think that is unfortunate.

So, when the survey is done again later this year or early next year we shall know whether the percentage of people living below the poverty line is continuing with the trend of reducing and this is how we know what is happening to poverty. I would like to appeal to honourable members, because they are leaders, to desist from the kind of statistics that says, “I went somewhere and I saw somebody with jiggers therefore there is no economic growth.” This is not really a good way of measuring. I think it will be better for honourable members to take the time to visit the bureau of statistics and sit down with them and say, “Is your sample representative? Did it include the east, did it include the west did it include south”, so that they can judge whether the samples taken by the bureau of statistics are good or not good and then come here and make a statement. But to simply say that, “I went somewhere and I saw this therefore there is no growth” is a very primitive way of thinking and Members should desist from this sort of thing. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

MS ALICE ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for bearing with me and I have a procedural concern, which I think should be taken note of at this point. The Parliamentary Elections Act says I only need to have an equivalent of A’ Level to be in this House. I do not have to be a professor; I do not have to be a doctor; I just need to an equivalent of A’ Level and I believe many people in this House like me have an equivalent of A’ level. When we make questions to ministers, it is because we would like to understand. 

Secondly, it is because they swore to do their part, to speak to me as a people’s representative and, to bring me on board by clarifying government policy. It is very unusual of Dr Suruma and I was very surprised when he told off my shadow minister, hon. Nandala. My shadow minister has read some books at least and he is not like me. He has an MBA, he has CPA, he has ICPAU and I am sure he was taught by Dr Suruma and so he understands better than I do. But when Dr Suruma tells him off because he is a professor and he has no time for us, it is very sad. I want to implore government, until we amend the law, to help Members of inferior understanding like me to follow government policy. I plead with you, Madam Speaker.

6.21
THE MINISTER OF THE PRESIDENCY (Dr Beatrice Wabudeya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to make a few clarifications on the issues that were raised by Members during the general debate. I would like to, in addition to what the Minister of Finance has said, clarify that the programme for Prosperity For All is not only about micro-finance and the Minister of Finance has very ably articulated the role of financial intermediation which is one arm of the programme on Prosperity For All.

I therefore want to say that we should try not to equate the Minister of Micro-Finance to the minister for Prosperity For All because the programme has got the production arm of which is the responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and is being implemented through the NAADS programme. 

I would like to allay the fears of the members who during the debate were saying that this programme may be targeting only members of the ruling party. I said it the other day; I want to say it again that this is a programme for all Ugandans and therefore as we bring the policy and other documents for support, we expect that all the Members of Parliament will –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Minister, for giving way. The minister comes from Sironko where I also come from. She is the MP for the women –(Interruption)

MRS KABAKUMBA: Unless hon. Nandala corrects the record, all I know is that there are Members of Parliament who represent districts and they are Women MPs not MPs for women. I know I have been one of them and I am referred to as a Woman MP not an MP for women. Is it in order for him to insinuate that hon. Wabudeya, who is in charge of Sironko District and therefore his MP, is just an MP for women only? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is out of order. Hon. Wabudeya is a Member of Parliament for the whole district of Sironko: men, women and children including hon. Nandala.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your ruling. Prosperity For All and NAADS officials recently gave one packet of cabbage seeds and one tin of drugs to a group of members who had contributed Shs 30,000; each of them had brought Shs 1,000. These are people who are already destitute but before anything is done, they must pay. They were given one sachet of cabbage and one sachet of drugs which were valued at about Shs 10,000 yet their contribution of membership was Shs 30,000. What is Prosperity For All when we are getting Shs 10,000 against Shs 30,000?

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Madam Speaker, Prosperity For All is a very good programme for the citizens of this country and I am a very strong supporter of this programme. It was the theme of the campaign of NRM and it is going to determine how NRM performs in the future elections. The problem I have had with Prosperity For All is how the concept was first passed on to the citizens of this country. The concept was that you form a SACCO and the government brings money to help you get out of poverty. 

This beautiful explanation the ministers are giving here is not in the minds of Ugandans and what they know. I also went to Masindi and passed through Bujenje and the people of Bujenje are waiting for money from government to feed their SACCOs  –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we went for lunch, the Prime Minister directed that the Minister for the Presidency brings here a statement on Prosperity For All. I think we will all have an opportunity to discuss, understand and explain it to the public. Hon. Egunyu, is there something burning you?

MS EGUNYU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like the honourable Minister in charge of the Presidency to help me understand what they mean by Prosperity For All, because I think it should be development for all. When we talk about development for all, we have to talk about peoples’ human rights that are inherent. The President, in his State of the Nation Address, did not talk about the political situation in the country; he did not talk about democracy and he did not even talk about our rights. We on this side think that that would be Prosperity For All to us. Could the honourable minister shed more light on that? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister for the Presidency?

MRS WABUDEYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I listened to my Member of Parliament for Budadiri West narrating his story on his version of the NAADS and I would like to say that that is his version. The official version of government is the one I was trying to describe and which I have laboured in the last two days to describe here. I will go further to describe it when I bring the statement for debate. As far as I know, when we come to implement Prosperity For All we are going to choose six households to use as demonstration units and thereafter, other people will adopt it and we shall get the programme running.

Hon. Malinga is very worried. I want to allay your fears by saying that this programme was hatched by the NRM Government and it is going to be rolled out by the same government. In this programme, there will be no handouts. Everything that we shall do will be as a result of working hard. You will work hard, be assisted by government and you will make money. So, honourable members of Parliament, I am appealing to you to popularise this programme the way it is and not the way you think it is because that is the only way we shall move forward. 

That partly answers the issue that was raised by hon. Egunyu because this morning, while some Members were criticising the President for having a very long speech, others were criticising him for not including some things while many were asking for details. What do you want the President to do? If he is going to bring here everything in the State of the Nation Address and even give you details, surely we cannot achieve your desire of having him have a short address. So, we need to have a balance of what we want. 

The other issue I would like to clarify is the allegation that was raised this morning by hon. Mutuluuza on the money, which he was querying; money going to individuals yet in his constituency he has not seen the impact of that money. I would like to say that this is an issue, which needs verification and therefore I will need time to first of all verify what the money was meant for and find out what the money did or did not do. Then I will be able to brief Parliament accordingly. Madam Speaker, I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Agriculture is not here, but there was something on environment, hon. Eriyo. 

6.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Ms Jessica Eriyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank honourable colleagues for debating the President’s State of the Nation Address and I would like to respond to a few issues. First of all, I would like to appreciate those who contributed to the fact that we need to plant more trees along the roads. I would like to add that we need to plant more trees on our boundaries and that each household needs to plant trees and have a wood lot because as we talk about Prosperity For All, the demand for wood in this country is increasing and we cannot achieve Prosperity For All without enough wood. Therefore, each household needs to be a base because for the conglomeration of the environment, we need to sustain our tree cover including the forests. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to respond to the issues raised by my colleague hon. Beatrice Anywar on the issue of Mabira. First of all, it beats my understanding that she laid on Table a letter that was not even copied to her. I do not know how she got it and I do not know whether that is legal. However, the information that I can give to the House is that yes, the issue of de-gazetting Mabira Forest Reserve has been a hot issue in this country. It has taken a lot of our time and cost us lives and property. Therefore, I would like members to be sober and not continue inciting the public over this issue. 

If at all Mabira Forest Reserve or any other central forest reserve in this country is to be de-gazetted, it would only be after the mandate of this House and as I speak, Mabira forest has not been de-gazetted. The only information I can give here is that, the issue was discussed in Cabinet and a number of issues arose during the discussion including the report of the scientists and other technical people. That is why Cabinet recommended that a number of people do not understand what the issue of Mabira forest is all about, what it constitutes and how it is managed.

It also recommended that an aerial recording of Mabira forest is required for people to understand and I want to appreciate that some Members of Parliament have been visiting the forest and they know what is going on there; not just for the purpose of de-gazetting the forest but for the purpose of understanding what is going on in the management of forest reserves. 

The National Forest Authority has also been requested by the same Cabinet to do enrichment planting as opposed to natural regeneration because when the forest was degraded due to encroachment, one strategy was to leave the forest so that it could regenerate naturally and by leaving it to do so, invasive species came and attacked the forest, denying the natural trees to grow in that area. But research has shown that in some parts of the forest where enrichment planting has been done for some species that were originally there, the forest has regenerated faster than areas where enrichment planting was not done, and that is why the National Forest Authority is urged to do enrichment planting so that the invasive species in the reserve can be dealt with.

In addition to that, Madam Speaker, we are preparing a master plan on all the forest reserves in this country because as this House knows, forest reserves play a very big role in sustaining the development of this country in ensuring that there is sustainable development and also in mitigating the effects of climate change. And so, there is -(Ms Anywar rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, you raised your complaint, so the minister is answering. 

MS ERIYO: I want to thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Secondly, I want to comment on the issues raised by some colleagues here regarding the decline of the contribution of agriculture as opposed to the increase in industry and services, as being a bad indicator. That is not true because an increase in the contribution of industries and services to the national economy is a good sign. It is a better sign that indicates that more people in this country are not only dealing in agriculture but there is an increase in industries, there is an increase in services, there is an increase in medium and small scale industries, which is something good because in the developed countries, you find that only two percent of the population is engaged in agriculture and that does not mean that the people are redundant. And I don’t think in this country, you have more people who are redundant because as the absolute numbers of people that are engaged in agriculture grows, the absolute number of those engaged in services and industries is growing faster than those in agriculture and I think Members of Parliament need to understand this. 

Madam Speaker, finally, I would like to respond to an issue which was raised here by hon. Mutumba about the Cycad tree species which is disappearing, which is in Kamwenge District. He raised this issue on Tuesday. Unfortunately, I was not in the House to respond and I would like to respond at this time. First of all, I am sorry, Rt hon. Prime Minister, I was not around because I had gone to see –(Laughter) First of all, there is construction of a hydro power dam in Kamwenge on River Mpanga and this dam will contribute 18 megawatts of electricity to the national grid. 

Construction of this power dam started in April 2008, just a few months ago. Issues were raised because there was limited compliance to the environment impact assessment report. So, a number of people particularly were concerned about the Cycad species of a palm tree which hon. Mutumba also said here that was planted by the Queen in the compound of Parliament. 

It is true, Madam Speaker, that this particular tree is endemic to that very area and it covers only a small area. I would also like to state that the Cycads family known as living fossils - because they have remained unchanged for millions of years and therefore are very important. There are many species that keep changing but these have remained unchanged and a study of the fossils record reveals that these plants flourished some 135-280 million years ago. They are scientifically important because they represent a link in the evolution from fans to flowering plants. They have been in decline perhaps ever since the flowering plants became dominant. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, his complaint was that the construction of the dam is finishing off the last piece of that plant. 

MS ERIYO: That is right, Madam Speaker. I thought Members also wanted to know what the importance of this tree is. [Members: “No”] Well, if you think I have lost out, others have benefited from the literature that I have given and those who will read the Hansard will also benefit. 

Madam Speaker, it is not entirely true that those who are developing the dam in Kamwenge District have cleared the tree species. A survey has been done because once the issue was raised in May and June, a combined team of specialists from NEMA, UWA and other bodies were sent to Kamwenge including representatives of Kamwenge District. Now, it has been found that about 5,000 trees have been lost in that area but out of these 5,000 trees, only about 40 were destroyed as a result of the construction of the dam. The rest of the trees have been lost because the people are cutting them down. 

One fact about this tree also is that it can only flourish under other trees. So, when you clear other trees - because it is not good for timber, it is not good for firewood - where it exists, then it dies. So, people have been cutting down the trees for firewood and they have been clearing the land for grazing and that is why this tree is also diminishing in number. 

It is also not true as the honourable member alleged here that this was brought to the attention of the Minister of Water and the rest but to-date nothing has been done to save the trees. This is not true because as I stated, Madam Speaker, a team was constituted to do an audit of this construction company. Between 15th and 16th May 2008, this team was in Kamwenge to assess the level of compliance and adherence; to assess the level of accuracy of the predicted socio-ecological impact; the precision of the suggested mitigation measures and the adequacy of the conditions of approval contained in the approval certificate.  

As a result, Madam Speaker, a compliance agreement was drafted and it was signed on the 5th of June and this agreement is requiring the company to resurvey all the roads not yet constructed to avoid a destruction of the Cycads and any other vegetation; to protect the catchments areas especially where the Cycads are found; to limit the areas where roads are built along the canal; to minimize on the destruction of the cycads; to sensitise the workers and the community on the importance of Cycads tree; to locate the power house outside the boundaries of the Queen Elizabeth National Park and to recruit an environmental officer to take charge of environmental management within and around the project area. 

Madam Speaker, the company is complying with all these and the ministry is in charge and therefore Members of Parliament should not come here and allege that ministers have been informed and are not acting. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you lay that document for our scrutiny? You have been citing extensively from an agreement; please lay it on the Table.

MS ERIYO: Alright, Madam Speaker. I cited the Hansard which I think Members have.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That we have. 

MS ERIYO: I have the environmental audit report on Mpanga mini-hydropower on Mpanga River, Kamwenge District and I wish to lay it on Table. 

I also have here the agreement between the Republic of Uganda, which is environmental compliance agreement between National Environment Management Authority and the South Asia Energy Management Systems incorporated for implementation of mitigation measures for the proposed Mpanga small hydro power plant. I lay it on the Table. 

And also, I have here brief literature on the Cycad species, which I lay on the Table. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Tubwita, please wind up. 

6.49
MS GRACE TUBWITA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, I would like to take this opportunity to thank you for your contributions and for your support of the motion. During the debate, a number of issues came up and I would like to thank the ministers for the clarifications that they have made. However, as a mover of the motion, I would like to point out three things:

First of all, I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for his balanced statement - (Applause)- and I am glad that the Leader of the Opposition showed some regret that district road funds have been a major source of corruption through contracts. And I know the President’s Address on the State of the Nation will answer all these regrets. 

I want to urge Members that let us support the President towards the fight against corruption. When these audits have been set in his office, I request that we provide them with all the information necessary and we should provide information to all the fighting agents like the IGG. It does not require you to write a statement and put there your name. You can even make a blind statement without your name and submit what you need to be investigated upon. So, Honourable colleagues, the fight against corruption is not only the President’s role; it is a role for us all.

One thing came up where one Member said that the President fears to fight his cadres. I want to remind you, honourable members, of what happened during the GAVI funds. It is the President who instructed the investigation on this and hon. Muhwezi and Mukula, who are former members of Parliament in the Seventh Parliament were arrested and I believe these are His Excellency’s cadres. So, when making statements please, let us not generalize some of the things. 

One honourable colleague was concerned that the President the day he delivers the State of the Nation Address, he should answer back some of the concerns of Members. But, honourable colleagues, I want us to note that when the President was delivering the State of the Nation Address, we were interjecting. So, this also takes a lot of time because when someone is talking and you are also answering back, that means someone has to answer you back again because when you make a loud interjection, someone cannot leave it untouched. So, I would like to request that when people are making statements on the Floor, let us listen. If you have any information, wait for your turn, then you give your information or you ask politely to be given time to give information. We are Africans and I think this is rude in the African society.

Concerning Prosperity For All, a lot has been said which I will not repeat. The honourable minister I am glad is going to come up with a statement. The honourable Minister for Water, the issue of water for production came up, which I think is very important and I don’t think it should go untouched but please, let the ministry at least respond on this because it is a big problem, which is affecting most of our areas. 

Madam Speaker, one colleague came up with the idea that the Prosperity For All should only target the school dropouts. I am really against this. I think let us be for all our people. One thing that I need to note is that, when you want money, money will not look for you. Prosperity For All is for the active people. Those who will come out to work will benefit from this programme. The lazy who are sleeping will not benefit. So, let us be open to our voters; let us tell them the truth to participate actively so that they can benefit from this programme. 

Lastly, I want the Minister of Education to note that the SFG programme, which was stopped, should be revived in order to cater for those areas that were not reached, where children are still studying under trees. I don’t want to see circumstances where children are affected by weather conditions. Those were the old days; now in this modern society we need all our children to be comfortable when they are in their classrooms. Madam Speaker, honourable colleagues, I want to thank you for supporting the motion. May God bless you! Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you all for the contributions. I put the question that this House do give thanks in respect of the State of the Nation Address given by His Excellency, the President on 5 June 2008. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion carried)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESOLVE INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY 
TO APPROVE THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NO.2 
FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2007/08

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that matter has really been hanging around for the last two fortnights. Let us complete it; it is what we argued about yesterday.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, this is a supplementary budget and the resources have already been spent. What we are doing is only to see how best they spend the remaining resources. It is not illegal if we do not pass it today. We can give it time and deal with it some other time because it has no time limit – (Interjections) – yes, Members, please listen to us. In fact, even if we decided to do it in August, there is no problem. We cannot do it now because we have a big debate over it. We should debate it when we are all still fresh.

Madam Speaker, I would like to plead with you that since it is already 8.00 p.m. we better think about other things. Thank you.

DR EZRA SURUMA: Madam Speaker, I believe the law was explained yesterday and it says that supplementary expenditure has to be approved within four months. So, there is a time limitation and the sooner we do it, the better.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know we have really haggled over this supplementary expenditure for now a fortnight. I think what is left is really not much. Let us finish it and we go, I am pleading with you Members. When we adjourned there was a disagreement within the budget committee. So, let me invite the chairman of the Budget Committee to tell us what they have done.

6.58
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE BUDGET COMMITTEE (Mr William Okecho): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity to allow me present the position of the Budget Committee in line with what you directed yesterday.

As can be recalled, Madam Speaker, you directed us to meet and immediately come out with a position on the brief that the minister had submitted. I have, in front of me, an addendum to the report that we had already made to this House. This report was on supplementary schedule No.2 for the financial year 2007/08.

I wish to read the addendum verbatim because it is important that we really get to the route of this matter. The addendum reads thus: In the report that was presented to the House on Tuesday, 1 July 2008, the Budget Committee had reported that the resource supplementary expenditure under schedule No. 2 of the financial year 2007/08, which amounts to Shs 73.226 billion, constitutes 1.64 percent of the total approved budget. That was excluding arrears, non-VAT taxes and statutory payments. This percentage is below the limit of three percent as required by the Budget Act, 2001. However, it maybe recalled that the additional supplementary budget request under Schedule No. 1 of the financial year 2007/08, which was passed in March 2008, amounted to Shs 183.779 billion and constituted 4.16 percent of the total approved budget for the financial year 2007/08.

Consequently, Madam Speaker, on the same day Tuesday, 1 July 2008, during plenary debates, you directed the Attorney-General to give the legal interpretation of Section 12 of the Budget Act, which section spells out the limits of supplementary expenditure and the roles of the Executive and Parliament with respect to supplementary expenditure.

On 2 July 2008, the Attorney-General gave a legal interpretation. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Planning also circulated a brief to Members of Parliament in respect of compliancy to the supplementary expenditure for a financial year, which is the Budget Act. The Speaker directed that the Budget Committee goes back and re-examines the figures. The committee met this morning with technical officers from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to re-examine the supplementary schedules. We had a record turn up of Members as can be shown by the signatures at the back of this presentation.

Madam Speaker, the committee would now like to report on its findings as follows:

The committee rejected the submission by the ministry that taxes amounting Shs 12,588,000,000 under Schedule No. 2 was a non-resource. The ministry official also conceded. It is the position of the committee therefore, that taxes are resources that are appropriated by Parliament.

The amount of additional resources approved in March 2008 under Schedule No. 1 was Shs 138.221 billion after Parliament had rejected of Shs 45.555 billion in favour of fuel for national reserves in Jinja. I think this can recalled.

The total additional resource requested for under Schedule No.2 now amounts to Shs 73.336 billion as had been indicated in earlier report, which we presented.

The cumulative additional resource under schedules 1 and 2 amounts to Shs 211.447 billion. That is cumulative for the whole financial year of 2007/08.

The total approved budget for the financial year 2007/08 was Shs 5,471,188,913,000. We quote this figure because it is the base figure which we use for calculating whether the total amount of the supplementary exceeds three percent or not.

Thus cumulatively, when we had made calculations, additional resources as a percentage of the approved budget was actually 3.86 percent not as we had indicated earlier of 4.16 percent in the original report. 

Madam Speaker, the committee would like to observe that whereas the percentage of 3.86 percent was above the limit as set by the Act, that is Section 12(1) of the Budget Act, the minister sought the approval of Parliament, which was granted in March 2008 when Parliament approved supplementary schedule No.1. 

Given the interpretation f the Attorney-General, therefore, the need to maintain and guard the power of Parliament over the purse and given the spirit of the Budget Act, which requires Parliament to judiciously appropriate resources to critical areas of the economy, government should desist from spending more than three percent of the approved budget. 

Madam Speaker, in light of the concerns raised pertaining to heaping together new resources required during inter and intra-vote reallocation and taxes, the committee recommends that in future, government should present a separate supplementary request for required additional resources under section 12(1) of the Budget Act.

In addition, a separate request should be made to Parliament to approve re-allocations necessary to be carried out in the course of the budget implementation since Parliament would have appropriated the budget on the basis of specific activities which would have been highly prioritised. 

With this clarification, the Budget Committee recommends to the House that supplementary schedule No.2 for the financial year 2007/08 be approved. Thank you very much Madam Speaker.

7.07
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the addendum to their report and I would like to make a careful observation of the implications and facts. 

I believe the fundamental issue concerns the expenditure which was approved and made by the minister as additional resource before getting the approval of Parliament. In looking at the report of the committee, I would like to make the following observations on the six points on the second page. 

Madam Speaker, I will not waste the time of the House on the first item, on whether non-resource taxes are additional or not. I will just say in passing that this refers to payments that are book entries in that no actual money is taken from the money collected by the Uganda Revenue Authority. It is simply a book entry in which the government says, “We have paid taxes”, for example, “On a government car”. But actually no debit is done to the Consolidated Fund; so there is no increase or decrease. But I do not want to argue about it, if the committee feels that it should be included as additional resources, I am prepared to concede that point.

On the second point, I believe that there is a problem. The second point concerns the amount of additional resources approved in March 2008 under schedule No.1. I think the issue here is, “Approved by who”? The fundamental point is the amount approved by the minister without the authority of Parliament. The amount money approved by the minister without the authority of Parliament in schedule No.1 was 73.492 of additional resources and 8.403 of non-resource taxes coming to total of 81.895, not 138,221. In other wards, when we came to Parliament, there was an amount in the schedule which had not yet been spent but which we were asking Parliament for the authority to spend. 

So, our view is that it is not correct to say that the ministry spent 338.221 because when we came here we had not spent that money and we sought the authority of Parliament. The balance over the 81.895 was approved by Parliament; the 81.895 is what we actually spent without the approval of Parliament. 

That is consistent with point No.3 where the amount being shown is 73.226 under schedule No.2 – that is the amount that we have spent which we are asking you to approve. The additional amount of 107 had not yet been spent when we came here. So, when you add the amount of additional resources plus the non-resource tax, it comes to 155.12 not 211.447; so there is an inconsistency between point two and point three. 

So, Madam Speaker, in conclusion, the percentage spent by us without the approval of Parliament is 2.84 and is below the three percent limit. 

MR ODUMAN: Madam Speaker, I am a bit disturbed. Today is the third day we are dealing with disagreements between the committee and the minister. When we adjourned yesterday, you clearly guided that the committee should go and harmonise their position with the minister and that is after the other time when the committee came with a report and the minister came also with another report rather than submitting to the committee for harmonisation so that the committee would submit a revised report. 

Now, from the report of the committee on page 1, the last paragraph on the first page says, “The committee met this morning with technical officials from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development -”. That means the minister was not part of that meeting and that is why the minister is coming with disagreements with the positions of the committee. 

I really need to be guided. This is the third day; we had hoped that by today they would come with a common position. How are we now going to adjudicate between the committee’s position and the minister’s position and yet the committee agreed with the technical people? On their second page they say, “The ministry officials also conceded to the fact that no taxes are supposed to be appropriated.” That they should be included in the calculations of the threshold, the three percent. I think we are moving back and forth. We wonder whether the committee and the minister are working together. And what capacity do we have now to say whether the minister is right or the committee is right?

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This morning the chairperson of the committee reported that he spoke to the minister. The minister was not in a position to come but he did promise that he would send his representative. And these are the technical people that attended the meeting this morning. And we went through all those figures one by one. And they were convinced with our position that there were errors and we agreed to purge those areas from the report and to correct the impression which was created yesterday. 

It is very unfortunate that the minister did not come himself. He entrusted and delegated other technocrats to come and represent him. And at the end of the day when the technocrats reported to him, he comes and tells us a different story. We have no other team to work with. We spent the whole morning, Madam Speaker, dealing with this case. And there is nothing that was hidden during the meeting. I am surprised that the minister is coming at this moment with a different position. Thank you.

MR OLENY: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to provide further information following the submission from hon. Cecilia. Indeed, it is true, this morning we did meet and we had representation from the Ministry of Finance, none other than, I think, the director of budget and the commissioner budget policy. 

At the conclusion of that meeting, we did make a position as has been presented. Now, I am really very surprised that when the technical team went back to the minister that is the brief they gave him. I am suspicious that he is speaking from the brief given to him by the technical team, which was not the position agreed to by the committee. 

MR WOPUWA: Why do our political committee Members need technical officers when we have four ministers of state in the Ministry of Finance?

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, mine is not a debate. I want to request the Minister of Finance to concede that the people who came to the committee, Director of the Budget, Patrick Ocailap and Kenneth Mugambe who, I think, is the Director of the Economic Policy of - we sat and we all agreed that the minister concedes because we are not about to do anything. We are only saying that next time let us all, as Parliament, look at the reallocations; let us see how much you are spending before you spend above it. It is not your fault, honourable minister, there were so many problems at the beginning of this year and you had to spend money. It was not you spending your own money. So, if the minister has another position, Madam Speaker, let us adjourn and leave the minister with his supplementary. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe he is going to concede. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the supplementary budget is a budget which is supposed to be used for programmes of our country. The Minister of Finance is talking very ably because he is a professor of Economics; that first and foremost, he does not agree with the committee that to appropriate a tax does not involve payment of tax.

All of you Members must agree or you know that everyday we have the budget of Uganda here, there is a tax component which is appropriated and is given to every ministry in as far as taxes are concerned. And the moment it is appropriated here, any addition must be appropriated. We do not know what Physics or Economics – the minister is coming and telling us that it is now not supposed to be appropriated. Even yesterday he came out strongly and said that it is 2.45 percent and not three percent. It is true that the first time you came it was 183.7 billion because it was already above three percent. Now it was reduced to 130 something billion, but it does not imply that you should not have come.

Given this inconsistency, Madam Speaker, we would plead with you to allow the Minister of Finance, and we go back and sit again and look at this supplementary otherwise we are not going to call our committee stupid in here when it did the right job. I thank you.

DR SURUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable chairman of the Budget Committee called me this morning and asked me if I could send an official or officials to go over the numbers with them and I duly sent the director of the budget and the commissioner to come and go over the numbers. Now, as a technical team, their work is to advise but this is not their report. They have given their advice and the advice can be taken or it can be rejected. But I am giving the position of the ministry, which may have been rejected in the committee. That the fundamental point of the law, as I understood it from yesterday’s submission of the Attorney-General, concerns additional resources and the reallocations. 

I want to put it on record, Madam Speaker, that the additional resources which were spent by my ministry before getting the authority of Parliament, is actually below the three percent limit. And that is the submission I am making. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, given the circumstances, we Parliament are saying it is 3.86 percent. The minister is saying, “It is below three percent”; don’t you think it is necessary for us again to go back so that the minister shows us whether it is below three per cent and why we have more that 3.8 per cent? Failure to that, Parliament is to be used as a rubber stamp to pass things for the sake of it. Madam Speaker, don’t you think we need to go and look at it further?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members,  I think we have been put in a certain amount of difficulty so I think I will propose that we adjourn so that you go back and really come to agreement on the presentation, on the contents, on the quantum otherwise our records are going to look very funny when we do –

So, honourable members, I had indicated that we conclude the State of the Nation Address today, which we have done but we had also promised the Members a special meeting on the MTF.  So, we shall have that special meeting of the MTF on Tuesday afternoon. That will conclude the final meetings of the plenary and then we go to the committees. So, House adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 7.25 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 8 July 2008 at 2.00 p.m.)

