Wednesday, 7 July 2010

Parliament met at 02.52 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting. We apologise for yesterday’s inability to work. We had a shortage of water in 90 percent of the building, so it was not possible to keep nearly 1,000 people here. That is why we were unable to work but the situation has been rectified.

Secondly, I want to amend the Order Paper and defer item No. 6. The minister responsible has informed me that he is not in position to proceed today, so item No. 6, No. 7 and No. 8 will be deferred because they are related. Thank you.

2.54
MR JACK WAMAI-WAMANGA (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Madam Speaker, I take the Floor on a matter of great importance. The people of Mbale have been attacked by a strange disease referred to as “red eyes”.

I have also been told by other Members that even in Busoga, a number of schools were closed; even Kampala, people have been attacked by “red eyes”. I want to find out from Government because the people I represent have been to Mbale Referral Hospital and whenever they go to the hospital, they tell them to go and look for medicine and now with the borders of this country opened - I have also learnt that the disease in a lay man’s language called “red eyes” is very infectious. If you shake hands with somebody, it affects you very fast. What are we going to do as politicians? When we go to our constituencies, we are supposed to greet our people and shake hands with them.

I would like to find out from Government how prepared they are to arrest this situation which has taken over the whole country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.56
DR SULEIMAN BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Budiope County, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national concern. A few days ago I was in my constituency to mobilise my wanainchi on issues to do with development, among others.

In the many meetings I conducted, the persistent concern that was being raised was about the falling prices of agricultural produce and this ranges from cereals to grains. I also lately went to the constituency to attend the burial of some of my former voters who very sadly crossed to the opposite side of life but throughout the burial proceedings, I was under constant bombardment, from the verbal artillery of some of the mourners who wanted to know what steps Government was taking to help save the situation of falling agricultural produce prices. Of course, in my polite response, I promised them to pass over their concerns to Government, which I am doing right now.

However, the issue that I would like to highlight is that there are serious distortions, which are being created by the falling and unstable prices of agricultural produce, which greatly affects the planning processes of both households and individuals. On one hand you have a producer who is not able to raise enough revenue from what he has sold and, therefore, he cannot meet his daily obligations, say school fees, medical bills and other basic necessities. On the other hand you also have the middleman who is expecting to get profit but his profit margin levels have been greatly undermined. Then also on the other hand you have the area Member of Parliament who continues to be a target of financial demands from the voters whose income levels have been destabilised.

Hon. Members will agree that the majority of our people in the countryside finance their budgetary commitments largely from the proceeds that are got from selling their produce and it is, therefore, not surprising that there is now a large outcry out there. The people are greatly concerned.

I do not know what the situation is like in other areas of the country, and I stand to benefit from experiences of other colleagues on how they are managing the situation there. Otherwise, I am calling on Government to urgently address this issue by making the necessary interventions. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me ask the Prime Minister to irrigate the nation. (Laughter)

2.59
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Members of Parliament, I have requested hon. Aggrey Awori to indicate to the ministers who should have been here to answer those questions on Tuesday. I thank you. [MR WADRI: “Awori?”] (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is some information about the “red eyes”. 

3.00
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In the absence of the Minister of Health, since I am medically qualified, I could just provide some useful information on the “red eyes” question, which has been raised by our colleague from Mbale Municipality. It is true this illness of the “red eyes” is actually prevalent in a number of communities especially in Eastern Uganda.

This is a viral infection, which usually occurs during the dry season but like most viral infections, it is self-limiting. In other words, it will go through the cycle and it will just go. Usually, the way the infection is transmitted is through contact; if you scratch your eyes and then maybe touch another person. It is through contact that you can transmit this infection. So, what the ministry needs to do is to sensitise the public through public education campaigns to explain this viral disease, how it can be avoided and also promote hygienic behaviours among the population. Otherwise, your people should not get scared. It is not fatal but you just need basic hygiene measures and to know how it is spread and with time it will be self limiting, it will go. I just wanted to provide useful technical information to our colleague. (Applause)

3.02
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Aggrey Awori): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity to answer these two concerns on behalf of my honourable colleagues.

The Minister of Health will be here on Tuesday to answer it in a more substantive detail but at the same time, I would also like to thank Hon. Baryomunsi who has shed some light on the issue of the “red eyes”. 

Hon. Balyejjusa again, the concern raised will be answered by the Minister of Agriculture early next week. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe hon. Awori, you know on 6 February, President Museveni was in Iganga and he assured the country that the maize, which was in their gardens and stores would be bought by the Government. Since February, the maize has not been bought and the new crop is now ready for harvesting. So, the situation is really very bad. It is very grave indeed. 

MR EKANYA: To supplement that, Madam Speaker, the Kenyan Government has even worsened the situation because in the past, the maize used to go to Kenya. Now the Kenyan Government has passed a law to set prices and they are doing this selectively. The Ugandan traders are therefore not sure of the prices; or how much they should invest in buying the maize and take it to Kenya.

3.04
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Madam Speaker, mine is not about maize but milk because the people I represent mainly produce milk.

The other day I met the Managing Director of Sameer who said that his problem is lack of milk. As I speak, the price of milk in my village has gone to below Shs 200 a litre. That means that the supply is high and it continues to go down even when the dry season is on. So, I would like to know how the biggest company in the country that is processing milk could be lacking milk when in our villages milk is actually literally almost being poured because if you are selling a litre at less than Shs 200, then you are literally pouring your milk. Could the Ministry of Agriculture, when they answer the question of maize, also add my concern on milk? I thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.05
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER IN CHARGE OF EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Eriya Kategaya): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the statement I am going to read should have been read on Thursday last week but we know that Parliament did not meet; and the statement was supposed to be given yesterday but again, as he stated, we could not meet because of the water problem and that is why my statement is dated 06 July 2010.

In accordance with rule 40(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I am honoured to make a statement to this august House about the commencement of the operationalisation of the East African Community Common Market Protocol. 

On 01 July 2010, the five East African partner states simultaneously launched the East African Community Common Market. The launch marked another key milestone in the journey to full regional integration by the East African Community. The successful commencement of the East African Common Market has been arrived at through the energies and efforts of a great many people, over very many years.

The EAC Customs Union has been in place since 2005 and since 2003 the volume of trade among EAC partner states has grown from US $1.3 billion to over US $2.8 billion in 2008 and is now well over US $3 billion. Uganda’s exports to the region grew significantly in the years after the launch of the Customs Union. Exports to the region rose from US $144.8 million in 2005 to US $274.8 million 2007, growing at an annual average of 16 percent. Uganda’s revenue has also improved over this time, from around US $300 million in 2001 to US $650 million in 2008.

Following the completion of the ratification of the protocol on the Common Market by the five partner states, the long march towards transforming the EAC region into a common or single market began on 01 July 2010 with resolve and fervour.

The operationalisation of the Common Market is a process - and I want to emphasise that - it is not an event or a destination. Indeed the process itself is complex in terms of what is required to be undertaken at the level of the partner states and in certain respects, at the level of EAC itself.

The Common Market lays the foundation for EAC countries to specialise and take advantage of economies through mass production as a result of reduced barriers to movement of goods, capital, labour and services. Its implementation and impact will be progressive over the coming months and years. 

The key elements of the Common Market Protocol are:
1.	Free movement of goods
2.	Free movement of persons and labour
3.	Free movement of services
4.	Free movement of capital
5.	Rights of establishment and resident.

Goods had already been moving freely under the EAC Customs Union Protocol since January 2005. The key principles of the Common Market Protocol are equal treatment of nationals of partner states and information sharing. The Protocol also requires that there should not be any new restrictions with regard to the above rights. We are now going to determine how the four freedoms and two rights encapsulated in the Common Market Protocol should resolutely be put into effect.

Madam Speaker, in Uganda we are very lucky that in many ways we have been prepared for the Common Market for some time. Many of the commitments that Uganda has made in the protocol have been in existence and have only been put into a legally binding document; practices that have been in place for many years. 

Uganda is already open for EAC workers and businesses to enter our economy, and we all know that the movement of people and businesses in and out of our country has been going on for some time. However, there are also some changes that we expect to take place and make a difference on how we do business. These changes come in the form of opportunities for expansion and increased efficiency that I encourage all Ugandans to seize. 

The Common Market has liberalised many service sectors including business services, communication, distribution, education, financial services, travel and tourism as well as transport. These includes sectors such as mobile communication in which providers have been operating regionally for some time and sectors such as publishing in which providers have not been able to take advantage of in the region because of challenges faced with regulations or legislation in the partner states.

After the commencement of the Common Market Protocol, service providers in these sectors can now enter other East African markets on an equal footing with domestic providers. 

Legislation, regulations and administrative procedures can no longer discriminate between domestic and EAC businesses in those sectors. Businesses are now able to establish in other East African Community states or provide their services across the border. You have the right to bring in managers and supervisors from across the EAC to help you run these businesses, and these workers are entitled to residency so that they can remain in the country to do so.

The liberalisation of services provides an opportunity for businesses to expand and the structure of the protocol also provides an opportunity for businesses to prepare for increased competition. A progressive approach to liberalisation gives you time to take the action necessary for engagement in the Common Market. For example, some service sectors will not be opened until 2012 or 2015, such as legal service and some retail services and computer related services. 

This may be because the Government wants to continue supporting these sectors until the deadline or regulation and oversight of the sector is put in place before they can be totally opened up. It may also be because businesses in that sector are not ready to compete regionally and need some time to prepare. 

Now is the time for businesses to identify how they could become more competitive and take advantage of the expanded market. We appeal to the business community to register with the relevant authorities and take time to assess and improve their internal governance as well as refining customer service and improve the quality of their products. 

We are also encouraging the business fraternity to develop business plans for the next five years and to research regional markets that may be an opportunity for them to sell their products. 

My ministry has developed an information pack explaining the steps that businesses must take when trying to establish in another East African partner State. And I call upon all hon. Members to encourage all Ugandan business persons to use this as the starting point for research. 

I beg to lay on the Table the said information pack that contains a copy of the Common Market Protocol, brochures on how to establish a business in the EAC and the Common Market, EAC Common Market frequently asked questions and what my ministry does. I beg to lay this package before the House. 
 
Now that the Common Market has been launched, there is much to do to make sure that it is implemented properly, much of which involves the government in terms of legislation, regulation and policy guidance. 

The Government of Uganda is not only implementing our commitments under the protocol but we are also looking at how best we can make policies that will enable Ugandans to take advantage of the Common Market. We call these complimentary policies. Some of the areas being looked at include the linkage of education and labour market gaps, the need for improved infrastructure, the streamlining of immigration procedures, and the formulation of a policy to support small and medium sized enterprises. 

However, the responsibility for implementation and realisation of the benefits of a successful market is on the shoulders of all East African citizens. The Common Market challenges us to work more efficiently, mor3e productively and more effectively. This is what we need to tell the people we represent in this august House. 

My ministry and Government are here to help. We are working towards providing the right environment for businesses to flourish. But this alone cannot help those that do not wish to take advantage of the opportunities available to them. We must work together to ensure that Uganda benefits from the EAC Common Market.

One of the first steps in finding out how to take advantage is finding out what the Common Market entails. We understand that information is vital for all of us; and that it informs the business community and other important stakeholders. 

My ministry has developed and is now implementing a communication strategy, which aims at reaching out to all segments of society. You probably note our billboards and newspaper articles as well as radio and television interviews discussing the Common Market. We have been reaching out at the local level through sensitisations in the border regions of Busia, Mutukula, Malaba, Katuna and Kyanika.      

Regional sensitisation workshops were held in Kampala, Mbale, Lira, Mbarara, Fort Portal and Masaka. In addition, two sensitisation workshops were held in Makerere University and Kampala International University and this sensitisation programme will continue over the coming months. There is a campaign aimed at informing the public inter alia about the benefits and challenges of the EAC integration. 

Looking towards the future of the Common Market, there are still many areas in which work is still ongoing or yet to begin. Negotiations continue on extending the liberalisation of services to a greater number of sectors. The annexes on mutual recognition of academic qualifications as well as social security are yet to be concluded.
 
The EAC countries have also committed themselves to co-operate and co-ordinate many other areas including financial sector policy, harmonisation of tax policies and laws, transport policy, environmental management, statistics, research and technical development, intellectual property rights, industrial development and agriculture, and food security. 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the Common Market is here. Achieving consensus and successful negotiations leading up to the adoption of the Common Market Protocol, its approval by EAC Heads of State and its ratification record time is indeed a milestone for East Africa. No other regional economic community in Africa has achieved such a milestone. (Applause) 

But more significantly, it is no longer debatable whether we should integrate. It is only how it should be done that we are embarking on. It is a remarkable moment in our history and a milestone that optimises strong political will and firm commitment by all the East African stakeholders in deepening and widening integration.  

The launch of the Common Market shows that all East African partner states agree that integration is the way forward for our region. 

My minister, working with other ministries, departments and agencies is also in the final stages of developing a Common Market implementation plan soon to be tabled in Cabinet to enable us follow up on key actions, responsibilities and timelines required to implement obligations under the EAC Common Market Protocol. 

Hon. Members, we should realise that you cannot take advantage of the opportunities available here without understanding the Common Market Protocol and how it will operate. Some businesses and business people are already prepared for the EAC Common Market but I urge you and the public to do much more to get prepared.

We at the Ministry of East African Community Affairs have been advising and continue to strongly urge Ugandans to harness advantages ahead by identifying the business and trade opportunities, studying the EAC Treaty and the Common Market Protocol in detail and embrace the Common Market as the future of Ugandans and East Africans. 

At the ministry, our doors are open. We appeal to the public to come and gather as much information and assistance as they may need in order to turn the East African Common Market into a successful opportunity. Madam Speaker, I beg to present. (Applause) 
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to thank the First Deputy Prime Minister for the elaborate information especially telling us that everything is not starting today because there was a lot of excitement in the population that they can move to Nairobi and build houses tomorrow. So, Members you can ask some elucidatory questions.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order. Under our Rules of Procedure, we have two sides here in the House; the ruling party and the Opposition but I can see an honourable member who is seated on our side and yet he has publicly declared that he has crossed over to the NRM. Is it in order, Madam Speaker, for hon. Alex Onzima to continue sitting on our side and enjoy the privileges of the Opposition when he has publically declared that he has crossed over to the NRM? Is it in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member has not informed the Speaker formally that he has left the Opposition; he has not!

3.23
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the First Deputy Prime Minister.

On a lighter note, I would like to add that you are very particular when it comes to authenticating your statement because every time you make a statement on the Floor of this House, and it is from your office, you take keen interest not only to sign but even to put your personal stamp to show that it is from you and even further prove that it is also in Chinese so that nobody can forge it. I thank you for that. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister has issues in his statement, which are very timely because there were many Ugandans, me inclusive, who already had a lot of misgivings about this East African Common Market. 

Last Sunday when I was on my way from Malawi, I had a stop over in Nairobi and I took the trouble to read the Sunday Nation. There was one person in that paper who shared and expressed his agony on his trip from Nairobi to Dar-es-Salaam via Namanga and how he proceeded to Zanzibar Islands where he was discriminated against right from Namanga on issues of payment of taxes and being considered a foreigner. 

The man said, “But I thought we were now in the East African Common Market and that we were now together.” This man even went further to say when he boarded a boat to cross to Zanzibar, from the first boat he was taxed as a foreigner and he jumped off this boat and went to the second one. Before they could come and say, “No, this man is a Kenyan and he is just going around”, he was swift to say he was from Wanja but the operator of the canoe was also somebody from Wanja and he tried to engage him in a discussion. He said he was from Wanja but a Jaluo so that there could be no common communication medium through which someone could say, “No, but you are not one of us.” So, he successfully crossed. 

The point I am making is that when all these five leaders of the East African Federation came up to sell to us this spirit, it was sold to us to be brought on board in Rwanda, Burundi, Tanzania, Kenya, Uganda. We were all convinced that this was something good for all of us. I am happy today that you have allayed our fears that this thing is not all starting at a go; that we will go piece meal. 

But looking at all this that we are going to go into, I look at Uganda as a country, which might only have comparative advantage in two major fields. We may have comparative advantage in as far as education is concerned, hoping that Makerere University is still the one of those days when probably the super minister, hon. Patrick Amama Mbabazi, Minister for Security was still a student. That time Makerere was really Makerere. Everybody identified with Makerere. In law people identify with Dar-es Salaam but Makerere was the epitome of education and we used to pride ourselves that as far as education was concerned, all these other four partner countries would be considered with due respect as juniors to us.

On the other side, we will also pride ourselves that Uganda as a country gifted by nature will be able to be the food basket of this region; that we will be able to produce our maize, matooke, tomatoes, rice, whatever it is and that we will be able to have comparative advantage and indeed maximise that so that we will be able to gain. 

However, my worry is in the service sector. If somebody took statistics or conducted some research in Kampala, you would find that in the service sector, especially the hospitality and banking sectors, Ugandans are doing poorly -(Interjections)- please, Second Deputy Prime Minister, you will have a chance! As a person in Government, you should be better placed to answer me because I really do not know but the issue is that we are disadvantaged.

And in being so disadvantaged, if we are not going to, as a country, give a protective cover to our people; I am afraid we may just be lowly placed. Can we borrow a leaf from other countries like Rwanda, which of course is a member country? But even all these countries that we are talking about give purposeful protection to their labour force so that if you are a Kenyan and you are an expert in the banking sector, we allow you to come and work here probably for two years meanwhile your second in command must be a Ugandan whom you must groom and understand you so that at an appropriate time after two years when you leave, we have a Ugandan who is ready, capable and able to take on the mantle.

I feel that purposeful intervention should be made so that we do not open our doors wide and expose our people to vulnerability. I hope that at an appropriate time, the hon. Prime Minister will be able to give us that type of assurance so that when we go out and we are popularising this move to our people, they are able to be on board with one voice and give us the necessary support. 

I thank you, hon. First Deputy Prime Minister for your exemplary - I wish all ministers were like that. If I were the one supervising, probably I would have given you the mark that you deserve. I thank you. (Laughter) 

3.30
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I thank the Deputy Prime Minister for the statement. There are a lot of issues regarding the Common Market. The people of Tororo Country and the border, as the statement indicates, expected that from 1st July they would be free to cross to Kenya, buy their products and come back without being arrested by the Anti-Smuggling Unit, which has harassed them since the colonial administration divided Uganda and Kenya and created the boundaries. 

But they are disappointed that as of today, the harassment still continues. May I ask you that you place an information desk at Malaba and all border points of the country to explain some of the issues because you do not have offices at all these points and some of our officials also do not have the information? Can you have a billboard? There is modern technology. You can have a billboard, which explains that you are welcome to the Common Market of East Africa, as well as explain the services and opportunities that are available in Uganda.

On 24 June, when the President, the Deputy Speaker and hon. Members came to Malaba to lay the foundation stone for the Inland Dry Port, we had guests who chartered a plane from Mombasa and they wanted to land in Tororo direct but the airfield in Tororo was not ready so they had to land in Kakamega. 

On landing there, I went to pick them. They came and found our border closed. I want to thank the President that he has taken action regarding those matters.

For the last one week I have received complaints from importers and exporters and today I wanted to be in Tororo but the road is closed. I hope that at an appropriate time you will ask the Minister of Works and Transport to explain because the people are asking me, “What is this common market that has led to closing of the road going to Busia and Tororo. Is that the purpose of the Common Market or what?”(Laughter) So, people do not understand and it is a very serious matter. The New Vision today carried a photograph and I hope you will grant the Minister of Works time to tell us what action he is taking to address the matter. It is a dilemma and disaster.

I want to conclude by informing Government that we at the border are excited and we want a common market to be implemented. 

I also wish to inform you that there are over 500 Ugandans who are in illegal detention in Kenya. I have been trying to work with security to have these Ugandans released. Well, as for Kenyans who come this way, we try everything possible to ensure that they are released and not detained illegally here. This information is available with Police. The Kenyans are hawking all over Eastern Uganda but for a Ugandan to go and hawk in Kenya, it is a different business – this is the same is with Sudan. 

So, I hope that you will engage our partner states and we shall continue to give turn the other cheek. But there is only so far that one can go on with this matter. So, I request the minister to put up an information desk and a big sign post, and I request the Minister of Works to explain the action he is taking to allow me access my constituency. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Concerning the issue of the weigh bridges, I have allowed the minister time to make a statement immediately after we finish with the Common Market. Five minutes each.

3.34
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum):I thank you. I would like to thank the First Deputy Prime Minister - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you also from the border? (Laughter)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank the Minister for East African Community for a very good statement. I think this is one of the few good ministerial statements we get in this House.

I am seeking clarification in a few areas. The first two are on page 2. At the top, the Minister is giving us figures of our exports growing at 15 percent annually and this is very good. However, without figures from other countries, these figures do not mean anything to us. We have to get the figures for Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda and Burundi so that we can see how well or badly we are doing. But to only give us our figure does not make much sense.

The second clarification is bullet two on the same page 2, about free movement of labour. I do not know how many businesses Ugandans set up in other partner states. But I know very many businesses from partner states set up here. What they normally do is that they come with the four top personnel; the chief executive, his deputy, the chief accountant and the chief personnel officer. There is no term limit for them in terms of how long they can work here until maybe they are transferred elsewhere. At the same time, some of our leaders are on record as having said that Ugandans do not have good work ethics. If that is our situation, how freely will our labour move across the border if we allow this situation to exist as it is? If people come here - four top officials, all foreign but ours are about work ethics; where will they go? I think the question of free movement of labour should be looked into very seriously. 

My other point is on sensitisation on page 6. I am happy to note that there were regional sensitisation workshops in all the six towns in Uganda. We are talking about the East African Community and not the East African Community of leaders but of the people of East Africa. I do not know what programme the minister has to go down and let the people of Uganda know this thing we are talking about. As I speak here, if you go – even in Kitgum town and ask about this common market, nobody will understand you because people are not aware. We must sensitise our people if the community is to be for the people and not the leaders. I thank you.

3.38
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): I thank you. I also thank the Minister for this statement. I have two pertinent issues to raise.

I represent a commercial hub in Kampala city and in the country: it is called the Central Business District. I must inform the Minister that the public down there in the Central Business District is confused. They do not know much about the full import of this common market. I do not know the strategies you have, apart from the sensitisation workshops in Makerere or elsewhere; the strategies you have to break down these issues particularly the five elements here outlined to the understanding of the common man down in Kikuubo. I beg to get some information about that and see how this information can go down so that people appreciate what it is all about. Otherwise, people are asking me, “Am I now free to walk with my biscuits across the border? Does it mean that I do not even need a visa to go to Kenya?” You need to give us much more information.

The second element is on page 4, the second last paragraph. When you look at the second last paragraph, there are serious issues here. The Minister is saying, “Some service sectors will not be opened until 2012 or 2015 such as legal services, some retail services and computer related services. This may be because the Government wants to continue to support these sectors until the deadline or because regulation and oversight of the sector needs to be put in place before they can be totally opened up. It may also be that the businesses in those sectors are not ready to compete regionally and need time to prepare.” This statement is full of conjectures. The minister is not giving us a clear picture. Will the service sectors commence in 2012 or 2015? You say either 2012 or 2015 and it is not clear.

Secondly, the reasons as to why they are not commencing immediately; the minister is also not sure. Maybe Government wants to further protect these sectors, maybe people do not want to compete regionally. Maybe these matters of conjecture and surmise do not augur well with the clear picture you are giving us or you are supposed to give us. 

Related to this, specifically allow me to speak for the legal fraternity. Madam Speaker, you are a member, the minister is a member and you know that for a long time, in that forum of East African Law Society, we have been talking about cross-border practice and it has been a matter in all our assemblies. We have always yearned to have cross-border practice, not today but yesterday. You remember even in the Presidential elections petition of 2001 or 2006, President Museveni wanted to enlist the services of Dr John Kaminwa from Kenya to beef up his legal team when we dragged him to court for – let me leave that for obvious reasons. (Laughter) 

When Dr Kaminwa landed here, he had to go through a very rigorous process to get a temporary permit to allow him practice law here. I would like to say that it has been a matter of concern from the members of the legal profession on why we are not opening up. I know that our colleagues in Kenya usually argue that our economy is not as developed as theirs and so that there might be an overflow of the legal practitioners into Kenya. I know they are pursuing a protectionist approach.

However, what I am getting from the minister’s presentation is to the effect that they are postponing this matter. I would like to say that we shall find problems to explain it to the legal professionals as to why this is not part of the package that is going to immediately start. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.44
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to add my voice to those of other members in thanking the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for the East African Affairs for giving us this very important and timely piece of information.

However, allow me make a few observations. I would like to know from him how soon we are going to reach the East African levels of the 1960s.

The second one is about sensitisation workshops, which have been carried out. I do not know whether those workshops were only done in Kampala. At the moment, I think Kampala is the dirtiest city in East Africa. What are we doing about this? I am saying this because when we talk about the quality of goods and services that we are putting out to compete on the market with those from other East African countries, I think your mind will tell you that we are better off not competing. So, what measures are we putting in place to address this serious Kampala dirt? If you ever traveled through this city, say along Gayaza Road through Kalerwe Market – it is a pity!

My other concern is about how we are going to reach the beneficiaries, especially the farmers – those who are going to make the East African Community lively. At the moment, like in my village, I think I am the only person who has information about this East African Community and its Common Market. And I think it is going to be a pity for me to start talking about it in my village – it needs to be disseminated to other villages in East Africa too. These people need such information because they are the producers; they the people who need a lot of sensitisation about this common market to understand how they are going to benefit from it. Again, what measures are we putting in place to ensure the East African market becomes common knowledge in Uganda and the whole of East Africa at village levels?

The other issue that I would like to draw your attention to is the free movement of goods, persons and labour. Again where have we put that common Ministry of Transport and Communication, which used to make East Africa very lively? I am talking about the railway line. When is the railway line in Uganda going to be revamped? I am saying so because this is the cheapest means of transport that we have in this region. While the Kenyans and Tanzanians have that advantage, what has happened to the one in Uganda? It should be able to carry our goods very cheaply even for those who would like to tour East Africa – most of us are eager to go for tours in Tanzania, Rwanda, Burundi and Kenya. We need to address this too if we are to succeed.

You talked about how complex this process is. But isn’t there any means of making it simpler for the business community to understand and ensure they do their businesses in a faster manner? I am saying this because when it becomes complicated, they will give up. And who is to lose? We are the ones to lose. So, what measures are we putting in place to address this complexity? It is a serious matter.

Finally, after working for the customs union and one resigns, what happens? I would like to know whether we are going to have common identification or not. Or are we going keep to the separate national identifications for Kenya, Uganda and so on? If this is now the East African Community, what measures are we putting in place to ensure we are common in all aspects? Thank you very much.

3.48
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for presenting this report, but I have some issues to seek clarification on.
 
It is true that we are going to benefit as a region from this common market. However, as we prepare for all the benefits that are associated with this arrangement, the Minister should go on to tell us the challenges anticipated. This will enable Ugandans prepare for those benefits and to know the challenges they are going to face as a result of this common market. I am saying this because when you look at the elements of the Common Market Protocol, you will realise there is free movement of goods. 

I know this is very important, but how are they going to be moving from country A to C? The example, I can give here is the maize, which Ugandans are producing in plenty and a lot of it is being bought by the people from Kenya and Tanzania. But you realise that the cost is really high given the fact that these people are buying it in unprocessed form at the expense of our farmers. By them buying unprocessed maize we lose out a lot especially on maize brand for our people who are doing poultry farming. This is one of the challenges I am talking about. There should be some guidance as we allow free movement of goods and services – we need mechanisms to follow so that it does not become expensive to the wanainchi.

On free movement of persons and labour, I would like to say that unless we prepare ourselves for this it is going to be expensive for our country to handle science professionals. Uganda has a policy of promoting scientists, but if we do not prepare ourselves on how best to pay them, we will be affected by this free movement of labour and persons. The example I can give here is Rwanda where a doctor is paid US $2,000 but are we doing the same here? How are we going to keep our doctors away from such free movement? We should try our level best to strengthen this kind of movement.

Finally, let me talk about publicity. It is true, as the Minister has stated, that we cannot take advantage of the opportunities available without understanding the Common Market Protocol. Much has been said about workshops and seminars that have been organised before. However, I would like to observe that organising workshops in hotels is not enough. We cannot disseminate the information we want if at all everybody is to gain from this kind of arrangement.

I am of the view that the ministry should take advantage of the media houses we have in Uganda so that we put a lot of funding in as far as publicity is concerned. We should use the local media in the country side.

There is need to use schools for sensitisation programmes, this should start from primary up to university level so that young people can know what is happening in the East African Community.

3.48
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): I want to thank the Minister for the statement. I urge the Minister to try as much as possible to see that this information is transcribed from English to the local languages. Since it is taking us a lot of time to comprehend, I would prefer a method where it is summarised in local languages and put in brochures and fliers to help people understand what is required in the Common Market.

On page 2, the Minister gave us these figures but we would like to know the areas which have been contributing a lot to our trade such that we can tell our people where the demand is. These are block figures; we want something behind these figures. He should give us details some time in future such that we go down and tell the people that, “This is what is reflected in the figures”. Let us know the exact product that is on demand such as coffee or maize. This will help us to tell our people where they are supposed to go.

The Minister says that the Common Market lays a foundation for East African countries to specialise and take advantage of economies of scale through mass production. Most of our people are unskilled, how are we going to play a role in this common market when most of the youth are boda boda riders? How has the country come out to train and help these youths? Otherwise, I think the plan is good on paper but our country is still badly off in terms of skills compared to Kenya and Tanzania. I do not know the policies that Government has put in place to help in this situation. 

Lastly, what are the don’ts in this? The do’s we have seen. What areas are we not going to venture into? Because for us we have a belief that once you open the border then there is no barrier at all. Can you clarify to us what we are not supposed to do in this common market such that we can know where are to go and where not to go?

3.57
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): I would like to congratulate the Minister up on this statement. It is my view that this statement would have been better debated if it had gone to the committee because it would give opportunity and chance to the Minister to come with his technical staff and explain in detail some of the issues being raised here.

For those of us who take this as a very important subject, we think that Parliament should have allocated a lot of time to its debate such that we get the pros and cons of the Common Market and the committee would come up with a detailed statement after getting a clear view about this Common Market.

When you hear some of views and explanations coming up, some are a little bit embarrassing because Members have not had the opportunity to study the Common Market in detail. I would like to associate with hon. Sebaggala because for every dark cloud, there is always a silver lining. A common market like this comes with dividends but it is not just chest thumping about the good only; we should be addressing ourselves more to the challenges and the problems.

Our economies are all small but they are different in terms of development. The industrial sector of countries like Kenya cannot be compared to that of Uganda. Therefore, some small businesses will have problems competing with the more efficient and well developed industries, leading to closure of some of them. Once they close down, you are talking about loss of jobs for our people, not necessarily those of the Common Market. Has Government put in place policies for affirmative action for our small businesses and industries to be more competitive with the rest of the region? These are some of the crucial issues that we would interact with the ministry and know more about, if time allowed.

We need to get figures, look at the ones given by the Deputy Prime Minister; they do not give the real meat of it. We needed details to enable us compare and advise Government accordingly.

There is need for strategic intervention; that is coming in with public money to help private people such that the market can benefit our country. This is a welcome development and we need to congratulate the fore fathers who came up with the idea of the East African Community. (Interjection) If you come from a district like Kaliro, you might think that it came in 1986 but if you are a student of history you would know when the EAC started.

Dr Apollo Milton Obote, Mwalimu Julius Nyerere and Mzee Jommo Kenyatta should rest in peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, about sending this document to the committee, I think we shall have no problem with it. I think sometime back, I was trying very hard to ensure that we had a committee on the EAC in the House, but I was overruled. People did not think it was important; so it is buried with all the other things. I wanted one for East Africa.

4.03
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to sincerely congratulate the people of East Africa for realising a dream lost 33 years ago. The East African Common Market - the bigger market, the free flow of goods and services, persons and labour and choice of residence - was swatted when the then community collapsed. 

As a young boy I remember evidence of the community looking at the functional railways, the functional airline, and I remember the products of the industries and even the water transport, which we had. I think we need to work towards disregarding these colonial injustices of boundary lines. I want to thank the telecom companies, which actualised this even before this step was taken. The banks and insurance companies were also already coming in. 

Our concern, however, is what Uganda’s contribution is going to be in this service industry. Even when we talk of axles on roads and bridge challenges, it is because our imports and exports, which are supposed to be coming to Uganda by rail, are moving by road. That need would not be there. So, we have a challenge of making sure that we do not only look at the concessions of the Rift Valley Railways, but do a joint venture investment to revamp our railway system so that we can attain free flow of goods and services. 

As a country, we need to emphasise the challenges that come with this. The markets bring us a lot of opportunities, but we must prepare for them; and for the challenges. Just recently when we had CHOGM, one of the service industries which was supposed to be opened up brought our brothers from Kenya to manage the service. Are we prepared to compete at that level? 

We need to look at the challenges that come with free flow of human resource. As a young boy, I got a certificate of the East African examinations board. I am sure many people here have those certificates, but we need standardisation to avoid quack doctors and engineers coming into the country because we have opened up the borders. Are we going to see another East African examinations board? Are we going to see other professional bodies, apart from the legal fraternity which hon. Lukwago talked about, being brought on board? 

As a country, I think this also poses a challenge for more “vocationalisation” of our education system, more so in skills development. I am afraid that if we are to work on the refinery and the pipeline in the Albertine tomorrow, I would not be surprised to have more people from the coast providing those skills, because we have not developed them here. 

Uganda has also been hospitable, not only to East Africa, but also to the whole of the Great Lakes region, because of the conflicts in our neighbourhood. Because we do not have a national identity, a lot of the neighbours that we hosted have found it very easy to acquire land in Uganda. So, are we prepared for this? Remember, we have one of the fastest growing populations in the world. Are we going to wait until this exercise is finished? I am aware of a certain project in progress under the Ministry of Internal Affairs, but before it is done, the Sudanese, Somalis and many other neighbours who came here are busy acquiring land in this country. You do not have means to identify who is not a Ugandan because this project has taken long to take off. 

Once again, I would like to congratulate the people of East Africa and encourage them that apart from translating things into local languages, we should simplify the meaning and the challenges –(Member timed out_)

4.08
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to congratulate the Minister and the country at large for this achievement. We have received a protocol that has been laid on the Table, but most of the issues being raised here should have been raised much earlier and captured within the Protocol. The issue now is that the Protocol has been signed and even if we talk, we cannot make a difference.  

I request for clarification: before these protocols are signed - when they are still in draft form - I feel the Parliaments within our countries like Uganda, Kenya, Rwanda and Burundi should have an input. When Parliaments have an input in those draft protocols, the peoples of those countries will have added their voice to them. 

The present arrangement involves mostly technical people who co-ordinate with the Council of Ministers and the Summit. I do not even think that the East African Legislative Assembly is so involved in these developments. If it was permitted, our views would be filtered through our regional Parliament, the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA), and EALA would interface with the Council of Ministers before those matters are finalised into a Protocol. It affects the people; it affects our laws; it affects our tax regime; and when we raise matters they say, “Things were settled in Arusha”. 

When we were discussing the Finance Bill, they would tell us, “This one has been overtaken by the circumstances in Arusha”. So, we need to put in place a mechanism where parliaments get involved before the protocols are signed. Otherwise, bringing these protocols here and we just receive them and send them to the committee; what can the committee do about them? Nothing much!

The other day I was in the bank and found out that the banks are worried; the business people are worried. The capacity of our private sector is low. In fact, the capacity of the private sector in a country like Kenya is much higher than ours. So, our Government should put in place a mechanism through which they can collaborate with the public sector. The Public private Partnership should be real this time. We approved a loan here for that purpose, but its implementation is not seen on the ground. This is the time to use those resources to build the capacity of the private sector. We can partner with banks, for example. 

The cost of production is another issue to address. Hon. Ssebuliba was talking about maize. It is more profitable to sell maize in Kenya than grinding the maize in Uganda and taking it to Kenya because the cost of production is very high. So, we need to harmonise the cost of production. The industries, business people borrow money in dollars and the interest rates in Uganda are very high, yet the interest rates in Kenya are lower. At the end of the day, the business people in Uganda are going to fail and their businesses and properties will be sold off because they are in the same market with people who are accessing the same finance at a cheaper rate. So, the issue of cost of production, doing business, weighbridges - you said a statement is going to come, but I may not have another opportunity to talk about it - need to be addressed. Last time the people who were involved in weighbridges were doing so privately. They made money, people cried and nobody rescued these people. It was corruption at its highest.

The other day hon. Ekanya was talking about this issue. There was a line of Lorries of about two kilometres, and all we saw was a PR officer of, I think the East African Community saying, “We are sorry.” So, who was going to pay for the time? (Member timed out_)

4.14
MR BARTILLE TOSKIN (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I join the rest of the Members in thanking the Minister for this statement, and also congratulate the East African Community for the efforts they have so far made. Commencement of the East African Common Market is a very big step in terms of integration of the region and as Members know, the building of regional blocks is a sure way of eventually coming up with an integrated continent.

I still want to say that the Common Market is here, but as Members have said, it is a challenge to Ugandans to see how best they can take advantage of the Common Market. In his statement, the Minister has talked about making complementary policies, which will enable us take advantage of the services of the Common Market. This is very urgent because as we already know, Uganda has an advantage in terms of education. We have so many citizens from the region who come here for education. Of course, we need real policies, which can enable this to work out smoothly.

The other problem I see is that the people who are going to be very involved in this common market are the business people. Unfortunately in Uganda, the percentage of the people who are doing business and are not very educated, is a bit high. It will take them time to understand these policies about the Common Market. Actually, there will be a deliberate effort by us to go out and teach them in order to help them understand it, so that they can be able to operate well. Already before this, our people have had a lot of problems of accessing markets in the region, especially in Kenya. Therefore, it is important that people are educated. 

I come from the border area and people are very anxious to take advantage of the Common Market, but up to now, they are not sure of how the whole thing is going to be implemented. Recently, the Uganda Revenue Authority has been educating people about what the Common Market means. It has made it clear that it is not all free; they will still need to pay some taxes. That has brought more confusion. People are worried about the taxes they are going to pay and what is going to be free. So, it is important that much as there have been some regional conferences to teach people, they still need to go deeper. The Uganda National Chamber of Commerce has branches, which can be used to reach the people who want to participate in this.  

Finally, I want to talk about preparing the whole population in terms of training. One advantage countries like Kenya have is that they have established polytechnics. These polytechnics have been educating their young people in entrepreneurship. Uganda has been slow in venturing into this area. We need to do it; we need to educate our young people in small businesses, tourism, hotel issues and other similar areas so that people can take advantage of this. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.18
CAPT. EMILLY OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to join my colleagues in thanking the First Deputy Prime Minister for this very good statement.

I am very keen on the key elements of the Common Market Protocol. That is on page 2. The First Deputy Prime Minister stated all of them there: free movement of goods, free movement of persons and labour, free movement of services, and so on and so forth. I come from a local area and the First Deputy Prime Minister knows that when a team was sent from Arusha to fast track the Common Market, local governments were heavily involved. By that time, I was the President of ULGA and I was heavily involved in that fast tracking programme. What I remember was that local governments were supposed to have been involved very seriously.

I am saying this because sometimes it is the local people who benefit a lot from these protocols. From up there, the Minister says there will be reduced barriers to movement of goods, capital, labour and services. That is fine, but to what extent? We have heard conflicting messages from URA, for instance. While the Ministry of East African Community is saying this, URA and other people from other areas like – I can quote one - Civil Aviation Authority, are sending conflicting messages. 

The Uganda Revenue Authority, like my colleague, Toskin, has said, is saying, “Please, do not jump up and down; the taxes are going to be there.” They are saying very seriously that the Common Market is there but do not jubilate yet. I think the First Deputy Prime Minister needs to co-ordinate with those people who are jumping up and down, exciting the public, and tell them that whether there is a protocol or not there will be taxes or you will still have to declare this and that. So, you need to control that more efficiently.

Two, regarding free movement of persons and labour, hon. Minister, as a local person I want to know how this is going to affect the rigorous checking that is taking place at our border posts. I was there a few days ago - I was going to Nairobi and coming back - but I did not see any change at all. The same time I spent when I went to Nairobi about a month ago is the same time I spent when I went back. It was even slightly more because the checking was a bit rigorous. You had to prove that your passport is like this; you had to spend about two hours at the border while going and two hours on the way back. What is going to happen to the passports and what has happened to the East African passports? Are they going to be re-introduced or are they being used? 

I also want to know from the Minister what is going to happen with dual citizenship. If you have a passport of Kenya and a passport of Uganda, how is that going to help in the free movement of persons and labour across the board?

The other one is free movement of capital. I know the Minister has stated that it will take a bit of time before we reach there, but already some monies of the East African countries are circulating although if you went to Kenya you will not find a Ugandan shilling. Even if you went there and said, “Please, can I get Uganda shillings?” They will say, “That one, not yet!” The same thing will happen with the Tanzania shilling. However, in our bureaus here, there are so many Tanzanian and Kenyan shillings, even Rwandan francs. The only item you do not get in those bureaus in Kenya, Tanzania and other countries is the Ugandan shilling. Why is that? 

The other issue is about sensitisation, mentioned on page 6. The Minister has done well on sensitisation, but my worry is that the common beneficiary, who is the local person, does not seem to have been sensitised enough. My colleagues have already said this; maybe the best the Minister can do is to use the local FM radio stations. In Teso, for example, we have about six FM radio stations. If you selected one of them and emphasised the issue, maybe once a week, that would do a great deal in sensitising the public on what we mean by the Common Market Protocol –(Member timed out_)

4.23
MR ROBERT KASULE SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I congratulate President Yoweri Museveni for the many hours spent on signing this protocol, including the ministers, notably the minister in charge of this sector. We congratulate them. Many ministers have been involved in this process; how I wish that also we, the MPs, had been engaged like the ministers and the President! 

I also want to concur with my colleagues who have said that we need more time as Members of Parliament to internalise the East African Protocol and to get more information. If need be, a notebook should be produced for East Africa, whether classified in terms of ministries or the industries concerned, such that on a daily basis, we are kept abreast of the issues taking place in East Africa. Priority should also be given to public questions and a way should be found to answer them such that the whole population is kept abreast with information. 

I am one of those people who would encourage a gradual process. The East African Community is going to be with us for as long as it takes, so we need a gradual process. We do not need to rush so many things at the same time, otherwise we shall be confused. They have allowed free movement of labour, but how free is this “free movement of labour” in as far as acquiring land, buying houses, mixing cultures and allowing other East Africans to come here is concerned? So, we need more information. 

I know that businesses have been asking for more information about what is going to happen in as far as taxes are concerned. What I know is that as long as the products are produced within East Africa, there shall be free movement and maybe no taxes, but we shall continue paying taxes for goods that come from outside East Africa, as we have been doing. The only problem here would be the re-branding. Somebody imports something from Kenya, re-brands the commodity and then exports it to Uganda. That should be a great concern for all East Africans - that we can import things here, re-brand them and then impose them as East African goods. I would like the Minister to assure us that that is not going to happen in the region.

As far as education is concerned, we have different types of education systems and yet we are going to be competing for the same jobs. How are we going to streamline the education systems in as far as competing for the same jobs in future, is concerned? We also need to harmonise the education systems. 

Lastly, because there is no time I will talk about the many Bills that are lying here in Parliament. The Anti-Money Laundering Bill needs to be fast tracked. A Bill to do with genetic plant resources needs to be looked into - some countries are ahead on this and Uganda is lagging behind. We should be allowed to import GMOs maybe from Kenya to Uganda, but since we do not have a Bill to that effect, we shall find problems with some of these issues. There are many other issues that I would have wished to point out, but because of time, I will stop here. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.28
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, we now have a common market, but as we do our things in Uganda, I want to ask the Minister and Government how prepared we are as a country. I know that we have entered this protocol, but there are a number of challenges that we need to address as a country. One thing that is common and is going to happen is that we have been importing a lot of goods from Kenya and Tanzania, but we export very little to those countries. So, there is definitely an imbalance in our trade. We are importing more and exporting less and so we are not gaining anything in the Common Market. 

Right now we are exposing our young industries to competition. They are now going to compete with giants from Kenya. We have had problems in Uganda here; our factories and industries were destroyed and we are just getting mobilised, but now we are opening up to competition. Our young factories and industries are now going to compete with giants in Kenya. What I know for sure is that they are going to be swallowed up. Most of our industries and factories in Uganda here will be swallowed up because they are not yet ready. Their cost of production is still very high. They are borrowing at very high interest rates. Our facilities are not proper. With the giants and economies of scale in Kenya, they will come here, swallow them up and buy them off. 

As an economist, I know that what is going to happen is that we are going to encourage monopoly and oligopoly in the country. They will set their own prices and their own terms. There will be no competition because those factories will come and swallow up the young ones and, therefore, with monopoly and oligopoly, we might not benefit. 

We are now operating in an environment where policies and laws are not harmonised. How long are we going to take to harmonise our policies and laws in this country? As a Ugandan, when I go to Kenya, definitely our laws in some areas are totally different. So, we need to harmonise our laws and we need to harmonise our policies. 

We should not talk about the economies of scale and mass production because it is the poor people coming together. If we are to benefit from this, we must have what we call effective demand. Our consumption pattern as a country and as a region is still very low - one out of a million compared to other countries. Having 120 million people and thinking that 100 million people will increase our production and will translate into economies of scale is wishful thinking. 

In economics, it is not about the number of people; it is about the effective demand; how much can they buy? As we join the poor people together, we need to work in that line - drive away poverty and, therefore, increase the purchasing power of our people. They must be rich. If you are joining poor people and we are not encouraging them to be rich, then we may not benefit from the Common Market. 

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: I would like to seek clarification from the hon. Member of Parliament. If you join two sticks and you try to break them, would that be equal to joining 100 sticks even if they are poor sticks? The effort of breaking them will be the same. (Laughter) It appears the hon. Member of Parliament is arguing that we are engaging in a futile exercise to form the Community. Is that science or is it economics?

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I did not understand the Minister -(Laughter)- because he did not specify which stick. Is it Mahogany? Is it a weak one or even a pen? It depends on the strength of that stick. You can join 100 weak sticks, but definitely, they will be weak and that is what I am saying. We are joining weak people and, therefore, they will all be weak. So, honourable minister, you should understand what you are saying. 

As I wind up, I support the Common Market, but I want our people to be sensitised. Right now, people like those who pay tax do not know whether they are still going to pay VAT, Custom Duty or Excise Duty. The people must be sensitised so that they know what they are supposed to know. Otherwise, thank you very much.

4.34
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate the Minister for the commencement of the Common Market. 

First of all, I would like to comment on the cannons of the Common Market. The way the honourable members have been arguing is as if we can disengage from certain principles. You either have a common market or we do not. One of the issues is that of free movement of labour and capital. Hon. Okello-Okello was saying that the issue of labour could be disengaged. I think you would be redefining the common market. Internationally, those are the norms that are supposed to be within the Common Market. I am sure there are about three or four stages of economic integration. So, whatever we are talking about is a matter of improving and strengthening the Common Market. 

We are talking of free movement of labour, but I am very sure that Kenya is not decentralised and Uganda is decentralised. So, hon. Minister for East African Affairs, there is need for us to have some kind of harmony in the way Kenyans will go to Mayuge, for example, to seek for jobs, and what interviews they are going to take. There is that bit where the local governments must be brought on board because there are different structures in the other countries.

The other issue I would like to mention is that maybe the honourable minister should be very clear because what is happening is that Ugandans are thinking that when you talk of a common market, even if I got items from Dubai and I exported them to Kenya, I will not be subjected to taxes. There is need to have that emphasis of having a certificate showing that this good has been manufactured within the East African boundaries. There is need for us to re-emphasise that.

Madam Speaker, we had the Nanyuki 1, 2 and 3. I remember in Dar-es-Salaam, the Members of Parliament of the East African Parliament agreed that most members within the region need to have briefings, even if it means giving a weekly briefing, informing people about the East African Community and now the Common Market. So, hon. Minister for the East African Community, if you do not have a public relations officer, this is a time that we must have one who is very robust. Let us have weekly briefings as far as the Common Market is concerned. There is need for us to have that briefing because Ugandans think that the Common Market has come to totally ensure that they should not pay taxes. Some Ugandans, like I am sure most of hon. Ekanya’s voters, are used to smuggling -(Laughter)- so when you say that an item is not supposed to be taken when it is from Dubai, maybe they will go up in arms -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: I want to seek clarification from hon. Kubeketerya on whether he wants to say cross-border trade or smuggling; because smuggling is illegal. To the best of my knowledge, the people of East Africa are engaged in cross-border trade. Is that what you meant or you meant smuggling?

MR KUBEKETERYA: Hon. Ekanya, the point I was putting across was that now that we have a common market, certain goods that are not manufactured here have to have taxes levied on them. So, I was saying that the fact that most of your voters are used to smuggling -(Laughter)- they could go ahead and say that items from Dubai -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I was trying to be lenient to my brother and educate him about border practice, but is he in order to state that the people of Tororo County and Eastern Uganda and different parts of Uganda who live around the border, when they engage in trade they are engaged in smuggling? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think hon. Kubeketerya is saying that the people at the border do not recognise the boundaries; they just move with their goods back and forth. (Laughter)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much for that wise ruling, Madam Speaker. Lastly, I just want to appeal to the Minister to ensure that we have a robust public relations officer and that we really give thorough information regularly to the East Africans. 

For all the lamentations that Members are having, Uganda has already signed and you cannot say that we are going to remove certain components within the Common Market. We should know that we are just evolving within the issue of integration of the East African countries. Madam Speaker, I thank you very much.       

4.40
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate the Minister upon his statement, but also on his role in the integration of East Africa. I would like to congratulate our President for his tireless efforts in reviving East African Co-operation. It is historical and it is a fact that Uganda has spearheaded the reintegration of East Africa following the collapse of the East African Community in 1977. 

Those of us who enjoyed the benefits of the East African Co-operation were let down by the breakdown in 1977 and for the recovery of the East African Co-operation to mature to the current position, it is a joy for some of us. It is a realisation of a hope that had been lost. In fact, I can assure Members of this House that some of us will not rest until we see a federation. If I were standing here on the day of a federation, I would be bigger than I am because it would have enabled me to realise a dream that really should be a dream for every East African. 

I am not one of those who are looking for weaknesses, shortfalls and disadvantages. On the contrary, a common market is good in itself. It is an encouragement for competition. I do not want to be part of hon. Okot Ogong’s doomsday saying, “Oh, we are going to be swallowed; we are going to be eaten up.” Surely, in the world today and in the world of living things, this competition is normal. It is only when you open grounds that opportunities give you chances. 

To say that our people should be protected is good, but it is not good enough. I think when the ground has been opened, we should see people enjoy opportunities; when opportunities open up, potential rises. I think the smaller we have been, the less we have been able to realise our potential. So, I see a common market as an opportunity for the smaller businesses to become big and those which collapse will be the manure for the bigger ones emerging. (Laughter) This is normal development and as we join the world, the bigger you are, the better you are at competing.

Those who talk about differences in benefit should look at Europe; not all the European countries were at par, but many have now benefitted. Spain, Ireland and Portugal are enjoying the benefits of being together. Go to the United States of America; not every state is equal to the other. There are some states, which are producing more than others. So, even here, let us not be scared that we may be weaker. In fact, Uganda has a greater chance of benefitting from the community than living alone. I think our internal integration will become stronger. The honourable member there who is anxious to be a regionalist will also feel that being small is not a disadvantage; it is an advantage. (Laughter)

It is now my hope that all these processes are leading to irreversibility. In 1977, it was easy for the break up to take place, but I am hoping now that we will be so integrated as not to be able to break up again. It will be so unfortunate that as we come together, we visualise in the future that that possibility is there. I would wish all of us to make sure that we do not reverse the process of integration and the process of development -(Member timed out_)

4.45
MS BAKO CHRISTINE (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would wish to ask the First Deputy Prime Minister: what is Uganda’s strategic interest in the East African Community and hence the Common Market and other protocols that we have acceded to?

Having asked that, First Deputy Prime Minister, I am rather disappointed in your statement. I expected you to be exact in terms of how much we have gained as a nation, right from our entry into many of the regional blocks that we are in. We are part of COMESA and you know that we have been in the East African Community; what is our comparative advantage in the choice of the two trading blocks? 

Secondly, by how much is our economy going to grow given the fact that we are in these multiple trading blocks? By giving us such statistics, we would then be able to ascertain as a nation whether the gains of this engagement actually exceed the losses that are likely to accrue. 

It is good the hon. Minister for Disaster Preparedness has spelt out that he would have been happier if at this material time we were talking about a political federation. I want to give you the extent to which the East African Community has been more of a political-centred engagement than a people-centred process. When you look at the Summit, the composition is practically political. Look at the Council of Ministers, it is practically political. When you look at the Judiciary, it is an appointment of the Summit; and when you come to the East African Legislative Assembly, it is the national parliaments that actually constitute the East African Legislative Assembly. All this brings it out as a process that is politics driven other than people-centred, people-oriented and economics driven. So –(Interruption)

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: The East African Community in fact is forcing the politicians and governments to do what they are supposed to do. Kenya Commercial Bank is here, it is in Rwanda and in Tanzania. The National Social Security Fund is the biggest shareholder in Safaricom in Kenya. Hon. Member of Parliament and Members of Parliament, I can tell you that the private sector is very anxious and is driving and not listening. In fact, we are the ones who have been delaying to the extent that even COMESA wants us to have finished it yesterday.

Today, Uganda benefits from an extra US $150 million of trading between Juba and Kampala. You come from the border, Madam, and you know very well that the trade is intense in that area. In fact, they are asking for the roads to be made yesterday. So, it is not true that it is for politicians. It is the private sector, which is actually forcing us to go in the direction we are going. It is in their interest. If we want to get votes, we must actually comply with them. If we do not do it, they will do other things. I thank you.

MS BAKO: Thank you very much for that information. I would ask you the same question: what has the trade imbalance been in the agricultural sector, apart from the banking sector, if you are talking people-centred integration? What is that? For the economics of banking, how many people are actually engaging in the actual banking sector and what is your projection for the agricultural sector if you are talking about a people-centred integration process? 

Back to the question I asked earlier. Kenyans are interested in seeing that their economy, as usual, is positioned far ahead of any other economy in the region. Rwanda has a destination for ICT and conferencing, but in Uganda you cannot talk of anything strategic that our country is seeking for in this process. I have not seen anything. I know when I am in Rwanda that ICT is going to be their focus. In Kenya, it is superiority of the economy and placing it across any other economy in the region. In Tanzania, the infrastructure development aspect of it is key. So, what is our interest and what are we seeking for in this case?

Most importantly, it is good the Common Market is here. It is really going to be the test of leadership of the Summit in as far as our economies are concerned, because this has broadened the market. How much is the ordinary Ugandan who is now an East African going to benefit? That is the ultimate test of this Common Market, nothing else.

Finally, it is good that we have come in. A lot of issues have been stated here. We are going to bring managers and supervisors across the East African Community to help run these businesses and so forth. My question is: how does a nation like Uganda safeguard the political decision-making process in its own country given the free flow of persons, particularly when we want to make political decisions as far as elections are concerned? We have not indentified who a Ugandan is or who a Kenyan is, and yet suddenly, we are going into free movement of human beings who are not identified. Who is going to make a political decision for me in Arua if I cannot identify the number of Kenyans who are in that place?

I would rather implore the honourable minister to be explicit and exact because he is not even sure. At one point he is saying it may be because business in that sector is not ready to compete regionally. If as a Minister you are not sure about your statement, how do you expect me to consume it? I need clarity. This is what will make a ministerial statement a ministerial statement. If you are on guesswork, then it is very unfortunate that I for one will not take you seriously. Somewhere even your figures are not exact. I want to quote you. You are saying the East African Customs Union has been in place since 2005, and since 2003, the volume of trade among the East African partner states has grown from 1.3 billion to over 2.8 billion -(Member timed out_)

4.53
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. I would like to start by thanking the First Deputy Prime Minister for this statement because this statement afforded us, as a Parliament, an opportunity to recognise the onset of a protocol that is very important to East Africa. It would have been very funny if we did not formally recognise the commencement of this particular protocol. 

Many members have made contributions. Sitting there, you just get the same thoughts on the reference to a description of the elephant - some holding the tusk, others holding the ears, all accurate in their description, but totally incomplete. I did appreciate what hon. Katuntu proposed, but I will suggest a variation of that proposal after I have said two things. 

First of all, the East African Community that we grew up knowing is not the same as this East African Community. We may be thinking about the past and talking about the present, and there will be a contradiction. 

The East African Community of the 60s came from the colonial times with many elements. The function of that Community was to spur development in various critical areas and that resulted into the transformation of East Africa. If you can remember, the East African Airways, the East African Research Institute, the Virus Research Institute, the East African Telecommunications et cetera. There were elements of bringing the economies of scale to investment in critical sectors that would spur development. However, they were also a very broad recognition of the fact that we were dealing with exploiting potentials of East Africans.

When you have a common market like this, particularly a free market, there is an assumption that you are able to compete. Free markets are like Darwin’s law - survival for the fittest. The challenge, therefore, will not be that there is no market; the opportunity obviously is an expanded market, but the biggest challenge will be for you to prepare to compete, and this is a responsibility. I would like, when this is referred to the committee, that rather than focussing on the Treaty which has already been negotiated and agreed upon, we focus on what this means to Uganda and what we must do to ensure that we are able to compete. 

Some time ago there was a big cry in this Parliament about foreigners taking jobs. I got up and said, “You are wasting your time; if you do not train somebody to manage your floriculture, the person investing in the flower industry will bring somebody from outside to manage it.” That is the critical challenge. This is going to be a big challenge for our Government because we have to review many things. 

Ask yourselves, “On UPE and USE alone, what must we do to make these programmes, which are good intentioned, enable us compete?” If we do not do that, we will have an East African Community that will shift our people to the periphery. That process is not about the business people because they are able to compete; they have the resources and knowledge. That is the critical role of our Government.

Take a simple case of Rwanda and Burundi. I do not know the provisions in the law, but Rwanda could critically protect itself by saying that if somebody wants to work there, knowledge of French is preferred. In interviews, if you do not have knowledge of French, you get knocked off. It would be a very strategic way of doing these things. 

I do not know this; I have not looked at the thesis hon. Deputy Prime Minister, but I have three specific areas of concern. One is agriculture. We have the potential to make huge gains from the East African Community on agriculture. It now means that we must change how we handle agriculture in Uganda. If we do not do it, that opportunity will be lost. In fact, Kenya will even jump over us and go and out compete with us in the Sudan. (Interjection) You see, the problem with Prof. Kabwegyere, even when somebody is helping him, he just resists. (Laughter)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, I have known hon. Latigo to be a big farmer. I recognise him in that capacity in addition to him being a professor. I do not see him lagging behind now – that instead of becoming bigger he now becomes smaller. When I say we shall do it, I am recognising that you can expand your production and produce more.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Speaker, I appreciate that, but I think some of the things I am trying to point out are actually in good faith. Kenya subsidises fertilizers. I can tell you that the cost of doing commercial agriculture in Uganda now is incredible. A bag of DAP fertilizer is at Shs 80,000. How many farmers can afford that? (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much professor and Madam Speaker. The information I want to give you is that I do not want us to argue for the sake of just arguing. In Kenya, the interest rate for borrowing for agricultural purposes is at eight percent. Here if you went to a commercial bank, it is 24 to 26 percent. So, how will you compete favourably? So, if you hear Prof. Kabwegyere explain himself in that manner, then I am worried for our President.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you. The point is made that we must prepare our country and our people. We have two challenges. We have just launched our five-year national development plan. If you look at that plan and you look at this opportunity in the Common Market, is there harmony? Is it designed to enable us to compete? These are questions that we must look at when this thing goes to the committee -(Interjection)- whoever the operator is, I am the Leader of the Opposition; you cannot switch me off like a peasant. (Laughter)

Finally, Uganda is going into the oil industry sector. It means that there will be lots of financial and job opportunities and we must prepare our people to compete with the Kenyans. I lived and studied in Kenya for seven years; the Kenyan people are very aggressive business people. Unless we recognise that the people we are joining with in the common market are exceptional characters and we need to create strength within our people –(Interruption) 

MR KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition. I was really enjoying your contribution and this is of national importance. Unless we prepare ourselves, we are going to get extinguished, according to Darwin’s law of survival for the fittest. Kenya and Uganda have got different cultures towards work. Because of the nature endowed on us, we can survive even without much work. In Kenya and India, if you do not work you die. So, we have not yet reached that desperate situation.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you very much. That was in the past. You are now entering a common market where Uganda ceases to exist. It will be East Africa existing. If you have that mind set, you will be wiped out; I can guarantee you that. Otherwise, I thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have allowed a fairly lengthy debate on this matter. Twenty Members have contributed because this is an important policy shift. However, I think I must now ask the First Deputy Prime Minister to respond. 

5.05
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER IN CHARGE OF EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Eriya Kategaya): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the contributors to this debate. I am also glad that there is interest for the East African integration in this House. 

Of course my statement is not exhaustive. Because of our rules, it must be short and precise, but if you want the details, I can give them to you. I would go along with those who are suggesting that we have either a committee or even the whole House look at this. I will come with my technical staff to back us and give you all the details of some of the questions you are raising. We have tried to organise a seminar for these honourable members, but one or two turned up. The only Member who I know has been consistent is hon. Toskin, if I may mention his name. However, we are prepared to have another day to come here and answer all the technical issues that people are raising. If I go through all of them right now, we shall be here until 8 O’clock.  

First of all, somebody asked what the strategic interest of Uganda is in the Community. The question is: are we satisfied with the present economy we have in terms of size? Are we satisfied that this economy, small as it is, is able to deliver all the services that we want for our people? Isn’t there obvious unemployment in this economy? How do we break out of this? This is really the strategic question we should answer. 

Our simple answer is that we needed to create a bigger opportunity. Part of the common problem in Africa is divided and uncoordinated small economies. These are strategic problems. Africa is the only continent, which has 52 countries. If you look at the map of the world, Africa has 52 so-called countries; some of them do not even deserve the name because they cannot even pay the salaries of their workers. So, we have 52 countries with divided and uncoordinated economies. The trend is that we should have bigger economies. 

Hon. Okot Ogong said we are gathering poor people together. He was talking about effective demand. Yes, I agree, but effective demand of 30 million people is not the same as effective demand of 120 if you are planning your economy. If I am planning my investment on the effective demand of 30 million people, it is not the same as when I am planning for the effective demand of 120 million people. Definitely, the effective demand of 120 million is bigger than that of 30 million people. Therefore, one cannot say, “Do not move because the effective demand will not change”. It will change; the size of the economy will change. What we need is to say that this is a good idea. 

Somebody, I think hon. Katuntu, said that this is not something new. Yes, this idea of the East African integration started in the early 60s. In 1961, the late Mwalimu said, “I am not going to have independence of Tanganyika. I will wait for Uganda and Kenya to get independence and we form one country.” That was 1961! It has been going on and our failure to do so has also kept our economies in the state in which they are.  

Madam Speaker, I was saying that we should have a debate on the topic, “50 years of independence: What has been achieved?” It should be discussed, not even by the Opposition or Government, but by East Africans or Africans. The other day, Congo was protected by the UN at independence and 50 years later they are still being protected by the UN. (Laughter) The question is not East Africa or NRM or anybody; it is Africa. Where is the future? What is the future of Africa? Is it in small and uncoordinated economies or having a big economy? This is really the question we are talking about. So, we also have the strategic interest. 

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, it is not the size of the population that determines the rate of development. I want to inform the Minister that in the 1970s we were at the same level with Singapore and Singapore has about 3.8 million people. Uganda now has 30 million people but our level of development is different. We never developed, but Singapore, with a smaller population, has developed. Was it because of a community in Singapore or because they had programmes for their people?

MR KATEGAYA: Madam Speaker, yes, the size of the population may not be important. The question is: where do you sell what you produce? (Interjection) Please, that is why I am saying, if you want to have a debate on this one, we can have it. We should also look at the atmosphere in which Singapore developed. Singapore and South Korea were helped by the Cold War when the Americans were pouring their money in to make sure Russia does not go there. 

Secondly, Singapore started planning what to do and that is why I agree on the challenges. The Common Market is here and we need to sit as the Parliament of Uganda. What are we supposed to do? [MR OKOT OGONG: “What about Botswana?”] Botswana is just on diamonds, nothing more; like if you get oil, it will be a different thing. 

The challenge is there, yes, I agree, but let us see what challenges. By going into the Common Market, it is not going to be business as usual. This is the point I am emphasising. We have to wake up a bit, if I may use the word. How do we do business? What type of business do we have? Do we have quality goods which are going to be supplied on time, in good quantity and are reliable? This must be done and we need to sit down and work on it because the economy is not a monopoly of one group. We can sit down. In my speech I said there should be complementary policies and that is why I was talking about them.
 
Even immigration - I agree with hon. Latigo about agriculture. We have to look at it. I have called the Minister of Agriculture and said, “Here is the market, what are we going to sell in it? How are we going to prepare ourselves to change the agriculture to be able to supply the goods, which we can?” Therefore, I would suggest that we set aside a day or two and I will come here with my staff and we go through the details of what should be done. What does the Protocol say? What do the annexes say? How do we go through all this?
 
On the question of sensitisation, sometimes the limitation is on the budget. Last time we got about Shs 300 million and it was not enough. We are now asking for about Shs 800 million. Once we get it, we are willing to go down and explain everything to our population. But I thought - for instance I have been talking to Uganda Manufacturers’ Association many times and we even formed a committee between my ministry and Uganda Manufacturers’ Association where we can have interaction on any issues concerning the Common Market. I have had interactions with the Chamber of Commerce to tell the traders what they expect when we are in this common market. In terms of using radio and the rest, we have done that and can continue with local radios in local languages. 

Of course the other point I want to ask the hon. Members here to support me on is in popularising Kiswahili. [HON. MEMBERS: “For what?”] You are going into the Common Market and the majority of the people speak Kiswahili in the region. If our businessmen are going to go to Nairobi or Dar-es-Salaam when they don’t know Kiswahili, they will not do business, hon. Lukwago, if I may tell you.
 
Secondly, it is even cheaper for our country. Kiswahili will unite our country. I don’t find it very amusing that when I am in Karamoja somebody is interpreting the way he wants and that I don’t know what he or she is interpreting. One time I was in one town here. Somebody was giving his own speech until somebody came and said, “By the way, the interpreter is actually not saying what you are saying. He is not interpreting but giving his own speech.” Swahili is a common language, which we should actually encourage -(Interruption)
 
MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the hon. Third - First Deputy Premier for yielding the Floor. I am used to the third one because I represent him in this House. (Laughter)

The Constitution provides for a national language. It also provides for Kiswahili being the second official national language. I would like the First Deputy Premier or the Leader of Government Business to tell us what steps Government has taken to make sure that we operationalise that particular constitutional provision to have Kiswahili taught in schools or even spoken in the Chamber or as a language in any office in this country? (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, about the Constitution, you know. You were here in this House when we said Kiswahili is the second national language. You were here, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. That one is a given.
 
MR KATEGAYA: Madam Speaker, it is written there in the Constitution.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes it is. Operationalise then he can tell you. We will have a day for this, but let him finish.
 
MR KATEGAYA: This time I will not give ground. Madam Speaker, as you know, Kiswahili is spoken by some sections of our community. It is now the language in the Army precisely and it has brought about more cohesion and unity in the Army because people don’t group themselves up according to their local languages.
 
As far as the Government is concerned, I have contacted the Ministry of Education and we found that there are some schools, which are already doing it voluntarily as a subject in schools, but it is not examinable. In other words, it is not a compulsory subject in schools. We have been discussing how to make it examinable, which means compulsory and secondly how to get enough teachers to propagate the Kiswahili language. These are the two issues we are working on.
 
Otherwise, as far as I am concerned, I have been pushing this question of Kiswahili because apart from the region, it will help us in this country to also communicate very quickly. Madam Speaker, if you agree on the seminar, I will definitely prepare to come here and we work on the details raised by the Members because I have noted them down. 

On the figures and why I gave Uganda figures and not the rest of the other countries like Kenya, Rwanda, Burundi, Tanzania, we have them but I could not give them in my statement, which is supposed to be precise and short.
 
Otherwise I am ready for the House when they are ready. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Prime Minister. We have no objection to arranging this meeting. We have done it for the Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Finance, National Planning Authority, and the National Development Plan so we can actually arrange it. We will arrange it. Thank you.
 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENT
 
5.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr John Byabagambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is the statement on the status of the axle load control. The Ministry of Works and Transport has noted and appreciates the problems at the Busitema Weigh Bridge. We do apologise to all road users and to our business community that were affected by yesterday’s activities at the Busitema Weigh Bridge.
 
The problems at Busitema Weigh Bridge were caused by failure of our equipment and a few impatient drivers who blocked the Bugiri-Malaba highway. The Ministry of Works and Transport’s interest in preserving national roads goes back to the enactment of the Traffic and Road Safety Weigh Bridges Regulations of 1998 and the Uganda National Roads Authority Act, 2007 which authorised UNRA to preserve our national roads, infrastructure and to keep trucks and buses moving efficiently.
 
In order for UNRA to meet these obligations, heavy commercial motor vehicles should comply with size and weight standards stipulated in the Traffic and Road Safety Weigh Bridges Regulations of 1998 and in this connection, UNRA is responsible for axle load control for purposes of satisfying road user compliance with national laws and standards.
 
The purpose of stating and enforcing vehicle loading limits is to protect the country’s road infrastructure against premature deterioration that would occur if they are exposed to heavy loads that they were not designed to handle.

The endemic overloading of heavy goods on commercial vehicles typically of the order of 10 to 50 percent above normal load has led to the accelerated deterioration of roads in Uganda, the treatment of which is coming at a high cost to the Ugandan taxpayer. Overloading by freight, construction traffic and other vehicles must, therefore, be curtailed to prevent unnecessary further deterioration of our precious and expensive road infrastructure. 

An over loaded heavy vehicle is a traffic hazard especially regarding the vehicle’s braking system and additional braking distance required. This situation is further aggravated at steep down hill slopes and sharp curves on the road system. Heavy vehicles are also too often involved in fatal accidents as their gross weights are too large for their drivers to maintain effective vehicle control thereby causing public roads to become unsafe especially at night.

On 22 October 2009, the Minister of Works and Transport suspended weigh bridge operations and constituted a commission of inquiry to look into allegations of bribery and mismanagement. The commission presented the report in January 2010 and based on some of the recommendations, a number of measures were put in place, leading to resumption of weigh bridge activities on 15 June 2010. The following measures were put in place:

1.	Weigh bridge staff implicated in the report of commission of inquiry were suspended pending further investigation. 

2.	UNRA has acquired new modern weigh bridge equipment from the Ministry of Works to replace the set that was being used before.
 
3.	New weighing platforms have been built at four stations of Lukaya, Mubende, Busitema and Mbale to get accurate results.

4.	UNRA has also advertised for a short-term consultant advisor on weigh bridges and the procurement process is in advanced stages. It is anticipated the consultant/technical advisor will carry out a detailed study in the operation of weigh bridges and advise UNRA accordingly.

	Further more, the outcome of this consultation will be fundamental in improving how the weigh bridges are managed in this country.

5.	Regular sensitisation of stakeholders on axle load control. Since the suspension of weigh bridges, we have sensitised stakeholders in the print media. We have also held sensitisation meetings with major oil transporters like Total and Shell and others like the World Food Programme and from May to August, we are holding meetings with corporate bodies like Roofings, Uganda Breweries Ltd., Nile Breweries Ltd., Coca-Cola, Hima Cement and Tororo Cement. We are also targeting bus companies because it is also noted that they too overload.

6.	Computerisation of the system: the roll out of the Wide Area Network (WAN) is in advanced stages. In the WAN, all stations and bridges where applicable will be connected with headquarters and here we have expanded to the police. It is on this basis that weights, the data of trucks and buses inclusive weighed at the weigh bridges will be on the line transmitted to the headquarters for analysis. By so doing, headquarters will be monitoring the field weigh bridge operations. It is anticipated that his computerisation system will go a long way to enhance transparency.

7.	Standard operational procedures have been put in place. These procedures will get a long way in improving efficiency. 

Actions so far since yesterday at Busitema:

A concrete weighing platform has been erected at Busitema. We have acquired a dynamic axle weigher that will weigh vehicles in motion to ascertain their axle loads. This will replace the equipment at Busitema that was procured by Ministry of Works and recently handed over to UNRA. The Ministry of Works and Transport is suspending weigh bridge activities at Busitema for one week while this equipment is being put in place.

Our weigh bridge at Busia has recently undergone modification and repair. We are waiting for its calibration before it can be put to active service and use. When the Busia weigh bridge becomes operational, all vehicles weighed at Busia and have URA seals shall be exempted from a second weighing at Busitema to reduce on the traffic.

Long Term Measures

The Ministry of Works and Transport and UNRA are actively working on long term measure to improve on axle load control activities around the country.

1.	We shall have two new fixed weigh bridges, which will be constructed at Luwero and Magamaga. 
2.	All weigh bridges are going to be interconnected to a central system at the headquarters – which I also mentioned that it will be monitored by the police. 
3.	More fixed weigh bridges are planned at various places.

In conclusion, Government recognises that heavy vehicles play an important role in the economy by facilitating commerce and they are expected to remain a common sight on our roads in the foreseeable future. However, given that roads are designed to carry a given or finite number of standard legal axle load repetitions, overloading by non law abiding transporters substantially reduces the design life of these structures and causes rapid deterioration of roads conditions all to the cost of or detriment of the over all public.

Transport operators that continually overload their heavy vehicles affect the ability of operators that do not overload to compete on equal terms in the transport market. Here, I want to note that we have received a petition from Hima Cement Factory owned by Lafarge. This company has been very strict on axle load control but they are being out-competed by Tororo Cement Company, which overloads. They have presented their petition and we are looking into it.

Effectively, apart from causing illegal damage to the road infrastructure, transporters who overload unfairly out-compete law abiding transporters at the cost of the general taxpayer, and this is unacceptable. 

The Ministry of Works and Transport will continue to improve weigh bridge activities to eliminate unnecessary inconvenience to the law abiding transporters and traders. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think let us just have three minutes each.

5.31
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): I would like to thank the honourable minister for his statement. I really call upon the Minister to come up with a time frame for a short, medium and long term solution. Madam Speaker, you do ply that road; the number of trailers on that road and as you are aware have even caused us to lose MPs in this House and yet they have been loading too much on the trucks. With the enforcement of the axle system, we expect the number of trucks on that road to triple. I would really have expected the Minister to inform the country that in the next one or two years, all goods imported into this country will come in by rail. That is the long term solution that was sought by the colonialists. 

Secondly, the Tororo Cement Factory continues to carry stones from Karamoja to their factory in Tororo. I would expect the Minister to tell us that within the next one year, we are going to have a factory in Karamoja. Why should we carry stones up to Tororo? 

Lastly, I have an SMS here. In fact the Leader of the Opposition asked me to find out whether what the Minister is telling us is true. I want to thank the Minister – and I met him this morning to discuss this issue because I wanted to go to Tororo, but I could not – he told me that he has suspended, but as of now, his technical people in the field are not aware. When I went to UNRA this morning, I got to realise that they are not aware of that suspension. It is URA that has – because of complaints from East African Legislative Assembly Members - they have directed the importers and trailer drivers to disobey Ministry of Works and Transport’s system.

I would like to call upon you to always communicate your directives by writing to your officials for them to comply. Thank you very much.

5.33
MR MOSES KABUUSU (Independent, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for presenting this statement. Yesterday I was in Lukaya and I can say that the weigh bridge is now working after a long period of suspension. However, I would like to inform the Minister that the state of political influence in Uganda is killing every infrastructure we are investing our money into. 

There are reports to the effect that at the weigh bridges of Lukaya and Mbarara, when vehicles coming from the western region are impounded for being overloaded, high ranking politicians in this Government always order personnel at the weigh bridge to release them. This is wrong and must stop! We invest a lot of money in this kind of infrastructure, so we should not allow it to be wasted because of political influence. The Ministry of Works and Transport must put strict measures in place to enable weigh bridges achieve the objectives for their being in place.

On that note, Madam Speaker, allow me talk about public awareness. It is wrong for an offender to just get to know that he has committed an offence when he reaches the weigh bridge at either Mbarara or Lukaya. Very few people in Uganda can read and write yet the basic method of communication the ministry has been using is print media. As a result, very many people have had limited access to the information on weigh bridges. I would like to urge the ministry to open up to several means of communication so that people are informed.

Finally, it is important for us to borrow a leaf from the neighbouring countries of East Africa. I am happy we are now opening up to the Common Market – when we went to Tanzania we got to realise that it is very cheap to maintain a centralised axle load control system. The Minister said the ministry is going to reduce on traffic and that if somebody has – but weighing a vehicle takes only one minute for both the front and the back axles. We should borrow a leaf from the countries that have implemented this –(Member timed out_­)

5.37
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a number of questions for the Minister, the first one being that he should tell us where he has put the overloaded vehicles his personnel have been impounding since 15 June. 

The second one is, hon. Geofrey Ekanya talked about Tororo Cement Works’ trucks transporting stones from Karamoja – can you tell us whether those trucks are usually overloaded or not? If they are, why haven’t they been arrested from Busitema?

The third question is: now that we have gone into the East African Common Market and I am sure there are weigh bridges in Kenya, are you telling us that when these trucks leave the weigh bridges in Kenya more goods are added onto them from Busia before they get to Uganda? Or are you saying Kenya just allows them to come? Or are the weigh bridges in Kenya different from the ones in Uganda?

Four, can you please tell us why you want to do sensitisation with drivers from Hima Cement Ltd, Roofings Ltd and Total Uganda? Why are you planning to do this when these are big companies with people who know the laws of Uganda? Are you colluding with them so that they can keep using the roads as sensitisation goes on? What is your motive here?

The sixth question relates to seals that the Minister talked about. Where is he going to put these seals? Will he put them on the tyres? I think there is no need for a seal because the moment the truck is overloaded you do not need it. If a truck is cleared, it should be given a permit to move.

Seven, on Saturday, I passed by Busitema weigh bridge, but I can tell you that instead of weighing the big trucks, the staff there are only concentrating on small trucks of five tonnes. Did you instruct those staff of yours to only weigh such trucks?

Finally, can the Minister tell us whether the staff who are going to be at the headquarters monitoring the weigh bridge system are angels? And why do you need a consultant in a ministry – okay UNRA has got over 60 engineers while the works itself has about 50 engineers, but even with all those engineers, you still want to waste public funds and hire a consultant to tell you how to run weigh bridges? Isn’t this madness? I think we are not serious. I thank you.

5.40
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add onto the point that hon. Nandala-Mafabi has just raised. My understanding is that a weigh bridge is a weighing machine – there is nothing difficult about it. We have engineers in the ministry of works recruited and paid using taxpayers’ money. We have professionals in UNRA to whom we allocate a lot of money. For you to say that you need a consultant to teach you how to weigh – we call it “minzaani” in our language – so you need a consultant in “minzaani”? Isn’t this country going crazy –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, hon. Katuntu and Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give is about hiring consultants. In the early 1990s, the Government decided to sell off pool houses, but it could not do it on its own. So, Government hired a consultant to advise it on how to sell about 2,000 houses. This consultant earned about US $15,000 per month, living in Sheraton Hotel with a new Pajero car. There is something crazy about hiring consultants and I do not know the reasons for this.

MR KATUNTU: That is the problem this country is having. We have this syndrome of consultancy; even where a ministry has paid professionals to do this job, the minister is busy looking out for somebody to give those professionals advice on what they already know. This is pure abuse of public resources.

The last point I would like to raise is about this statement. I would like to show how unserious the Ministry of Works is. Hon. Minister, kindly look at the last second paragraph of page 1 of your statement, which begins with, “On 23 October 2010….” Okay, let us go to the third line, which reads: “The commission presented the report in January 2010. Based on some of the recommendations, a number of measures were put in place leading to the resumption of weigh bridge activities on 15 June 2010.” It is less than a month ago and the Minister says that UNRA has acquired new mobile weigh bridge equipment from the Ministry of Works to replace the set that was being used before. 

From that, let us look at paragraph headed, “Action taken at Busitema.” It says that a concrete weighing platform has been erected at Busitema. “We have acquired a dynamic axle weigher that will weigh vehicle motion to ascertain their axle loads.” This is what the statement says. He says that this will replace the equipment at Busitema that was procured recently by the Ministry of Works and handed over to UNRA. This is the madness that we are talking about. He is telling us that UNRA has acquired a new mobile weigh bridge from the Ministry of Works to replace the other one which is also new!

In the subsequent paragraph, he says that they are going to replace even that new one, which they just acquired recently. You can see lack of planning, wastage of public resources, and confusion. We use these strong words because this country is sick and tired of the Ministry of Works. We drive through potholes everyday, we have a terrible traffic jam in town, they are not planning for us and instead they are buying weigh bridges and replacing them as they wish. This has led to wastage of public resources. What will this city be 15 years from today? The traffic will have doubled, we are not planning for infrastructure and the ministry is doing such things! 

This is not a partisan issue; Members across have been raising this particular problem about Ministry of Works. We went to the extent of allocating over Shs 1 trillion to make sure that you sort out your problems but how do you give money to people who are disorganised as this?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, join me in welcoming pupils from Avatek Primary School Budo, Wakiso District. 

5.46
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): I want to agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi that most of these vehicles come from Kenya with loads. A few weeks ago, we were invited to go to Malaba and witness a function which was being performed by the President and we took keen interest in the number plates of most of these trucks. The majority of them were from Kenya and they were on their way to other countries beyond Uganda as well. When you block them from doing their business for a week or so, what will be the feeling of the companies that man this transport sector that are being bogged down because of our own inefficiency?

It looks like our country moves one step forward and two steps backwards in terms of progress. A few moments ago we were treated to a very promising future by the Minister responsible for East African Affairs. He promised a very good common market for East Africa and here we are being treated with a lot disappointment in one of the areas which should be supporting the common market. Transport is a big disappointment and I do not know whether these ministers of ours share their concerns with sister countries and see how they should be assisted in addressing some of these bottlenecks.

I am really disappointed because these big trucks that are stopped on the highway from Mombasa going to the DRC and Rwanda block other traffic and I know this is the corridor, which should be selling this country. An investor who takes trouble to take this route would go back to his/her own country without coming back anymore because this is a manifestation that the cost of doing business in Uganda is high.

I think the Ministry of Works needs to be a bit serious. We have been told that they ate some of the money meant for expanding the road one metre left and right making the roads too narrow. Now instead of clearing the same roads of heavy traffic, they are holding the heavy trucks and causing unnecessary congestion leading to accidents on our roads. The Minister needs to address these bottlenecks very seriously other than giving us contradictions in the sector.

5.50
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Mukono): I am equally disappointed as my other colleagues but at least I will thank the Minister for the statement. We believe that a responsible minister should be looking at other sectors with in the ministry so that something comprehensive that can give hope to Ugandans is established.

You are talking about heavy traffic, haulage of goods, and destruction of roads, the purpose of which is this statement. We had railway transport, which was moving heavy goods from across other countries and facilitating trade. We all know how this was destroyed. We do not see any hope of having the re-establishment of the transport sector on the basis of the railway system, which would have done most of this work. 

It is disappointing that most of the time when we are looking at the Ministry of Works and Transport we are simply looking at roads. We are not looking at air or water. We are only focusing on roads as if it is a ministry for roads. The roads are destroyed from time to time, their designs are very disappointing! We should establish dual carriage roads. I am advising the Minister that as you come out with these kinds of statements to simply fix a few problems, you need to establish hope for the future because we are being seen on television by people who think that this country needs better management. You should be talking about what is going to be done in future such as construction of railways, wider roads and others but we are tired of fixing small things all the time as if this is a simple district. 

How else can I express my disappointment in this ministry and Government? I thank you very much.

5.53
MR TOSKIN BARTILLE (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the Minister for the statement. My major concern was the issue of the weigh bridge at Busitema. The Minister has not told us exactly what happened to the weigh bridge. In the statement, he says it was recently procured by the Ministry of Works, but he does not explain to us what happened to it. 

Then the other issue is that the Minister is aware that for some time, we, people from the Kapchorwa region, have explained to his ministry that the road from Kapchorwa to Sironko is getting seriously damaged day after day because of the heavy Lorries carrying stones from the quarries up in the mountain to Tororo. They have consistently destroyed the road and the Minister does not seem to do anything about it. So can the Minister explain the measures taken? There was a weigh bridge around Sironko, what happened to it? That was my concern. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

5.54
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Minister for the statement and for having taken action on the officials who were working on the weigh bridge. When my committee went there, we were shocked and we wrote a report about it. 

I am also impressed that the Minister has thrown some light on the danger of overloaded vehicles because this is one of the pigments we use when redesigning roads, apart from the load, the lifespan and a few other things that we take into consideration. 

However, I am not happy with the Minister when it comes to the long-term measures. My committee has consistently been telling the ministry that the law needs to be amended; but it is not mentioned anywhere in the long-term plans. If this is not done, the weigh bridge will not perform well. We shall have problems like it is in Kenya and Tanzania. We need an amendment and I appeal to the ministry to bring this amendment in time. 

The second issue on the long term is the load. A Lorry loaded with Matooke is already above the acceptable axle load. Is the ministry going to put weigh bridges everywhere in the county? They cannot do this. What they need to do is to sit back with our colleagues in the East African Community and revise the acceptable axle load. Otherwise, even bringing Matooke from Mbarara to Kampala on a full Lorry is unacceptable. 

The other thing he talked about was the designs, that the curves are short, the stopping distance – all that is right. However, we in the committee plead with the ministry to revise the design speed upwards. That will handle the issue of curves, slopes and the sloping distance. So the ministry should seriously look into the issue of revising upwards the design speed.

Hon. Katuntu talked about a bridge at Malaba but there we are talking about a mobile weigh bridge. A mobile bridge can be here today, tomorrow it can go to Gulu or Luwero. So when they build a permanent one, it should not be taken for non-performance on the part of the ministry. Mobile means it can be taken anywhere at any time. So hon. Katuntu should not worry about that. 

I can say confidently that the ministry has tremendously improved in its performance and I hope that by the year 2013, it will be on top of all those challenges. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.57
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Earlier when I was making my submission I talked about this issue. In fact, the first paragraph starts from where I ended. When you look at these statements - just a simple apology has been given to these transporters who have spent days on the road because the weigh bridge collapsed. The Minister is not factoring in the billions of money that were lost. People have been inconvenienced a lot. 

Towards the last paragraph, they say that on the 23rd 2009, the Ministry of Works and Transport suspended the weigh bridge operations and constituted a commission of inquiry. When you compare what was happening then and what is happening now, you realise that they just suspended individuals who were implicated in this matter. I am even doubtful – actually those who were suspended were just casual workers. The commissioner and the senior engineers who were involved in this have just been promoted.

I want to submit here that some of those people, who were involved in this, like the commissioners, are still working. What was happening there was pure extortion and it is not going to stop. In fact it has been re-introduced because the Ministry of Works does not have the capacity to do inspection on these weigh bridges. So, people are simply inconvenienced a lot. 

In my opinion these bridges, for example that one in Mbarara – why don’t you put these weigh bridges like in Itendero where Lorries load Matooke from? It would help the loaders to know that, “We have to load ten tonnes”, so that before it passes you know that it weighs ten tonnes. But all they do is to waylay the Lorries on Mbarara road. Even when they have been waylaid, they are not even produced in court and they just pay money, which is shared by the people in the ministry - the so-called commissioners. [HON. MEMBERS: “Do you have the evidence?”] Yes I have it. You ask the people who transport Matooke and they will tell you.

On the issue of parking yards, these Lorries park on the road sides and this should have been included here. When talking about preserving the roads, we should talk about parking yards; what happened to them? Some people have to sell “Kabalagala”, tea, and so on, just because they are voters. I lost three sisters just because of bad parking. Has anybody talked about it or worked on that spot where they died? And they are not the only people who died; these three sisters of mine died with my brother - four relatives at the same time! Many more people are still dying from there. You Ministers travel at night, pray very hard that it does not happened to you –(Member timed out_)

6.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr John Byabagambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Members for their contributions.

My report was specifically on one incident, but if I were given a chance, I would have given the comprehensive plan that the Government has on the many issues that have been talked about by the Members of Parliament.

I agree with hon. Ekanya. We interacted today in the morning on the same issue but I couldn’t include everything in here. In the long term, we are going to create the side lanes so that the weighing takes place a few metres from the road reserve. Also, we shall put storage in place facilities for the goods, which are being offloaded; and the parking yard. So, that one is in the plan. It is what we have embarked on. 

As I said, I was talking about Busitema. True, we have to go rail because it is only bulk transportation that will reduce the costs of doing business and at the same time save our roads. The Government is very serious about this. If I can tell you how far we have gone – maybe, Madam Speaker, you will give me another chance one day and I tell them how far we have gone with revamping of the railways.

Tororo Cement, somebody mentioned – I am going to combine them. He was saying that why do I sensitise Tororo and Roofings and what have you? These are the biggest culprits and it is not that I wanted to collude with them – you know there are some people who impute bad motives. But these are the biggest culprits and although it was not written in my statement, I mentioned that we have received a petition from Hima Lafarge that Tororo Cement overloads hence all customers from Rwanda, Burundi, Congo prefer to go and buy from Tororo than Kasese. This is because there is discipline in Kasese. At least those French people have got some discipline. These are some of the reasons why we intensified the measures at Busitema. So, they are law abiding citizens – old truck driver, but they are being pushed out of business by these people who overload.

Also, you said that my technical staff are not aware. Maybe they are aware. They have cleared most of the trucks. At least by midday, I rang and the roads were clear. All the trucks were gone, so they are aware. Last night I had a long conversation during a meeting with Kagina, the URA Commissioner-General about this. So they started last night.

Hon. Kabuusu, rightly so, people, especially the transporters, are more driven by profits. They do not think about the infrastructure that has been put in place. I know they are aware that it is their tax money that fixes these roads but because of their selfishness and the need to make maximum profits, somebody ends up overloading. This has been happening at Lukaya.

I want to give you a testimony. Last week, we impounded a lorry carrying 100 metric tonnes. I do not know how it was moving but it carried 100 metric tonnes instead of the 56 it is supposed to carry. You can see the situation we are in. The whole of that pin pressure was being put on the road. So, the road’s lifespan is reduced tremendously. 

I agree with you that we should be on radios and everywhere, but also we want to interact with the traders. That is why we call in the traders. Even next week I have a meeting with KACITA so that we can mitigate this.

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi; where are the vehicles which were impounded since the 15th of June? Some had been overloaded and these are the same vehicles that we impounded and offloaded and they decided to block others at Busitema. You can see how the situation is. These are the ones we offloaded. They were penalised; after penalising them, they decided to block the road -(Interjections)- actually, now they had devised another method of going on the Kenya side and then they stop and wait to arrive at a go in order to overwork the weigh bridge operators and fail them. It is still this -(Interruption)

MR ISHAA OTTO: Thank you hon. Minister for giving way. I have been listening attentively to the response of the Minister. He is telling us what is happening and what really happens but he is not telling us what measures they are taking. What penalty do you impose on these people? After impounding these vehicles, what do you do? You tell us you have impounded the vehicles and again the same vehicles are the ones, which are on the road. What are you doing with this? (Laughter)

MR BYABAGAMBI: You need to control your anger. Control your anger and we explain to you –(Interjections)- yes we impounded these vehicles. The law is very clear. After impounding the vehicles, they are taken to court. After taking them to court, the court rules and penalises them. After penalising them – well, I think I was talking about the incident. If you want to get the exact number of how many have been penalised since the 16th, I can lay it on the Table tomorrow if I am given a chance. Thereafter, these vehicles – because like tankers we do not have the facilities to offload fuel and so we penalise them; but the loose cargo is offloaded and the trucks are left with light weight and we let them go. This is the law. The law does not allow me to confiscate a truck -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now you conclude this. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: The law was made by this Parliament. Well, Members talked about Tororo Cement trucks, which we have impounded. We are still impounding them except that I do not have the powers to confiscate the vehicles. I have the powers to take them to court and they are penalised. After being penalised, they remove the excess baggage and the vehicle goes. The law was made by this Parliament but I think we need to look into the law again -(Interjections)- I will come to that when I am responding to Toskin.

The seals - you see, they come with Uganda Revenue Authority seals and where we weigh from like Busitema and Malaba, there are Uganda Revenue Authority customs officials. So they put on a seal and for us we put on a sticker. So, if it is containerised cargo and it has got a seal on the container – Nandala was saying that we put seals on wheels. I do not know how you can put a seal on the wheel, but these are containers – he is an economist anyway, I hear so. URA puts seals on the containers and for us we put just a sticker and when it comes to Busitema and the seal is still intact with our sticker, that truck will not wait again. It will continue.

That we leave big trucks and weigh small trucks. Hon. Members, what destroys the road is what we call pin pressure or the pressure exerted on the road. And that pressure is measured by dividing the load with the surface area. I think hon. Mafabi has run away; I would have taught him some of the little physics so that he can also learn. Okay and that effect, which I can call the specific pressure; the one which destroys the road and that specific pressure can also be with a small truck. It is like the specific density of any object or item. It can be a truck with only two wheels and is carrying only matooke, but the specific pressure on it is more than a truck carrying 50 metric tonnes of goods. I think I need to teach this physics to hon. Nandala so that he can learn.

Then while you ask why we need a consultant, I have said we need the consultant for only one reason; the wide area network. We saw this one in Israel. We are copying the Israel system whereby all the weigh bridges are computerised and then they are monitored by the Police, the Uganda Revenue Authority and the Ministry Of Works, simultaneously. So, somebody in Katuna will know that truck number so and so has crossed the border, has been weighed and is carrying so many metric tonnes. That is where we need a consultant. We do not need a consultant on how to use the “Minzaani,” as hon. Katuntu has insinuated. 

He said that we gave them a weigh bridge and then it is replaced. These weigh bridges are bought with specifications and one of the specifications is the volume of the traffic on the road. A weigh bridge, which I am going to place on the road in Ibanda, may not have the same specification of the weigh bridge that I am going to place on Gulu Road. So, these weigh bridges have got different specifications and capacities and these are mobile weigh bridges. They are not stationary. One day, I can have it in Mubende, another day I can take it to Kalangala and another day it is in Mbale. These are mobile weigh bridges. So, what happened is that we took this weigh bridge to Busitema and by that time vehicles were moving well with the other weigh bridge at Busia when it was still functional. But this weigh bridge is not doing what we call the weigh in motion. The other one which we are bringing from Luwero - because all the weigh bridges go to the Ministry of Works – with that one, the vehicle steps on it and the computer captures the weight and it continues moving. So, this will solve a very big problem for us on that side. Both weigh bridges are okay; there is no weigh bridge that was sub-standard, but they were intended for different purposes. 

Hon. Lulume’s concern was also about the railway and I think I have answered that. It is true that we have been focusing a lot on roads but we have now shifted our attention to railways. I will bring a comprehensive plan to give to this Parliament. 

Hon. Toskin - that is why we have the weigh bridge at Mbale - we wanted to use that weigh bridge to capture trucks coming from Soroti and those carrying limestone from Sironko and these are the measures that we are putting in place. But to some extent, problems have happened and I apologise but I think the measures that were put in place have started working because before these changes, you wouldn’t hear of lorries piling on the weigh bridge or people complaining, an indication that it was true that these people would come with money, pay our officers, pass and go. But the new measures that we have put in place have started biting and they have caused a new challenge and this is the challenge that I must solve. That is why we are there and we are going to solve that challenge so that we do not inconvenience the traders. 

Hon. Banyenzaki said that we suspended the small boys and that the big ones are still there. Yes, they were actually paying to those small boys and I know that the small boys were taking the money to the big boys. The report also mentions the big boys and we are actually moving on to suspend even the big boys but because they are civil servants, there are so many regulations about civil servants. We are moving cautiously but I think we are catching up with them. 

Putting a weigh bridge at the Matooke loading centres; well, Matooke is grown everywhere in Uganda. It is in Fort Portal, Bundibugyo, I found Matooke in Kapchorwa and Mbale and I don’t know how many weigh bridges I am going to buy to put at every Matooke loading centre but the best is that once people are sensitised, they will know how many bunches to put on a truck. It is very easy to know that when I carry 300 bunches - because on average a bunch is 20 kilogrammes – I will be carrying about six tonnes or so. But if I were to carry 500 bunches, then it means the axle load will go beyond eight kilogrammes per centimetre squared, which is very high. I agree with him and I think I also mentioned it earlier, that we are going to put the siding roads and the yards and put offloading facilities in place. We are working on that but I think the park yards which used to be there were removed by the Ministry of Finance and the reasons are very clear. You cannot stop trucks from moving at night. What sort of business will you be doing to say that the moment it clocks 7 O’clock then all should park and sleep and wait until it is 6 O’clock in the morning? I think that is not business but ours will be specifically for the weigh bridge so that we weigh from the road reserve. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the question that was asked has been answered. We are dealing with all the policy issues. You know we are about to discuss the State of the Nation Address, the Budget and the policy statements and you will have time to raise all these issues. Thank you, Mr Minister. 

We have, in the public gallery, teachers and students of Forest High School in Mubende. You are welcome.  (Applause)

So, the problem of the border, I think for now, has been handled.

MR EKANYA: Yes, thank you.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL

6.20
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament for leave to allow me introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act of Parliament entitled, “The Prohibition and Prevention of Torture Act, 2010.” The motion is grounded under rules 105 and 106 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and it is justified under the provisions of Article 24 and 44(a) of the Constitution, which provide for the freedom from torture and making torture a non-derogable right and based on that and recognising the fact that many reports in Uganda show that many individuals have been tortured and there is no definition of torture or a specific law, which makes torture in itself a criminal offence or provides for sanctions for perpetrators of the offence of torture, I beg to move that this leave be granted to me and I bring before this House the Bill itself. I have a copy of the Bill, which I wish to lay on the Table. 

Madam Speaker, I even have the Certificate of Financial Implications. If she so wishes I can lay it on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded. 

6.22
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker, we do not have objections but the honourable member will have to interface with the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Attorney-General as is required by the Constitution.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, at this stage, all he requires is the consent of this House, and then we will proceed to do the drafting and the others and bring back the Bill for a first reading. I put the question that leave be granted to the honourable member to move the Private Member’s Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But there is no item on the agenda. We are going to the - 

6.23
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had hoped that something would have been done when I saw the Minister of Defence here. And before hon. Niwagaba was given an opportunity, I had wanted to intervene, since ministers may present a statement on two things: the East African Community and the weigh bridge. 

Madam Speaker, members of the peacekeeping force that is constituted by Uganda and Burundi, were killed in Somalia. The photograph in the newspapers, I think yesterday or the other day, showed one of the members burnt and people were kind of celebrating, and yet the President and leaders of IGAD again went and met to agree on what to do. This matter of peacekeepers dying with no statements coming from Government is a big problem, because we do not know whether these people who died were Ugandans, and if they were Ugandans, what happened. So, I had hoped that the Minister of Defence, Dr Crispus Kiyonga, was here, specifically to request you to make the statement. This is the second time we are reminding Government on this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope the Leader of Government has noted that matter and I hope the statement will come. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE REGULATION OF INTERCEPTION OF COMMUNICATION BILL, 2007

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we had moved to the first reading. We had finished reading the report then the Members requested for time to study the report. I instructed - no, no, you have not got it today; you got it two weeks ago. I instructed the Clerk to distribute the UCC Act, which he has done and I can confirm that because I have my copy, and the Anti-Terrorism Act. Now, start debating.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Just allow me, I want to help. Madam Speaker, yesterday the Order Paper showed that this particular item would appear in the afternoon. And we said, “Fine. When it comes, we shall deal with it.” And then this morning a draft Order Paper was sent to my office where the item was not included. I had actually intended to come and inquire from you on the matter, but then I got caught up at the Electoral Commission and the Order Paper now has this particular item.

We then have a situation where many ministerial statements have been made. We have reached 6.30 p.m., Members are tired, and we are now going to discuss this item. I do not want us, as a Parliament, to be seen to handle this matter in such a way as if there were any other motives. My appeal would be, please -(Interjections)- this is what I am telling you as a fact. The draft Order Paper did not have it -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Members! Hon. Leader of the Opposition, I want you to be fair to this House and to the Speaker. Last week you were the one who requested me to postpone this matter to this week because you were going to Malawi. You came to my office and said you were going to Malawi and asked, “Can we handle this matter this week?” I brought forward other business well knowing that we were going to handle this Regulation of Interception of Communication Bill this week. I did that on your request - yes. Hon. Members, please!

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Speaker, it is an appeal, because if the draft Order Paper does not have it - the Order Paper makes it an item down and then it is brought up. It does not look well -(Interjections)- I know. My appeal is that let this be the substantive item tomorrow after communication and we discuss it; please.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I also have a programme of the Business Committee. I have got the State of the Nation Address and the Budget to handle. We agreed that we shall debate this item this week. You start the debate. We do not have to finish today. Members, start the debate. (Hon. Amama Mbabazi rose_) No, you are the minister; you will respond last -(Hon. Members rose_) it is a general debate. No, we did not touch the debate.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, thank you. I understand what you are saying that I will respond after Members have made their presentations. But as you may recollect, when I moved the motion for this Bill to be read a second time, I did not make my justification because at that time, there was the question of the minority report, which we did not have and there was no time. So, I was requesting that I make my justification, and we debate in the normal way. That is why I stood up.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you will respond to both the chairman’s report and the minority report later after taking into account the views of all the Members.

6.30
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. [HON. MEMBERS: “He spoke.”] No I did not. You check the record. Madam Speaker, this is my first time on this issue; the record will bail me out on this.

I stand here to oppose this Bill. I have looked at the report of the committee together with the minority report. When you look at both reports, it is very clear that this Bill constitutes a serious and a grievous affront to the fundamental rights - the Bill of Rights, in Chapter IV of our Constitution. And Madam Speaker, we must be careful. As Parliament, we took oath to protect and defend the Constitution. Under Article 79, our primary obligation is to protect and defend the Constitution. 

When I look at the observations made by the committee in the main report, it is very clear we are overstepping the mandate given to us as Parliament in making legislations, which constitute derogation from the fundamental rights -(Interjections)- yes, under Article 43; the right to privacy -(Interjections)- yes, under Article 43. I concede, the right to privacy is not an absolute right, but in this Bill you will see that we are actually eroding the right to private communication. We are completely eroding it. Even the safeguards given here are not a guarantee that these rights will not be violated with impunity. There are no safeguards and it is mentioned here. The Oakes principle which forms -(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to give hon. Lukwago very good information. Just two weeks ago, one child, Kham Kakama, was killed and somebody was using a telephone line that he dumped. I think that is infringing on the fundamental right of that dead person. That is the information I would like to give hon. Lukwago.

MR LUKWAGO: I thank you for that information, but we are talking about principles here. We are talking about the Constitution and we are talking about fundamental rights. You know, in this country, we do not even have a law that requires one to register his phone line. It is not there. So, it is not in this Bill.

If you looked at page 2 of the minority report, the last paragraph, the Members are saying, “Generally, the restrictions of the above rights by the Bill in its current form do not pass the Oakes test and pose a great threat to the enjoyment of fundamental human rights”. This Oakes test is very instrumental here. It was analysed by the Supreme Court in this country in the Obbo-Mwenda case; it was adopted, and it is a test we must adhere to.

In this particular case, what is the purpose of this Bill? What is the threat? We are already informed by the minister that security measures can be done or can be taken without necessarily passing this Bill. He has already informed us. Now the question is, of what purpose would the Bill of Rights be? What purpose will it serve after we have passed this Bill which opens the floodgates for tapping one’s phone communication without any safeguards? We are taking a very big risk here -(Interjections)- Yes! 

I notice here the committee is recommending for a warrant to be obtained from court, but I know the proceedings will be ex-parte; it will just be a matter of course. The minister or the responsible authority will swear an affidavit; take it to court without you the person who is involved in this matter getting to know and to defend yourself. 

The minister will get, for example, a warrant from court to tap Lukwago’s phone without giving me notice or an opportunity to defend myself in court. That is not a safeguard. (Interjections) That is not a safeguard. Let us observe the fundamental rights in this country. Let us be critical on all the issues to do with the Bill of Rights. Otherwise, we are going to erode the fundamental rights in this country.

There was a proposal here as I wind up. If you looked at page 5, the law imposes an irrational and strenuous compulsion on the service providers and consumers of electronic and postal services. This command that service providers like MTN, Warid, Orange and what not, should install the gadgets to tap the phones at the cost of the consumer. This is going to make communication in this country very expensive.

We already have enough laws in this country. The Anti-Terrorism Law is already there, it can help you hon. Minister. I would request, if you could bring an amendment to the Anti-Terrorism Law, where you need enhancement, we could help you; we could support you; but in this particular case, to come up with a specific legislation to completely erode the rights to communication and the right to privacy. Madam Speaker, I am warning this House. We are treading on very dangerous ground. As Parliament, we are actually overthrowing the Constitution by passing this Bill, which is treason under Article 2 of the Constitution. If we pass this Bill, we would have committed treason as Parliament. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.38
MR ROBERT KASULE SSEBUNYA (NRM, Kyandondo North, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is pertinent that we pass this Bill. By the time the Constitution of Uganda was enacted, there were some technological developments that had not yet reached Uganda. That is a fact.

Terrorism was at its initial stages; but now that those two developments have happened, technology has advanced; it is common for everybody to acquire a SIM card, use it, do whatever they want to do with it, and then throw it away.

Secondly, terrorism has reached our doors - child kidnap and many other evil things that can be done using technology. Phones and other methods of communication including computers [MR ISHA OTTO: “Information.”] I have little time. We are few; you shall have time to debate.

So, I pray that given what has happened in Uganda recently - a few weeks ago, somebody managed to hoodwink parents of a child to the extent that they even paid ransom. They paid ransom to the tune of Shs 30 million. That is the one we know. We do not know how much they paid. We were given information that even generals were scared by these lumpens who pretended that they were seeing everybody anywhere, while this murder was taking place. 

I pray even with the honourable’s clarification that both sides of the House come to an understanding if you have any proposal that would not enable us to pass this Bill, given the security threats both to us and the general public.

And secondly, and maybe the last one; we are going through campaigns; there is what they call malicious information, most certainly from the recently formed pressure group called Suubi. Those organisations are planning to malign us; to malign different people with malicious damage messages, and we need to know —(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I am a member of Suubi 2011. Suubi 2011 is a civic organisation which is not a political party; it is not a terrorist organisation and it is not at all intended to malign or kill somebody’s image in any way. Is the honourable member here in order to make such wild allegations when actually he has not even seen the document concerning the objects and the aims of Suubi? Is he in order to make such wild allegations on the Floor of the House instead of asking for information? Is he in order to allege that this organisation, this platform, is about maligning people and him in particular?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I have not yet had access to the objectives of Suubi 2011, but maybe he can substantiate.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Thank you. I am seeking information. In a fully multi-party dispensation environment, for one to create a faction – not even a faction but a platform - maybe we shall be given more information about this platform, if it is not to jeopardise the multiparty system –(Interruption)- can I finish my presentation? 

I have appealed to both sides of the House to consider passing this Bill into law because the security of everybody – we might also be planning to malign you. So, you need to safeguard yourselves and your voters. So, I pray and support the Bill. Let us pass the Bill in good spirit. Let us not politicise it. I thank you.

6.44
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Lira): Madam Speaker, many times I have not agreed with my brother, hon. Amama Mbabazi, but permit me to say that today I am agreeing with the minister. (Applause)

National security is very important to all of us, whether you are in the Opposition or in Government. Many people have been using modern technology, especially phones, to commit felony, to terrorise people, to defraud people. Today I stand to support the honourable minister.

In our country now, I know that hon. Amama Mbabazi is tapping my phone illegally and I have no right or law backing me to stop him from tapping my phone. Once this law comes in place, I will have the opportunity to go to the court and ask why hon. Amama is tapping my phone, because the reason for tapping our phones is clear. It is when somebody is about to commit a felony or planning to do something illegal. And I know many people might not know what a felony is, but in law those are criminal acts like murder et cetera, and this does not include political grounds, and that is why I am happy with him. So, Members of the other side should be free because it does not include political grounds. If it had included political grounds, I was going to reject this law.

Madam Speaker, nowadays people acquire telephone lines anyhow. I have travelled in many countries and there are restrictions on the use of telephone lines. In Lira, somebody would just call you – like they have been conning Members of Parliament - they call you on one line and say we are going to do this and that and by the time you realise that they are actually conning you, they will stop using that number and you will never get that number. There is, therefore, misuse of telephone numbers. We want this law to include registration of lines. You acquire a telephone number, and your names are registered so that we know that this number belongs to so and so; that would provide security to our people.

I am also happy that the minister will now write to the courts. He will not just use his mandate and powers to tap phones, but he will have to apply; and on applying, he will have to state the grounds that so and so is a criminal - like my brother, honourable –(Interruption)- the politician are Members of Parliament. If you are not a criminal, you are free and nobody will tap your phone. If they tap your phone it will be illegal. 

MR EKANYA: My brother, hon. Okot Ogong, has been telling me that he is interested in being a head of state. I want to tell you that as a head of state, and even today, the first people who are on line to be tapped are ADCs, the Minister of Security, the Chief of Defence Forces, the Director of CID – you have to tap the people around you. So, if you tell us now that you have to be a criminal first, then you will be overthrown the next day; and that is why you find that some heads of state are murdered. 

So, if the Minister of Security thinks that it is only the people in the Opposition who are going to be tapped – he is first on the line and the people who work with the President because the President’s security has to be guaranteed. The only problem is that they can go to the President, kneel and apologise; while for us on the Opposition side, that is not our behaviour. 

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I do not doubt my capability of being the head of state of this country, and I know that there are measures that I will put in place as the president to ensure my security; so, do not worry. Once I am in power, my security will be perfect.

We should not make this a political Bill. This Bill is for our own security; it is for our own safety. I want us to make laws that will not be misused. So, I beg Members of Parliament, both the Opposition and the Government side, to support this motion, because this motion is basically for the good of this nation. We need to put in place safeguards so that it cannot be misused by the minister. I thank you.

6.50
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is know that the honourable member, who spoke not long ago, brought the issue of Suubi 2011, and we thank you for that. But I also listened to hon. Okot Ogong and I can say that we sat as the Opposition this morning and even yesterday, to discuss this Bill, and one of the things we agreed on was that the security of the state is good; we have no problem with that, but then when we looked at the Bill and the other provisions of the law, we asked ourselves many questions and we came to clear conclusions.

First, when you look at the memorandum of the Bill, the second paragraph says: “This proposed Act will reinforce the provisions of part (iv) to part (vii) of the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2004, whose main focus is the suppression of terrorism.” 

Maybe the communication centre would reinforce, but that would be an administrative matter. If you look at all the other elements and you ask what is being reinforced, you do not see it. I remember when we were debating the Anti-Terrorism Bill, my good brother, the hon. Minister for Security stood up when hon. Cecilia Ogwal was making a contribution and said, “You are just talking, but we know everything that you have been saying.” That means that the title of the Bill becomes okay: “…to regulate”. Now, if we are regulating, what is the central instrument to ensure regulation?  

You are establishing a communication monitoring centre, but there are no accompanying provisions or regulations that we would have in the schedule of this law to ensure that that centre is not abused. And so, you then ask yourselves at this stage, why would we allow you to have a communication centre and give you a free hand to define how it will operate; what will be used, et cetera. 

And so we said, if we were to consider this Bill as it is, the central element in this Bill is this communication centre. So, we would ask the Minister to first go back and show how they are going to manage the communication centre, and how they are going to protect the interests of those who would not be adversely affected, including politicians. There is nothing here that says notwithstanding this, political communication is privileged; nothing.  

How do we know that that centre would not be a monitoring centre for the party in power? So, an outline or a proposal of how that centre will operate; how it will be regulated; and what safeguards are provided to ensure that the provisions of the Constitution are protected, would be central to agreeing to consider this Bill, and pass it in the present form. 

Secondly, I know that trust is not easy to throw around. [HON. MEMBER: “On your side.”] I have not said any side; in fact I would say on my side. Therefore, I would be very conscious, just because my brother is grey-haired, to trust - if you look at the Anti-Terrorism Bill, under the provisions on tapping communications, there is a specific minister responsible. And if you look at the other laws, which are cross-referenced here, the Minister of Internal Affairs is responsible. But now we have in this proposed Bill, that right dragged away from their feet and transferred to the Minister of Security or any other minster designated by the President. 

Hon. Okot Ogong says that he can sue; who will you sue when you don’t know who was assigned as the minister responsible? [HON. MEMBER: “I sue the Attorney-General.”] It is okay you can sue the Attorney-General, but I hope you see the point I am making. If I were to go and look for these people, who will know who is responsible? And why would you want the rights to do this thing taken away from the Minister of Internal Affairs and transferred to a particular minister; and not only that, but subsequently transferred to another minister who may be unknown to the public? It is important so that political pressure would be put on people.

If you look at the other element, which is crucial in this Bill, is the issue of interception, which the committee correctly spelt out. The responsibilities that are bestowed on the minister under this Act create a big challenge. But most important of all, you see the state has a responsibility; to liberalise the economy; it is the state to ensure that it can tap into the available technologies. 

But to suggest that the communication people have to order equipment to sell communication, but ensure that they are compatible with your equipment that they have not ordered for and will not know, and when there is incompatibility, liability goes to the communications company, is again not right. 

If the law, as we put it, establishes a communication centre where security of communication is ensured; where people are not adversely affected - my brother, hon. Kubeketerya and his immediate neighbour mentioned about this young child; it is very unfortunate; it is very tragic. The death of that child should not be used carelessly like that. Because you now have 12 million telephone lines; do you know what it means to sieve communication from 12 million communication telephone lines to get an ordinary event? Please, let us not use that; let us use the strength of logic. 

What if he had not been killed? When was this Bill introduced? Please, let us not appeal to emotions; let us appeal to the realities of the Bill; let us look at the reports of the committee of this Parliament; let us look at the position of those who appeared before this committee - the telephone companies, the civil society; they were all opposed to specific elements of the Bill. 

What we are saying is that on aggregate - the amount of work, if we have to take those proposals - is so huge that the best preference would be for the minister to go and make the best use of these suggestions. Come out with a better Bill bearing in mind the need to regulate that communication centre very strongly. If that is done, we have no problem; we will come and pass it because it is in our interest that this country functions. But as it is now, it is totally inadequate and potentially dangerous. It becomes a matter of faith; a matter of trust; and yet state matters are not dealt with on trust. You carry your position in the pocket in terms of the laws that are made. That is the challenge, Madam Speaker. It is a difficult challenge. 

We want to support the Minister, but the issues raised, by both the main report and the minority report, are major. The issues raised by those who appeared before the committee are major. I find difficulty in supporting this Bill. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

7.01
MR JOSEPH BALIKUDEMBE (DP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I stand to oppose the Bill in its current state. This Bill, frankly speaking, is inimical to the concept of constitutionalism, good governance and the rule of law.

When the NRM came into power, I was just barely in primary one and we had a great belief in what the NRM had brought us. We believed in a number of things that the NRM put in place, and among them was the rule of law, good governance and constitutionalism. When we look at our Constitution, Article 2, which says, “Supremacy of the Constitution”; the Constitution is a supreme law of Uganda. Under Article 20 of our Constitution it is clearly highlighted for a fact that inherent rights are not granted by individuals and neither are they granted by the state.

When you look at that Bill, dear colleagues, this turns out to be a violation of the Constitution as it stands. It is very wrong - I have been told it is called the “Mbabazi Bill”. That is what I have been told; I do not know why, but it is alleged.

To drive my point as to why I am standing on the Floor of Parliament, it is to categorically come out and say that what we are trying to bring out as a Parliament is a total violation of our Constitution and an abuse of the protection of freedoms - that is privacy, and personal liberty, and this would definitely go down as inhuman treatment. Clearly look at your Bill; it is called your Bill -(Interjection)- you have already taken me away from what I was supposed to say and I am dwelling on what you are telling me right now. 

Let us protect the inherent rights of our people. Where we believe in our Constitution, let us look at that in its entirety. When you tap somebody’s phone, believe me that is an abuse of that person’s right. It is already put in the Terrorism Act that you will, as a state, under the Ministry of Internal Affairs - there is what is due to you to cater for people who are not using their phones in an appropriate way. What would be required in this is for you to take the right course in amending the Terrorism Act; it is not necessary for you to bring this Bill.

Turning to the specifics of this Bill, I will take you to examples in South Africa. If we have thorough regulations that can be a facet to the schedule of the Bill if it is taken into place, that will help us have a clear objective of what the Bill intends to do. But if the Bill stands as it is, believe me it is very inimical of the concept of constitutionalism.

I humbly pray that we go back to the drawing board. Let us not always come on the Floor of Parliament and say this and that. Let us go and sit down and see what is best for our country and let us bring it on the table and do what it entails. Don’t do what you believe is right as an individual; no, that will not help us. Don’t push it onto people believing that there is a superiority element in some individuals and the like. No, there is no vacuum against any categorised national of Uganda. Let us work in harmony, in building a very clear-cut nation, built on the rule of law, good governance and constitutionalism, as way back as 1986 when I was in primary one. I humbly pray.

7.07
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are having a very delicate debate where we need to balance public interest and constitutional private interest. Both interests are actually constitutional. The Constitution provides for the protection and promotion of those public interests. It also provides for the protection of the private interest.

What we should be debating is how to balance both interests and come up with a law that does not affect the interest of a private person as enshrined or protected in the Constitution, and at the same time protect the public interest. If we do that, I don’t think we will be having a big and lengthy debate about this sort of proposed law. Because that should be the principle, in my view; but when you look at this Bill, then questions arise.

I am very uncomfortable, for example, having these rights defined by a politician. Any reference to a politician in this Bill is certainly not good for public interest. My friend, hon. Amama Mbabazi knows this. For me to imagine that I will give this interest to him who is actually a Secretary General of a political party, which political party wants to stay in power - he will be tempted to use this information for selfish reasons. It is natural because it has happened before and it is happening now. I don’t want to go into the details where sometimes we even use security agencies for political purposes, because it has been happening. 

So, what we are trying to do is to give that temptation a license. If you need my support for this Bill, delete anything to do with minister of whatever description from this Bill. Then we shall hold any other person professionally responsible, assuming you have got professional state security agents, or we shall demand professionalism from them. We can.

When you look at this Bill, it says in clause 3(2) - there are several others, which are absurd provisions. “The minister shall exercise final responsibility over the administration and functioning of the monitoring centre”. So, you are giving this function actually to a politician. God forbid. Can you imagine a Gagawala being given this responsibility? (Laughter) (Interruption)

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, I would like to remind the person now in charge as the Leader of the Opposition that I come from a family, which has got people with brains as far as law is concerned. I don’t want to go too far. I am rising on a point of order towards my honourable learned friend there, and I am not learned; I am just an engineer. 

This report, which is moved by the committee on page 3 is saying they did move around the country and even went to South Africa and UK. Members of the committee visited South Africa which uses this judicial system in issuing of a Warrant of Interception. They even went to the United Kingdom where the Secretary – that is the minister who is a politician, issues that warrant. Is the hon. Katuntu in order to suggest that what we are doing is rubbish; that politicians should be nowhere near this law and yet himself as a lawyer knows very well he is a politician and he has to make these laws?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, there is a committee report and minority report. I believe it is contributing to the minority report. 

MR KATUNTU: I thank you very much. We are talking about the Bill. This report is not a Government report –(Interjections)- we are debating this Bill. In any case, when I had my first child, I went to my mother to ask what name I should give my child. I had a name, which I may not say now, but my mother told me one thing; that when you name your child a name like Mpologoma, the child could actually behave like a mpologoma. (Laughter) So, hon. Gagawala; Wambuzi! I do not want to be diverted. (Laughter) (Interruption)

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: Is hon. Katuntu in order to start talking and derogating the name of Wambuzi when he knows what it exactly means? (Laughter) I did study in Buseesa where the hon. Katuntu is MP – I studied in that place for very many years and I know that actually his mother comes from our clan and he should know the meaning of the word Wambuzi. Wambuzi is a big name and what it simply means is, “Do not talk to me unless you have brought a goat.” (Laughter) And that is why also my mother added on Gagawala – that be rich with friendship and everything. Surely my name, Madam Speaker -(Laughter)- is it anywhere near those insinuations he is trying to put on me? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Your name is very important. (Laughter)

MR KATUNTU: I thank you. The point I was really trying to raise is that this Bill should only be supported when it seeks to promote professionalism. The sort of caution you are having, especially from this end, is: Is there a risk of a minister trying to use this Bill for other reasons other than those it is intended for? What could be the cure? 

In my view, we need to eventually move a provision to criminalise anybody who taps or monitors a phone for any other reason other than that for which it is intended, and that crime should be within this Bill -(Interjections)- please, I have read the Bill, and this one should go clearly in the Bill with definitions. 

As it is provided here, it is not very clear because I have read this particular clause. It should be very clear in detail, for example, if you have a minister – assuming we have a director-general of any of these security organisations who uses this information and provides it to a secretary-general of a ruling party that shows what people are doing - that should be criminal. 

When you look at the clause that provides for the instances when you would monitor a phone - under clause 5 - it talks about, for example, under (b), gathering of information concerning actual threat to national security, but it does not go into details to define some of these concepts. 

There is another very vague one - “or any other national economic interests.” What is a national economic interest? You now just leave that in the mind of the monitoring officer and yet the law does not work that way, because you are eventually going to end up having absurd definitions where courts of law try to interpret this saying that Parliament could have actually meant this. 

So, if we must pass this law, then we need to go to clause 5(i) and clearly define all these terms in detail, such that the person who eventually monitors, or the court of law where you are applying, should exactly know what you are applying. As it is now, it is vague. What are the state’s international relations as provided for under clause 5(1) (d)? It is not defined. So, we should go into the details of all these terms and define them. 

But at the same time, hon. Members, whether we pass it or not, they will monitor and on that one I can assure you –(Interjections)- because, I think it is good that we have some sort of law such that in case somebody is doing it for other reasons, you could run to court and seek remedy. I can tell you there is nothing we will not know because -(Member timed out_­) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are now on this side. Five minutes. 

7.21
MR NORMAN MUWULIZE (Independent, Buikwe County West, Mukono): I thank you. I stand to support this motion –(Interjections)- I support the motion because first of all, they say, “forewarned is forearmed”, and when men learn to shoot without missing, then birds fly without perching. If you are forewarned, why make deals on phones? I wonder if somebody had really good intentions on the phone and he is not having any hidden deals, we would wonder why he is tapped. When you are having deals that are not good – I think it is important that people also learn how to use gadgets. 

I also find some problem in the Bill, because in the object of the Bill on page 3, it mentions that, “In the course of transmission …” and yet this Bill, to be effective, there certainly has to be co-operation between the one who seeks to use it and of course, the operators – that is the telecom companies. But the telecom companies have their proposals on page 17 in this Bill. Their proposals numbered one to four have an element that shows that certainly there has to be proof. It has to be written; there has to be proof that other means have failed. The question is: how will this one be effected? I do not know how this has been harmonised in the Bill, because I have not seen it anywhere. Anyway, something has to be done by having the mechanism of implementing harmonised with what the state agencies and the telecommunication companies are going to be using in this arrangement.

That said, I would like to add that this Bill is helpful because it is only in Uganda where we have phones being used anyhow. I would like to also say that as we implement this Bill, we should register whoever uses any phone set. I am saying this because we are mixing two things: promoting those dealing in the sets – it is only in Uganda where you find a telephone set being sold like anything on the street. Someone will buy it, use it and just throw it away. I think we need to harmonise the usage of these gadgets by having it in line with a communication arrangement that is respected. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.24
MR BARTILLE TOSKIN (NRM, Kongasis, Bukwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand to support this Bill for obvious reasons. The important thing that I note here is the issue of national security. This is something that we cannot just ignore, given the issue of terrorism that has spread all over the world; the rampant robberies and all the others. As I read the report –(Interruption)

MR ISHAA OTTO: Thank you, honourable colleague and Madam Speaker. The information I want to give to the House is that already as we talk, part IV of the Anti-Terrorism Act gives the Minister of Internal Affairs powers to intercept any communication and do surveillance on any person suspected of getting involved in terrorism activities. 

And if I may quote part VII of the same Act, it reads: “Powers of the authorised officer - The scope of interception and surveillance allowed under this part is limited to: The interception of letters and postal packages of any person, interception of telephone calls, faxes, emails and other communications made or issued by or received by or addressed to a person, monitoring meetings of any group of persons, surveillance of movement and activities of any person, and electronic surveillance of any person ….” 

And to me, the most important part is that of electronic surveillance of any person. It covers all these; so, already anything to do with monitoring, surveillance, interception of any person indulged or involved in any suspicious acts is provided for in this law. That is why we informed this House that if there are any issues missing in this law, it would have been only a matter of amending the Anti-Terrorism Act to incorporate the missing provisions. Otherwise, the powers have already been given to the Minister of Internal Affairs. That is the information I want to give to the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Member, how do you balance up that with the absence of the power to register? Yes, you are saying we can do that, but unless you are registered – can we balance that power with the need to register?

MR ISHAA OTTO: Madam Speaker, that is why we are saying that whereas we appreciate some of the provisions, which are not catered for in this Act, there is no need for us to come with a whole Bill. Even in the objective of the Bill, the Minister puts it very well that they are just trying to reinforce the already existing provisions in the Ant-Terrorism Act. Our position is: why don’t we go to this Act and include those provisions by an amendment? Registration can be provided for in the amendment.

MR TOSKIN: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the information that has been given by the honourable member, but what I would like to say is that this Bill seeks to also strengthen that other law. There is no harm to it.

Like I was saying, the issue of national security is very important. Almost all countries that are conscious about their security have actually enacted this law. I remember we were told here that when the committee went out for consultations – it actually consulted quite a number of stakeholders on this matter. I would like to strongly urge this House to support this Bill.

7.29
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono County North, Mukono): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I stand to oppose this –(Interjections)– no, to oppose it. When you look at section 5 of the Bill, where there are categories of communications that can be intercepted, you realise that basically everything that a person does is included. That section reads in parts thus: “… a warrant shall be issued by the minister to an authorised person - when the minister believes that a felony has been or is being or will probably be committed ….” 

Madam Speaker, when you look at this last part, you realise that it covers so many things. For the Bill to assume that a felony will probably be committed is nothing, but giving the minister and the enforcement agents a lot of powers. This means that at any time, the agent can suspect any person of planning to commit such a felony.

The full implication of this section is that Uganda is going to become the big brother’s house anyway, because people will be harassed for doing almost everything. I would like to say that there is nothing like a bad or good law; what matters are the intentions of the framers of that law. We all have been in Uganda – I am one person who has ever been suspected of being a terrorist, although eventually, when I was brought back after a week under detention, I was only charged of sedition.

It is very clear in Uganda that some words have very different meanings to our law enforcers. Terrorism for example, in Uganda, means quite a very different thing. At one time His Excellency was on record for having said that we do not have terrorists in Uganda. He went on to say that the type of people who can hijack planes or bomb other places - but what have we seen? Remember those people who invaded Minister Maria Mutagamba’s office with a knife? Then there are these terrorists of the Nambooze type who went to CBS and said some words that did not please His Excellency the President, and so forth. So, when you look at the people who have been arrested on charges of terrorism in Uganda, you will understand that terrorism means a very different thing in this country. 

Today I am sitting on this side of the House and some honourable colleagues are sitting on the other side, but these seats are not permanent. Tomorrow some of us will be sitting on the other side while those seated on that side might find themselves on this side. We can make laws today, but let us understand that they may be used by other regimes. We may not be here to change some of these laws being made. We know the conduct of our law enforcers and how they treat suspects. 

In Mukono I saw a DISO working as a campaign agent for my opponent and this is the DISO who will be briefing the minister and say, “Nambooze is suspected of involving herself in unlawful activities”. We know that the GISOs are acting as registrars of NRM in the villages. We would love to protect ourselves and our country, but the people who enforce laws in Uganda act in a partisan manner. We should look closely at the intention of the framers of this Bill.

7.35
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chwa County, Kitgum): I rise to oppose this Bill as it is. I will start with the timing. However good the intensions of the Bill are, the time at which it is being introduced makes it prone to misinterpretation. We are too close to the general elections to come up with a Bill like this.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Is it in order for my honourable colleague not to read the Bill that is under debate? This Bill has been on the business of Parliament for the last three years. Is it in order, therefore, for hon. Okello-Okello to suggest that this timing and its closeness to the next election is something that was intended by introducing the Bill in 2007?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members the Bill was published and read for the first time in 2007, so it has been with Parliament for all this time.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank for that ruling, Madam Speaker. I think that is the reason why we do not need this Bill at all.

My second point is that I have noticed a new definition of ministers. Ministers are now being referred to as relevant. This is the first time I am seeing that three ministers will just be relevant to the Minister of Security. The ministers of defence, internal affairs and that of information and communication technology - they will just be relevant to the security minister.

I have never seen a Bill, which refers to a minister as being relevant. A minister must be responsible not relevant. What this means is that when this Bill becomes law, some powers of these ministers will be transferred to the minister of security and I think it is not good for this country.

I have it here that application can even be made verbal; this is clause 5(2). If you make the application verbally, what proof will be there that that application was made? What if someone gets up and issues warrants claiming that verbal application was made, how would it be proved? I think there is a lot of work to be done if this Bill is to be passed into law. 

Look at clause 4, among the applicants, the Chief of Defence Forces, the Inspector-General of Police and Commissioner-General of Prisons. These are all under different ministers. Will they apply through their ministers or will they go direct to the Minister of Security? This Bill has got a terrible hidden agenda of usurping powers of other ministers and putting them in one super minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, debate will continue tomorrow but let me appeal to you. We had the report of the committee, we had the minority report, and there was a lot of reference to UCC Act. Can you bring out those issues tomorrow such that we can appreciate the contents of those reports?

The House is adjourned to 2 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 7.41 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 8 July 2010 at 2.00 p.m.) 


