Wednesday, 2 July 2008

Parliament met at 2.57 p.m. in Parliament House Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I welcome you back for the afternoon sitting and I want to start by reminding the members of the government that the ministries were expected to have brought their policy statements by 30 June 2008. My census says that some ministries have not done so. However, we sat in a Business Committee meeting at the beginning of this session and agreed that starting from next Monday, the committees should begin to examine the policy statements. 

It is our intention to adjourn the plenary tomorrow evening to enable the committees to proceed with their work. I would like to urge the ministries to do the needful between now and Friday so that the committees can begin examining them and then we shall later come back to discuss the budget. On that note, we shall also be having a session tomorrow morning and I had indicated to the Prime Minister that we need to work morning and afternoon and close on the State of the Nation Address. 

3.00
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I did write to all my colleagues to remind them that: (a) policy statements should be in by 30 June 2008; (b) that they must use the new format. And I copied this letter to their permanent secretaries because they do the technical work. I trust that my colleagues will oblige. 

PROF. LATIGO: For the record, I would like the House to know that less than five ministers have so far given out their policy statements. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We do not need to name the ministries but we have agreed that by Friday evening, all the papers should be here so that on Monday, the committees can begin.

3.05
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (MAJ. GEN. Kahinda Otafiire): I am told in my absence, members of parliament expressed concern about a statement I am supposed to have made when I was in Manafwa. I want to put it on record that sticking to power is not my ideological orientation. I fought for democracy and I believe in peaceful change of Government. I never said it; I do not believe it; this was put in my mouth. I have denied it on three occasions; yesterday, the other day when I was at UTODA and on Sunday and I thought Daily Monitor would be decent enough to say at least the man has denied; they have not written anything. 

I was obliged to go to their radio station yesterday to say I did not say it. I want honourable members of parliament to be at rest; I am a democrat through and through and I ask the Opposition to work very hard and defeat us and we shall leave. But if you do not defeat us, do not expect us to go on our own. (Laughter)

3.07
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Latigo Ogenga): Madam Speaker, when some of us who lived with Maj. Gen. Otafiire for some time read what was written, we began to get worried and wondered whether some very serious physiological condition had besieged the General. I have been with Gen. Otafiire since our student days in Lumumba though he was ahead of me. But most interestingly, Gen. Otafiire one time made a statement that Monitor Radio likes to put that I am 94 kilogrammes. I have never believed in a queue, I will never be in a queue and then the Monitor suddenly says that Gen. Otafiire said they will never leave power even when they lose. Maybe the environment, given what was happening in Zimbabwe, was conducive for the newspapers to say what they said. 

But I rise to wholeheartedly thank Gen. Otafiire for reassuring the country that he still stands and he will always stand for what he fought for – the freedom of Ugandans to choose their leaders. We also take your challenge very seriously because we know that if we do not remove you through the normal processes, you will remain in power. All we appeal for is for you to let the ground be levelled. If Dr Besigye goes to Hoima, let the radios allow him to speak and when we have rallies, allow us to speak because I can assure the whole country, we all love our country and we want it to be peaceful. But we thank you very much for the assurance. This matter I think is rested now. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have heard we are adjourning plenary and before we went for recess, we had been asking for the report on road safety and last week, the chair promised us that the report would be here because he was assured by the Executive. Madam, is it possible to have that report tomorrow? People are continuing to die in large numbers and we do not know what is happening with the ministries of Works and Internal Affairs and with the people who are in charge of our lives on the road. We would like to have that report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, who was responsible for the report on road safety? Was it you or Ministry of Works?

MR KAWUMA: Madam Speaker, the ministers of Works and Internal Affairs have already worked on a statement and will be ready to make it to the House at the most appropriate date that you give us. (Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clarification on road safety? 

MR GODI: Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I am seeking guidance on something, which is very important. I thought that this afternoon, when the House convened, the Minister of Internal Affairs would come and give assurance to this country regarding the circumstances, which happened yesterday and which resulted in shooting. I am raising this concern because I have heard-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are jumping the gun. Please let us proceed with the Order Paper. We are going to get to that statement.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT CALLING FOR IMMEDIATE GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION ON THE FREQUENT OCCURANCE OF FIRE OUTBREAKS IN SCHOOLS AND OTHER INSTITUTIONS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Seninde – [Hon. Sebuliba rose_] Why don’t you allow us to follow the Order Paper?

MR SEBULIBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking your guidance because item 3 is talking about fire in schools. I do not know how this motion will include the happenings that occurred in Kalerwe, which I consider of national importance regarding our police. The mover of this motion –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have discussed with the Executive and asked them to make a statement on that matter in addition to the fire. That is why I am saying do not jump the gun. They are going to say something about that.

3.14
MRS   ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament calling for immediate government intervention on the frequent occurrence of the fire outbreaks in schools and other institutions.  Madam Speaker, I am moving this motion under Rules 44 and 50 of the Rules of Procedure.

WHEREAS the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides for the right to life under Article 22(1) and Article 34 of the same Constitution provides that a child is entitled to basic education, which shall be the responsibility of the State and the parents of the child; 

AND WHEREAS Parliament has enacted the Education Act, Cap 127 to ensure the proper and sustainable provision of the education service; 

AND WHEREAS a motion was recently moved in this very august House in regard to the inferno that destroyed property worth millions of shillings and cost the lives of 20 innocent girls at Buddo Junior School; 

AND WHEREAS Government promised to probe into the cause of the fire outbreak at Buddo Junior School in particular and other schools generally and produce a report; 

AWARE THAT since the Buddo inferno, there have been rampant fire outbreaks in various schools including: Grace Day care primary school in Ntinda, which happened on the 17 April 2008; Soroti Co-Primary Teachers’ College on the 19 April 2008; Nsamo Primary School in Mukono on 25 May 2008; Kebisoni Modern Secondary School in Rukungiri District on  31 May 2008; Karangwa Primary School in Wakiso District on 4 June 2008; Molly and Paul Primary School in Makindye, Kampala, on the 6 June 20008; Blessed Secondary School Rukungiri on 9 June 2008; Namalele Secondary School, Wakiso District on 15 June 2008; Bilal Islamic Institute in Kampala on 15 June 2008; Sunset Junior School, Kawempe Division, on June 16 June 2008; Sydeny  Primary School on 16 June 2008; Kyambogo University Hostel on 17 June 2008; Glory Lands Girls’ Hostel on 19 June 2008; Laban Secondary School on 20 June 2008; Seeta High School on 29 June 2008 and Progressive Kitintale and Luban Secondary School in Jinja on the 30 June 2008". 

Madam Speaker, even today there has been a fire in Gaba. 

“AND ALSO AWARE THAT despite the rampant occurrences of these fire outbreaks in various schools, it is petrifying that no extra precautions seem to be taken as more and more schools continue to catch fire, destroying property worth millions of shillings and causing a risk to the lives of students and pupils;

REALISING THAT in many instances the culprits are being left scot-free since the police has not produced any substantial evidence directly implicating the arsonists; 

ALSO REALISING THAT there is need for the government to put in place more stringent measures to curb the rampant fire outbreaks in schools, which is causing uncertainty as regards the safety and security of the lives of our children in schools; 

COGNISANT of the fact that children in schools, especially boarding schools, and the public at large are living in a state of fear and suspicion that such fire outbreaks can easily occur at any opportune moment; 

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by this Parliament as follows;

1. 	That Government considers appointing an independent body to carry out investigations into the underlying causes of the rampant fire outbreaks in schools.
2. 	That a report is presented before Parliament in a month’s time on the cause of rampant fire outbreaks in schools. 
3. 	That the Ministry of Education ensures that all schools acquire fire detectors in addition to other fire fighting equipment and frequently inspect their functionality. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded.

MRS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, first of all, I wish to put it to this House that the spirit in which I am moving this motion is in good faith. I want to remind this House that fire outbreaks are not discriminatory in terms of victims or colour. It is the concern of everybody; it is your concern and mine. We are all parents and we know what has happened before. Since the inferno that took place in Buddo three months ago, over 28 fires have taken place. Honourable colleagues, are we waiting for our own children to burn in these fires before we can show our concern?

Colleagues, it is sad to note as I have said that since that time many schools have burnt. Madam Speaker, the other day I was reading a newspaper and I realised that the Police press statement indicated –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please tone down the consultations. 

MRS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, I was reading the newspaper the other day and I noted that out of the 27 schools - I believe they include today’s fire - out of the 28 schools, 11 were cases of arson and that students are responsible for the 10 which students are not yet arrested. I believe this is a conspiracy; it is pathetic that since the Buddo inferno we have lamented for quite long. We are now calling for pro-active measures to end this problem once and for all, which must be taken as an emergency to avoid the worst where we shall wake up one day to find over 200 children dead. Colleagues, Madam Speaker, we must avoid future catastrophe.  

I want to remind Members that one fire is an accident; the second fire is a disaster; the third fire becomes a calamity. But where do we categorise the 28 fires, where indeed?  Madam Speaker, I am afraid - I even think that maybe this is terrorism like what was reported as having been said by hon. Tinyefuza in the newspapers. 

Madam Speaker, in view of the request for Government to consider appointing an independent body, I want to remind colleagues that when we had a problem in our city - you remember when we had thugs and murderers - everybody was scared of going to the city. But Government took a measure, a pro-active measure. They initiated Wembley. With the hand of the President, Wembley was put in place and eventually the problem was solved. The reason I moved this motion is because I strongly believe that Government is able; it has the ability to put in place an organ that can really help us solve the problem because we are mothers and we are scared. We do not sleep; all the time we are waiting for a telephone call that “your child’s school has burned!”  

Madam Speaker, everyone is disturbed that is the truth and everybody is troubled by the mysterious infernos and the public is anxious to know what and how Parliament is concerned. Colleagues, I am moving this motion because the public has a feeling, and in fact my constituents have told me that “You Members of Parliament do not care about us” because they think our children are studying from out of the country. That is why we all want to show - I know and I do appreciate that the government is responsible and is concerned and is doing something, but we want the public to know that Parliament is also equally concerned. We want to raise our voices and add our contributions so that we advise in addition to what the government is putting in place. We want to add our voice and advise them on how best to solve the problem because since the 14th of April when the Buddo inferno occurred, 

Madam Speaker, how come colleagues, that over 20 schools have burnt and it has now become a daily issue? Are we waiting for all the schools to burn at once? Colleagues, by moving this motion to ask Government, we are calling for an immediate intervention and we are playing our role as Parliamentarians, the implementation is left to Government. It does not mean that we do not appreciate their efforts.  

Madam Speaker, I read in the media that there is a police committee to carry out investigations and find solutions. But I want to inform this House that since the Buddo inferno, we have waited for a report and action to no avail. Otherwise, we would not have had these 28 cases.  The facilitation given to the Police in the first place is not sufficient to do the job because even in their presence, fire cases are increasing. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, Police is overstretched with so many things they are grappling with. Today there are riots; the other day there is this; and the other time there is fire; all happening at the same time! How do we expect them to do a good job much as they would want to?  That is why I am strongly convinced that the problem of fire can be dealt with using an independent body just as Government dealt with the security issue in the city. 

On the issue of a report, Madam Speaker, we want a comprehensive report on these rampant fire outbreaks with a way forward. I pray that the report we are calling for will not be like the Kanungu report which has never come 10 years down the road.

Finally, Madam Speaker, on the issue of fire detectors being installed in schools, I do appreciate the fact that fire detectors are very expensive. I do not know - I am sure colleagues can contribute ideas on what we can do to help schools, but allow me to thank the Ministry of Education which has tried on the other hand to strengthen the inspectorate through financial hardships; they are trying, they are doing their best, although there is still a lot to be done. 

We recommend that the ministry should be keen on schools having fire extinguishers as a requirement –much as there is that issue of fire extinguishers- I am calling upon the ministry to also add on fire detectors. But from the fire incident in Seeta, Madam Speaker, I realised that fire extinguishers cannot do much, they only stop small fires like of a burning saucepan. That is why I propose that fire detectors may be included on the safety and security requirements in all boarding schools.

In conclusion, may I also humbly appeal to all religions -the Mosques and Churches - to seriously pray about this mysterious problem.  Madam Speaker, I once again want to put it on record and to this House that I have moved this motion in good faith and in the interest of all of us and our children. I thank you very much. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ruth Tuma, but honourable members, let us be brief. We shall use 20 minutes for the debate. 

3.22
MRS RUTH TUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Interruptions)– Can I be protected?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, permit the seconder to proceed. 

MRS TUMA: Madam Speaker, honourable colleagues, as Members of Parliament and as Members of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children, we are aware that the Uganda Government is signatory to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child.  We are also aware that the government has signed the African Charter on the Welfare and Rights of the Child. It is therefore our duty to influence and advise, support and monitor the developments of all developmental programmes.  

Madam Speaker, colleagues, we would be fulfilling our obligation of ensuring adequate child protection. We would also be fulfilling and helping the government to reinforce the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child if we stood up and spoke about the rampant fires in schools.  

The media reported that in the last five years there have been 33 school fires and 27- the seventh was this morning- in the last six months. My colleagues, we have a problem.  We have a Ministry of Education, but we know there is a lot lacking in the Ministry of Education in connection with protection of children in schools, especially in regard to the school fires. The recurrence of these incidents is a reflection of the failure of institutions to reinforce policies and regulations in the entire education system, particularly in primary and pre-primary schools. 

This is regrettable because children at this stage are extremely vulnerable and it undermines the ability to enjoy their rights. A number of examples illustrate our point, such as, administering punishments in schools which was banned but continues to be practised. Although guidelines have been put forward for the construction and maintenance and management of the school infrastructure and other facilities in place, the monitoring and implementation is in a very sorry state.  

In Kampala, you find a school in somebody’s home; a classroom in one bedroom, another classroom in the kitchen, some children sleeping in the sitting room; girls sleeping in the sitting room and boys sleeping in the garage.  What is happening to the Ministry of Education? The Education Standard Agency, what is going on?

We set basic standards and requirements in terms of infrastructure such as, how big a classroom should be, what safety requirements should be met, as well as having fire extinguishers. But are these being implemented?  

The education objective, objective XVIII in our Constitution, requires all those putting up schools- individuals, religious bodies and other non-government organisations which operate education institutions- to comply with the general education policy.  But what is happening to the maintenance of the standards which require everybody to follow the regulations set out on paper?

It is also observed that in July 2001, the Government of Uganda created the Education Standards Agency whose functions include defining and reviewing standards in educational practice and provision, assessing the achievement of standards and evaluating effectiveness of all the education programmes in these institutions, and developing other necessary guidelines which necessitate the good running of institutions. We have been told that approaches have been developed to inspect and evaluate the education system. Where are the quality indicators?  Do we have them within our education service?  How about sticking to those indicators?  

Further more, we are also concerned about the framework of establishing and approval of pre-primary and nursery boarding schools. Some of these institutions are operating in very, very bad conditions. Existence of nursery boarding schools goes to the very heart of the violation of children’s rights.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable member, you have moved away from discussing the fire to discussing the education standards.  

MRS TUMA: But this is also child protection -(Interruptions)- Okay, in conclusion, I would like to request the Ministry of Education and Sports- I am on fire -(Laughter)- to review all existing policies and to assess the standards in connection with safety and security at schools. 

We would also like you to set indicators that everybody can look at and know that what is happening is following the system and the indicators are being adhered to. I would also like to request this Parliament to pass a motion, to ask the ministry to regulate both public and private pre-primary schools and to ban all operations involving young children sleeping in schools and all other institutions.  Thank you very much for listening.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Bahati.  But please, stick to the subject.

3.30
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  The Prime Minister yesterday assured this House that the Ministry of Internal Affairs would make a statement to this effect, and I am also aware that the Police are carrying out investigations to get to the root cause of this problem. However, there are facts and truths that do not have to wait in order for us to know what is in the report. We all know that parents have lost their children, schools have lost property and this is a fact that does not require us to wait for the statement on Tuesday.  

This afternoon, together with a few colleagues of mine, we visited The Red Pepper and we watched the footage of what happened at The Red Pepper. I now strongly believe that something must be going wrong with this fire outbreak. I have seen people with wood guns jumping over the trucks; I have seen things that I did not expect to see happening in this city. There are things that do not have to wait for the statement on Tuesday for us to know.

A few months ago, this House, in the motion after the Buddo Junior fire outbreak, requested Government to come up with a policy on disaster preparedness and management, but Madam Speaker, it is now six months - I want to use this opportunity, once again, to request Government to hurry up with this policy.

Madam Speaker, it is also important to note that the Police have not more than 15 fire fighting trucks in the whole country. Since it is Parliament that appropriates money, we need to support the Ministry of Internal Affairs to buy enough fire fighting trucks to cover the entire country.

In this era, technology is almost becoming magical. Though it has been used to do good, technology has also been used to do bad things. In Thailand alone, a coup was organised using a Short Message Service (SMS). In the Balkans countries, people can mass up demonstrations just in minutes, using SMS messages.

Madam Speaker, if you recall, even in the USA, the twin towers attack, had most of the co-ordinations done using the internet. I have also been to the USA, UK and South Africa and I have discovered that technology can help avert some of these calamities. For example, setting a citizens’ response unit in Government where all ministries can sit as a call centre with citizens calling in to get responses, could help in this situation. I am saying this because they are able to call in and say, such and such a thing has happened and we need your help as Government. It is something that we need to invest in.  Now that we have an ICT ministry, I think this is something that can help avert some of these calamities in time.

Madam Speaker, we are all parents in one way or the other and we know that this has caused a lot of calamities. We do not know where this fire is going to next. Today, it is at The Red Pepper, the other day it was at Buddo Junior Primary School and we do not know to which other school this fire will be going. [Member: “Parliament”] We are really concerned; we must know the cause of this and I am happy that the Prime Minister assured this House that the Ministry of Internal Affairs is looking into this matter to ensure we, as people’s representatives and the entire country get know what is happening.

However, Madam Speaker, there are things that we must do now. I think that we should work on the fire detectors in schools; we do not want to wait to carry out investigations and if all of us understand the urgency of this matter, the time to take action is now. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us have the shadow minister.

3.35
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (NRM, Woman Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the first place, I want to appeal to our heartless people out there who do not seem to be bothered about the loss of our young people in this country, the arsonists, to stop the practice. They should redirect their vengeance where it is fit, not to our innocent children.

Madam Speaker, since the Buddo Junior school fire until now, you will realise that there has been a lot of silence from Government. That is a total reflection of heartlessness on the part of Government. If you look at this frontbench, how many of the people, except the Chief Whip and maybe hon. Simon, have children of school going age? (Laughter) How many? Honestly, they are grandfathers; I am aware and totally informed [Matia Kasaija _ rose] I do not need your information. You can give it to my minister. 

I want to inform this country that unless we become a serious Government, we are going to be joking. Some of us want to be grandparents and see our grandchildren. The two categories of the Members of the frontbench here will tell you that they would be proud grandparents, but if there is no response from our senior citizens on the frontbench, then that tells you that honestly, there is something very wrong.

The destruction of property, Madam Speaker, you know that in this age and time it is almost very difficult for parents to afford the basics of life. Even buying a mattress has become a very expensive thing. The cost of living is so high with parents sacrificing a lot to the extent that others even sell their own cloths to pay school fees. But you what you get as a parent is a call that everything that you sent your child to school with has been fully roasted.

My appeal is that for all those children who have lost property and for all those parents, a sensitive Government would have an opportunity and realise that this is a disaster and compensate by say, buying the scholastic materials and mattresses for the parents to cut down on cost of education at least, if not the insensitivity of Government not to provide safety measures in our schools.

I am tempted to believe that this is a phenomenon of unhealthy business ethics in the private sector development in this sub sector. Why is it that the school fires are so rampant? Possibly, some people are not ready to catch up with the competition to the extent that they want to be very destructive in order to exist in the market. That now also tells the ministry – how do we license our private sector schools? In my constituency now, there are shops being turned into schools and these schools are functioning. You find somebody’s garage functioning as a secondary school. You get a building meant for a family, turned into a private school. What is happening? –(Interjections)– I will take that one. (Laughter)

MR KAWUMA: Thank you, honourable colleagues. To give additional information to what the hon. Members was saying, I want to say this. There is one building along Entebbe road where upstairs there is a lodge, in the middle there is a secondary school and below it is a supermarket. This is a school on a building that has a lodge and remember these are school going children and at an age when they are sexually active and very vulnerable – the information I wanted to give is in relation to that.

MS BAKO: Thank you for giving that information. I hope the frontbench is seriously taking this to effect because if you are going to have lodges combined with schools, then it will not be surprising that fires are not taken care of, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker, we have always given the Ministry of Education some considerable budget, but it is inadequate. As we try to liberalise this sub sector, I want to appeal to the minister and the ministry that licensing schools should put in place what you set in order for a school to be- It is not fair and it is not right, and neither is it consistent with our conscience to licence schools just for the sake of appearing to be private sector progressive. 

From this day forward, as I have been seeing the mood when this motion was being presented, I have had to retract one step back about our title - how honourable are we? And indeed that echo had to come from a minister; it is very embarrassing that in a state and age where you are supposed to be responsible for the young people of this nation, you can afford to be so obscenely insensitive at a time when we are mourning our children. Possibly because you do not go to the labour ward, but I appeal to you – one day you will have children who will tell how painful it is to try to use your DNA to identify your deceased. Thank you.

3.43
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before I make my substantive contribution, I would like to respond to a comment made that people in this House are heartless and obscenely insensitive. But even among us, for example the Rt hon. Prime Minister may not be having small children, but he definitely has grandchildren and he is a very caring grandfather, and none of us would like to see a life of a child being wasted. So, I think colleagues should focus on more substantive issues than suggesting that we do not care about loss of life. I believe that Members of the House on both sides care about life and we would like to see the wanton destruction of life in our schools come to an immediate end and the culprits be thoroughly and openly punished. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your permission to use this debate to not only inform colleagues but also say a little more on what Government has been doing so that the country is also informed. There have been a number of reported fires and indeed hon. Seninde has listed quite a number of them. A number of schools have been destroyed especially over the last two months. These fires have caused a lot of concern among parents, students, administrators, school proprietors, we the legislators and indeed the general public. Government has been deeply concerned and has taken a number of measures to address this very serious matter. 

Government set up a joint investigation team comprised of Police, Internal Security Organisation, Military Intelligence and the Director of Public Prosecutions and also Government Analytic Laboratory, Ministry of Works, Ministry of Energy and Ministry of Education. The team is headed by the Inspector General of Police and terms of reference are:
1.	To establish the causes, patterns, perpetrators and motives of these fire incidents. 
2.	To ensure prosecution of those found responsible.
3.	To identify and recommend immediate preventive measures to stop the occurrence of these fires. 

Setting up a securing assessment sensitisation team has also been done and it is composed of Police, Ministry of Education, Local Government, Ministry of Works, Housing and planning and Ministry of Energy; it is an inter-ministerial government team. Their terms of reference include:
1.	Assessing securing and fire safety measures in schools and their neighbourhoods. 
2.	Assessing the school structures, their suitability and safety and even electro wirings.
3.	Currying out sensitisation especially among the stakeholders who include students, school owners and the neighbouring communities and of course the parents themselves.
4.	To identify and make recommendations on how to improve security and fire safety in schools.

Preliminary finding of the joint investigation and security assessment and sensitisation are as follows:
1.	During the period of April to June 2008, there were 27 cases of fire in schools - in 12 districts as already stated by hon. Seninde. 

MR MALINGA: Madam Speaker, there is a motion in the House that was moved by hon. Seninde and when the honourable minister stood up, I thought he was going to contribute on the motion, but I see him reading a statement which statement we do not have copies of. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister is contributing to the motion. (Laughter) 

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 12 of the 27 cases were arson, 11 attributed to indisciplined students, three of which have already been charged in court. One was attributed to business rivalry – that is one of the schools burnt; 10 cases have been attributed to negligence or carelessness on the part of the students; in that case there were five students and five cases; school administration negligence, five cases. The fires have been started in some cases by candles and also an attended to and unprotected electrical appliances and wiring, and also poor and illegal electrical connections. Five of these cases are also still being investigated.

Madam Speaker, poor security and fire safety measure in most of the affected schools has been found to be the case. For example, inadequate and untrained guards, lack of adequate fire fighting equipment, and many of them have no security perimeter fencing to prevent intruders from entering school compounds. And in some cases, there are inappropriately designed accommodation facilities. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to make two general observations. Maintenance of security and safety is a concern of everybody. Government highly appreciates the cooperation the public has given to the joint teams that have been set up. We urge the public to continue cooperating with all agencies set up in order to eliminate this menace. 

The ministry of education will soon issue guidelines on safety and health in schools. We have actually gone through some of the preliminary work on it. We urge all stakeholders to ensure compliance with guidelines. And at a political level, an inter-ministerial team composed of ministers of Education, Energy, Defence, Internal Affairs, Security and Local Government, has also been set up. 

The reported fires have occurred due to a number of factors. Each case is being carefully investigated with a view to identifying the actual problem so that the appropriate actions are taken. In the meantime, my ministry is recommending institution of the following measures for immediate implementation:

Strengthening the sharing of intelligence on fire incidents with sister agencies and the public sharing this information with governmental security agencies.

Institution of a vigorous sensitisation campaign on fire safety by Fire Brigade and other responsible government departments.

All stakeholders in the education and security sectors and ministries – of the ones I have talked about, like local government, Umeme and the like, PTA organisations, etc, are called upon to take on this challenge of fires in schools with the seriousness it deserves. 

We should all perform our respective constitutional and administrative responsibilities through enforcement of the various available laws and regulations in schools.

Madam Speaker, every school should have a secure perimeter fence and an elaborate system of regulating and monitoring intruders into the school premises. 

Every school should designate specific teachers and prefects to be in charge of security at the schools and should have functional security offices with effective communication systems that operate 24 hours a day.

Schools should recruit adequate numbers of security guards depending on the size of the school. The school administration must ensure that such guards are vetted by the local security authorities and are given basic training in first aid, fire fighting, patrol techniques and observation, self defence, and making entries in gate registers so that whoever enters a school is known. 

Security officers should have the capacity to make deployment plans which should be inspected regularly by the school administration.

Each school must have a number of sufficient, operational, portable fire extinguishers placed in strategic areas and trained fire wardens selected among the teaching staff or support staff or students.

The school administrations should organise regular fire drills; at least at the beginning of every term. 

Every school should develop special communication systems in case of danger. This can be a whistle, a drum, a gong or any other instrument that can make noise to alert people.

The school administration should ensure that the recommended safety measures are taken care of during construction or change of use of premises. All doors and windows should open outwards for easy –(Interruption)

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister, from where I am seated, is reading a prepared statement. Even the content sounds like a statement and not like a contribution to the debate on the Floor. 

Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable minister to be reading a prepared statement when he is supposed to contribute to the motion that was moved by hon. Rose Seninde? I am raising this point of order under Rule 40 of our Rules of Procedure. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday you recall that when hon. Seninde raised the issue, the government was of the view that we should wait until next week to hear the matter, and have them come here to speak to us on it. However, I ruled that it is a matter which is urgent and I told him it would be on the Order Paper today. So, I think they were just prepared. So, he is contributing and I hope you will address the recommendations of hon. Seninde. 

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling and guidance. And actually it is true that I am definitely contributing to the motion and also at the same time consulting my notes. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, the school administration should ensure good lighting systems at the schools and at least have in place safe alternative power sources for emergency.

School administrations should ensure proper identity of all the people at the school premises and make restricted entries to certain areas like student dormitories and kitchens. 

School administrations should practice the system of holding regular meetings with members of staff and students.

The school administrations should conduct regular snap checks on students and possessions of students that could cause fire. 

School administrations and parents should have systems of identifying students who may be indisciplined who could be the source of leading to disturbance and causing of fires.

School administrators are urged to ensure close co-operation with the nearest police posts and administrative units in order to promote proactive strategies in combating problems or conditions that can lead to fire. 

So, Madam Speaker, the motion raised by my sister, hon. Seninde - by the way, there is no doubt about the commitment and sincerity of hon. Seninde and there is no need of over emphasising the point. She has legitimately moved a motion. People may have different views about it but she has exercised her democratic right, which we respect. So, the essential elements, I think, are okay and I support the essential elements. What I do not support, Madam Speaker, is what she calls for in No.1; that there should be an independent body to carry out investigations into the underlying causes of the rampant fire outbreaks in schools. And the reasons why I do not share this view is that we have capacity in this country not only in the police but also in intelligence organisations and because of wanting to optimise the skills that we have –(Interruption)

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Madam Speaker, I am at a loss whether to respond to the statement of the minister, but I want to give some information to the minister and the country. It started like a small story. The Red Pepper broke a story that some people had burnt the President’s own house in Kisozi and some people claimed responsibility. I even read a letter that was published in that Red Pepper. And if you listened to the minister, he is pushing the responsibility back to the schools, back to the school management committees, back to the PTAs. What is the role of the government in protecting the lives and the property of the people? (Applause)  

And the minister is responding while confining himself to schools. What about the people who burnt the Red Pepper? Are we safe in this same Parliament if now they are burning vehicles? They have burnt a printer of a media house, and if the story in Kisozi is true, are we safe in Parliament? Is anybody safe in this country? I think government should take a bigger responsibility and assure the country of the security of the people. And when the minister comes here to say that that committee is needless and yet he is not making any statement in regard to the fires outside schools, then I am not very sure of our safety.

DR RUGUNDA: So, Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude on that point you are making; the issue of the independent agencies. I think that is what you were addressing. 

DR RUGUNDA: Yes, that is true. So, Madam Speaker, actually the focus of the motion is referring to fire in our schools and that is where I am focusing. This is not in any way to suggest that government or myself are not concerned about fire in other areas. Very much so we are. 

Nevertheless, Madam Speaker, the point I was making is that because government takes this matter so seriously that is why it has done the unusual in order to concentrate capacity by bringing experts from the different intelligence organisations and criminal investigation departments to constitute them into one team in order to be able to solve and get the answers for these very problems. So, let no one have any doubts about the commitment of government and also about the seriousness with which government attaches to this problem. 

So, in conclusion, Madam Speaker – [Mr Tinkasiimire: “More clarification”]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him conclude what he is saying and then he will clarify later. [Mr Tinkasiimire: “He will run away”] No, he will not.  (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I do not agree with my sister, hon. Seninde, that it is necessary to set up a different team. I think we should instead give as much support as possible to a team that has been constituted in order to ensure that it does its work as expeditiously as possible. 

Another point, she would like to see a report being made to Parliament. This is a very legitimate point that Parliament should get regular reports on the progress of the investigations, and indeed the country. And by the way, I did made reference to schools, not that government was denying its responsibility but in the fight against this menace, it is important for not only government but also the population, the teachers, the school owners to all work closely together so that we can form a broad front to defeat this menace. And by mobilising the rest of the stakeholders, actually government is performing its responsibilities in taking a lead role in order to provide an answer to this problem. 

So, sir [Members: “Madam”] So, Madam -(Laughter)- Speaker, some lapses of that nature, I am sure you will be able to excuse them.

In conclusion, government takes this motion as an important motion. Government is concerned about this problem; government has mobilised human and material resources in order to decipher and find out the cause of this problem and bring a final end to this menace and we are convinced that we have a national capacity to be able to do it and we think government is on the right track. Nevertheless, it is a responsibility of all of us to work together in order to successfully bring this problem to an end. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will give a few Members an opportunity to speak but please focus on the motion, the resolution part especially. We know there have been fires here and there; let us go to the point which he is disagreeing with. Hon. Alaso then hon. Muhanga, then hon. Ndeezi.

4.08
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to go by your guidance that we focus on the resolution. I want to agree with hon. Rugunda that No.1 is not necessary because of what government is already doing. They have set their machinery to work and they are doing the best they can. I do not know what the outcome is but what he is telling us is that, the government machinery is at work. Therefore, I would like to propose an amendment really first to support him on the deletion No. 1 but add No.4 which says, “Parliament sets up a select committee to investigate the rampant fires.” 

Madam, I want to justify this. First of all, the investigations that are being done by the Executive are almost being done more as a routine basis. This Parliament needs a specific report. This Parliament needs to inform itself and this Parliament can supervise itself. This is not the first time we do select committees. We have just debated an outcome of a select committee on CHOGM even when government was doing a CHOGM audit itself. When we had an issue of the IDPs, we had Office of the Prime Minister doing whatever it could but this Parliament set up its own committee. 

In the Sixth Parliament we did the same on security. If Parliament in the Sixth Parliament could investigate security, matters of LRA, Defence and Kony it means the Eighth Parliament has the capacity to educate itself and most importantly, parliaments all over the world set up study groups for whatever subject in order to inform the policy provisions. I want to tell you, I have been reading my Bible and I want to read it to this House tonight. The Book of Ezekiel 33:1 says: “The word of the Lord came to me. ‘Son of man, speak to your country men and say to them that if there is a watchman who sees the sword coming  and does not blow the trumpet to warn the people and the sword comes and takes the life of one of them, I will hold the watchman accountable’.”

The Executive can do its part but that does not absolve this Parliament the responsibility to do its work, come up with its finding and make recommendations to the Executive. I would like that amendment, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that amendment that Parliament sets up a select committee to investigate the rampant fires. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, I have no objection to setting up a committee. However, I want you to take into account the following: First of all, we are about to adjourn the plenary. You are going to your sessional committees to deal with the Budget until probably the end of August. We are suspending the operations of the standing committees to enable you to work on the Budget. We also have two other committees dealing with the Police; do we really have the capacity within this time to handle one more select committee and report urgently to this House? I have no problem with setting up that committee but I want you to be reasonable and really convince me that we can do it all in addition to all these other activities we are involved in at this material time. Please, bear that in mind. 

4.13
MS MARGARET MUGISA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I had actually wanted to seek clarification from the minister, hon. Rugunda, but he did not take it when he was speaking. When I was elected a Member of Parliament in 2006, before I was sworn in but I was a Member of Parliament-elect, fire broke out in a school in my constituency and 13 children died in middle of Fort Portal Municipality.  

In my same constituency, Kabarole District, there was also a wrangle in the Ministry of Education with Kibito Boarding Primary School in hon. Adolf Mwesige’s constituency. The IGG intervened in this matter and the DEO and stopped boarding, but the Ministry of Education went back and overruled everybody and opened that boarding school again. The reason was, children were sleeping like goats; very inhabitable circumstances. You know a three deckered-bed where the last child is almost at the roof is very dangerous for our children. I think one thing that we have not taken into serious consideration is the way these children are packed in these dormitories especially in private schools. 

Madam Speaker, today I went with hon. Bahati to the Red Pepper offices – the minister said we should keep around schools but this is a small group of investors who have also come to this country to do something. Why should their place be burnt and nothing is done at all?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Muhanga, let us focus on the resolution. Let us agree on what to do about hon. Seninde’s motion.

MS MUGISA: Yes, Madam Speaker, I was coming to that but what I wanted to point out is that, at the Red Pepper they have a whole recording of what transpired. The guys were very smart like Sandhurst trained but the Police went there and simply never even took finger prints of anybody, never even carried a CD of this recording. This shows that they are not capable of doing anything maybe because they should have picked the CD of the recording in order for them to see how these guys moved in this place because you may find these are the same guys who are burning schools. But where things have been recorded, this should have been picked and maybe it could give a clue. If I know a person very well I can tell that this is the person walking but where people have been recorded properly and the Police have not taken a finger print anywhere at that place, not even a CD of the recording of CCTV! I think these things are related. Next fires will be in our homes and other institutions. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you saying that Police have no capacity? 

MS MUGISA: No, Madam Speaker, I am wondering because there is Police in Mukono. Why can’t they go and pick this information form Red Pepper?

4.16
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative, Central): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank hon. Rosemary Seninde for moving this important motion. This gives us an opportunity as representatives of the people to pronounce ourselves on this concern that I believe is a natural concern.  

Madam Speaker, we are aware and do appreciate what the government is doing in relation to the fire outbreaks. All of us I believe saw His Excellency, the President, in the papers when he visited Buddo. All of us I believe were here during the State of the Nation Address. His Excellency the President raised his concern on this matter. We have seen ministers like hon. Bitamazire visiting these schools and taking appropriate action. Also we have just heard the Minister of Internal Affairs articulating quite some details of what the government is doing. 

Madam speaker, I want to be very focused. I regret that I have to contribute after hon. Alaso’s contribution. Otherwise, I note that without putting in place a select committee there is nothing new we as Parliament are doing. Why? If you look at the fourth paragraph of the motion, we already had a motion here; we debated the fire in Buddo. We passed a motion urging government to do the investigation and to report to this august House. If you look at the four main requirements of this new motion, it is the same thing that is being asked. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I see a contradiction in No.1, that government considers appointing an independent body. Once government appoints a body then that body cannot be an independent body because it is already appointed by government. Therefore, I am tempted to agree that it may not be very useful for us to adapt the first recommendation.

Madam Speaker, when you look at No.2, it says one month; but we all know we have been here for long enough to know that the time frame of this nature is not binding. The last point talks about inspection by the Minister of Education but I believe if you asked the Minister of Education to comment on this debate, she would tell you that this work is already going on. 

So, Madam Speaker, without wasting much time, I would think that what is required now is to think about the role of Parliament, the contribution that Parliament can play, the supplementary role of Parliament, how we can boost the work of the Executive, our added value and I would think that our added value would be in form of having a select committee. A select committee will not be contradictory to the work being done by government but it will provide some important input from the side of the legislature. 

Therefore, I would like to appeal to honourable members of this august House to accept the idea of establishing a select committee and if this is not acceptable, then we should assign the appropriate committee of Parliament to be able to follow up this matter and give us a report at an appropriate time. Thank you very much.

MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue we are handling is very sensitive and it is of great importance. And as a Member of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, I would like to give honourable colleagues a very simple and brief insight - because we cannot have a proper cure without knowing the causes of what is really going on. What I can say is that, last year in our committee, the issue of capacity to fight fires by our government was high on our agenda. When we invited the Minister of Internal Affairs, they told us that this is entirely Ministry of Local Government work; it is under local government. That is what the minister told us. I wonder whether the Committee on Local Government has ever discussed fires in their committee because the minister told us that this falls under local government. 

Secondly, under the Police, there is a branch which deals with fire. But what you must know is that police officers are trained as policemen and women. They only find themselves being pushed to fire departments without any proper training. Madam Speaker, fighting fires needs training and I am glad that they have appointed Mr Odim who has had some training in fire; but all those who are under him are not well trained in as far as fire handling is concerned.

Besides, we do not have any policy regarding fires and a policy was drafted and the Solicitor General has a copy but up to now nothing has been done. We are discussing fires without any policy frame work! When you look at these private firms, they are doing a very good work but – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sebaggala, there is a proposal that we leave the matter to the government and they appoint an independent body. There is another one saying we should give them authority to investigate. Please, address that one.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, that is where I am coming to. I want to give you this information so that honourable members can really know the situation in which we are working. When you look at the policy of National Water and Sewerage Corporation, these private firms are not allowed even to access hydrants simply because there is no policy regarding that and recently, a whole family was going to be burnt down because they had denied those private firms access to water hydrant - they have to go to Munyonyo to collect that water! 

The minister has talked about putting various measures; committees in schools, buying fire equipments but we have UPE schools which are under the responsibility of the government. And indeed buying those equipments requires a lot of funds. What is the government policy on that? 

Secondly, during CHOGM, they contracted Fire Masters and they spent Shs 420 million, which has not been paid up to now, to cover CHOGM for only nine days. How do you expect a school deep in Katakwi, in Mbale, in Kampala to manage fires throughout the year? My humble appeal is that, we need a clear guidance and policy in as far as handling fires is concerned by the government. The government now has no capacity to handle fires and they have been very –(Interruption)

MRS SEMPALA: Thank you, hon. Latif for giving way. There is information that the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Ministry of Local Government have both denied direct responsibility over fire. So can we sit in this House and listen to the Minister of Internal Affairs telling us about fire and what the ministry is doing when there is information that he has denied direct responsibility and there is communication to this effect and that the Ministry of Local Government and city authorities under the Local Government Act Section 63, are mandated to provide street lighting and fire safety to the city. Between the Local Government Ministry and the Ministry of Internal Affairs who is responsible? We want to know as a House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us go back to the motion and there are two positions: The motion was proposing that the government considers an independent agency to investigate the matter. Other Members are saying no, forget the government and let us have a select committee of parliament.

MR SEBAGGALA: The way forward is that, my committee under the able leadership of Mathias Kasamba could ably do this work on behalf of Parliament. 

PROF. LATIGO: I think we are missing the fundamental point in this motion. The examples of fires that have taken place in this country – take June alone; there are 14 cases covering a new school at Seeta. If you sit here as a statistician and do a simple analysis and ask yourself, isn’t there a cause and effect on what you are seeing? You will say there is because for all the things you are talking about, they cannot occur in June. Even in the North, when fire occurs in the IDP camps, it is in the dry season and you can explain it away. 

Given the response of the government, they do not even seem to have appreciated the fact that when you have data, you analyse it and define probable causes and effects and concentrate your investigations there. This is not visible in the minister’s prepared debate and unfortunately too many of us are focussing on the wrong thing. If you link this with the fact that people who seem to be well trained were captured in the Red Pepper fire, then you have something more fundamental than just talking about crowding in classrooms, the lack of fire fighting equipment etcetera.

There are schools in the whole country, why are they not burning? If you cluster this data, you will find that there is some concentration somewhere and it must be explained by reasons other than the simplistic reasons upon which the minister has based his response. I think we do not have to do it as a select committee; you can still go back and investigate any way you want but we are also trying to help you. If you think it is very smart to put an investigation under the Inspector-General who is the ultimate authority rather than give this to a very technical group who can be dealt with at a technical level, then you have a problem. How will the actual investigators respond to a command of the Inspector-General if he suggests that investigations should take one direction and not the other?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister thinks he has the capacity; that he has set up a system to deal with the matter of the fires. Hon. Seninde thinks we should go outside the ordinary channels. The other position is that, we should have our own committee. Those are the three positions. We need to address that.

4.34
MRS WINFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity. I have been trying to catch your eye mainly because my district has been affected; two schools have been burnt and I have carried out an extensive discussion with the parents, the district security committee and with the district education office on the issues and indeed I do agree with what the minister raised in his presentation. 

I think we are being misled. I find it very difficult after this motion has been raised to imagine that Ministry of Internal Affairs should be the one to come in. My approach is different. This issue has little to do with Ministry of Internal Affairs. I would like you to agree with me that these schools have been burnt because either they have no fence, or they had no supervision; some of the boarding sections were not authorised to be there; the education standard agency hardly did any work as far as putting up these schools was concerned. 

These schools lack supervision and monitoring and what is very strange is that, we don’t realise that there is a missing link between the centre and the districts. I have been working in the education sector. The centre holds on to schools so districts cannot supervise. They don’t support, fund or supervise these schools because they are controlled from the centre. Therefore, Ministry of Education should carry out these roles. 

In that regard, therefore, I would like to suggest that we set up a select committee of Parliament to come up with a recommendation that pertains to the operations of the Ministry of Education and the relationship between the centre and the districts. We should ask ourselves whether to decentralise secondary education completely or not. That is one of the recommendations I would expect the select committee to come out with. I support the establishment of a select committee. 

Secondly, we should not raise the two months. Let the select committee work at its own pace, being aware that the government is handling this issue. Let us allow a select committee to come up with fundamental recommendations that will help with the fundamental problems rather than window dressing and trying to imagine that the cases in these schools are something that do not hinge directly on Ministry of Education.

4.37
MS JESSICA ALUPO (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to say that this is a very noble motion because it seeks to protect the lives of our children in schools. As far as I know and in relation to the motion, these fires, whether they translate to arson or not, are criminal activities. I also know that in this country, we have the people who are mandated by our Constitution to be the custodians of the law. 

Against that background therefore, I want to say that on this first recommendation that government considers appointing a body to carry out investigations into the underlying causes of the rampant fire outbreaks in schools, I propose that we give government a chance to carry on the investigations since they are also technical people. I also want to add that as far as these fires are concerned, government has left a lot to be desired. I think they have been reactive rather than proactive. For 28 schools to be burnt, we would expect that these custodians of the law would have been able to detect crime rather than wait and then dance to the tune of the perpetrators of the crimes.

I think it is something that government should learn from because when we talk about schools and the children, we all know the pain of having a child and losing it in a fire yet the child is very innocent and doesn’t know anything. I want to add that we have a very capable Defence and Internal Affairs Committee of this Parliament. If there is need to add another avenue or dimension into the investigations into this crime, I think we would recommend the Defence and Internal Affairs Committee, which has the able leadership of hon. Kasamba. I believe that they would do the needful because in that committee also, we have experts on security matters, which were designated in the committee. I want to thank hon. Seninde for moving this motion and I want to urge Members to support it. Thank you very much.

4.40
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are here discussing a matter concerning the life and death of our children. We are all potential victims and we are all vulnerable. I have no problems with reports or select committees but as you are aware, to date we have never received the Kibwetere report. We are talking of select committees and reports but a school has been burnt this morning. 

So, as we talk of those nice reports, if they ever come out, I would like to recommend that - and before I give it, if we got a fire in our lobby here in Parliament right now, God forbid, what would happen? Do we know how to get out if there is fire at the exits? I am talking about preparedness and fire drills. I am talking about preparing a nation. Now that we have these fires everywhere, can I suggest that the first recommendation is that we put the country, schools and institutions on fire alert and that Parliament takes a lead tomorrow by the Sergeant-at-Arms and others concerned arranging fire drill within Parliament? Next week –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mukitale, I thought you were helping us come to a solution but you are moving away and instructing. Please, let us have a way forward. Are you satisfied that the Police under the Ministry of Internal Affairs should continue? Do you agree that we should have an independent body? Do you suggest that we should have a select committee? Those are the three positions.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I am saying that before we wait for the Police investigation or even a select committee, can we first put the schools and institutions on alert? In the event that fire breaks as we look for the cause of fire and investigate, how do you prepare?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, the question of alerting our institutions has already been handled. All the districts, chairpersons, education departments through the Ministry of Education and through our own office have been alerted on what precautions they should take regarding fires. In fact, many of the districts took precautions at the beginning of this term. Some of the schools were not allowed to open before they met certain minimum standards. The alertness is already there but the implementation can take a bit of time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us focus on the resolution. What do we do about this that has happened? 

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I was concluding.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you are diverting us. (Laughter)

4.45
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to go by your instructions and directions that we concentrate on the resolutions of the motion. I am rising here to thank hon. Seninde together with those who supported the motion, and wish to speak on behalf of the parents whose children have died in fires, because I for one lost a child under a fire. That is why I feel so sorry, so painful that we lose our children under such circumstances. 

Madam Speaker, what we are speaking of is far beyond the reality and I do believe that like you have guided, it is very necessary for us to have a select committee of Parliament to deal with this matter. My proposal is that, instead of having a separate body to carry out the investigations, we have a select committee of Parliament. We are not going to run away from our responsibilities as leaders. Even when we had too much on our heads, we promised the world, we promised Ugandans that we would come here and carry their burden. I wish to say that this House accepts putting in place a select committee of Parliament, even when we have these other commitments here. It will not be bad because not all Members of these committees are going to be Members of this select committee. A few Members will be drawn from the various committees that we have in Parliament to concentrate on this matter to make sure that we get the real cause of the fires in this country. 

Madam Speaker, I am saying that our government, like the minister said, may be capable of handling this catastrophe but given the kind and nature of activities that they are overwhelmed with - hon. Seninde in her presentation did mention that a report about the Kanungu inferno has never surfaced in this country, which was a responsibility of the ministry. We cannot at this time accept that the same ministry be handed the responsibility of again investigating this same kind of matter, given the photographs and what we saw on the video coverage of what happened in the media house that was burnt. We are bound to feel suspicious that security personnel, like we saw, are involved in this matter and this therefore does not give reason to the Ministry of Internal Affairs to investigate itself when armed personnel in uniform are being featured in the fire outbreaks. Thank you.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you have finished. Honourable members, I think we are going round in circles. I want to put the question. Hon. Seninde has proposed that the government considers setting up an independent body to investigate this matter. How many are in support of that?

MR MABIKKE: Madam Speaker, before we pronounce ourselves on the motion for an independent body, we need clarification. If government is establishing an independent body, is it going to be local or are they going to enlist the services of a foreign organisation like Scotland Yard Police? We need clarification first before we pronounce ourselves on that because we may consider Interpol or Scotland Yard Police. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They have said that they have the capacity. I am just trying to explain how I have understood the government side. The minister has said he has got the capacity; she is saying you don’t and others are saying, “Forget the government, forget the body, let us do it ourselves.” Those are the three positions and the fourth position is that instead of a select committee, we give it to our Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. Hon. Seninde, maybe you have got an amendment.

MRS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to make a small clarification on what exactly I meant. We do appreciate whatever is being said and I must thank my colleagues when they say they want us to come up with a select committee. But colleagues, I just want to remind you that a select committee would be okay but don’t forget that there is a very big problem that needs urgent action and moreover serious action. That is why in my justification, I explained and gave an example that when we had thuggery in town, government got up so quickly and brought Wembley and it acted and it was independent of the Police, and something was done. 

Madam Speaker, that is why at this moment I am calling upon my colleagues to support an issue of coming up with an independent body probably like Wembley because what we want to do – (Interjection) – Madam, can you protect me from the honourable minister?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members please, the mover is explaining the body she wants and that is what we want to hear. 

MRS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, much as we shall put in place a select committee and much as I do appreciate the honourable minister’s concern with the committee he is talking about, let us not forget that burning of schools has become a daily issue. How are we answering that in two months? As I said, 28 schools have been burnt. What will happen in the next two months? Do we want to see 40 more schools being burnt?

MR SEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have followed the debate and I think we need to assist the mover of the motion to actualise what she wants to come up with. She is mentioning of urgency and if this is a matter we have to treat with urgency, I would like to caution that the urgency can be expedited best by Parliament. You may not tell government when to constitute that committee but Parliament can start its work right away. So, when addressing the parameter of urgency, better come back and look at Parliament at the select committee or at the committee of Parliament itself. That is where you can have the urgency that you want.

Madam Speaker, if you look at resolution No. 1 and what the seconder of the motion and indeed honourable members have pointed out, that indeed the matter is so huge in proportion that there have been views and pictures of people armed, it therefore makes part of the arm of government suspect in this matter. So, for you to say that we allow - and the minister has not stood up to deny this. So, there is already a finger being pointed at that, Madam Speaker.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, the honourable Member holding the Floor said, and I heard it very clearly, that Government is suspect - [Members: “Yes”] - is he in order to make that statement without substantiation? Madam Speaker, we can use the platform of Parliament to confuse this country. Is he in order to make unsubstantiated statements? Can he substantiate?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable Members, instead of going into semantics, Minister of Internal Affairs, are you prepared to set into place a crack unit to deal with this matter? That is what hon. Seninde is asking for? Are you prepared to set up a kind of Wembley? That is what she is asking for.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I am happy that colleagues appreciate the work done by Wembley. Wembley was actually nothing but a code name for a combined force of different security organisations - (Applause) - and actually Government has in mind that the combined effort that we are making to deal with this menace of fire in schools will also take advantage of synergy by combining capacity from different security organisations. Nevertheless, Government is more than determined to take decisive action to ensure that this matter is properly and thoroughly dealt with.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister is saying that he is going to set up a system similar to the one of Wembley, are you satisfied with that?

MEMBERS: No!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Amuge.

MS AMUGE: Madam Speaker, I need to be assisted by the minister. The consortium of different security organisations he wants to set up, are they the ones which he disbanded from the special branch and they were turned into what we are calling Crime Intelligence Rapid Response Unit, VIP Protection, Counter Terrorism? They were disbanded from their function and now they have been scattered all over. If this is the group he is calling the special group, Madam Speaker, I am worried.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank Members for the contributions. When we come to this Parliament, sometimes we bring facts, other times we bring views from the general public and many times we bring legitimate suspicions. Let me start with the suspicions.

Madam Speaker, if we pronounced ourselves as Parliament, as sanctioning a team like Wembley, we shall have fallen into the trap of the people we are suspecting of doing this job because it has a budgetary advantage. If I had time, I would enumerate areas where we suspect because we are not fools also. We have been going across and finding out what is happening. But when we simply come out and say, “Go and form Wembley -” (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please give us the solution. There are four areas: the select committee of this House to investigate these fires; the Defence and Internal Affairs Committee of this House; an independent body or none. Those are the four areas; please focus on those.

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, we need a select committee of this House not the Committee of Internal Affairs. It has worked. I sit on that committee; we have pushed issues and they have failed in the hands of technocrats. So, they are unable to supervise themselves. We do not need an independent body from outside, organised by the government itself; government will be supervising itself. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you propose. 

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, my argument is that we amend this motion and it runs in the direction of having a select committee of this House to expressly deal with this issue. Otherwise, we are going to find ourselves in a mess with other arrangements. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we need to take a vote on these matters now. The first amendment is that we have a select committee of this House to deal with this matter. Those in favour of the select committee put up your hands. Leave your hands up because we are counting.
 
Okay, you can put your hands down. Those who think we should leave the matter to the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs of this House.

Those who think we should have an independent body? Can we have those abstaining from all this? 

(Members voted by a show of hands)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now honourable members, first I want to make it clear that whether we set up a select a committee or not, we cannot take away the right and power of the government to continue. So, they can continue. We cannot take away the power of the government. You let the government do their work and we also do ours. Is that what you are saying? We are waiting for the tally.

Okay, honourable members, 35 members support the establishment of a select committee, 21 support the setting up of an independent body and only one voted for the committee of internal affairs.

MR NASASIRA: Madam Speaker, I seek clarification from you because we seem not to have followed the voting procedures –(Interjections)– Please give me time and –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please let him speak.

MR NASASIRA: Honourable member, I resisted standing up when you alleged that we are not capable of producing children. So, give me time. I am seeking clarification because we only voted on the select committee and we thought that we would go for those for and those against on each. That is why you do not have any votes about continuing with government work. If we had been given opportunity on government work, we would have voted overwhelmingly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether Parliament has the capacity to withdraw that work from the government. That is why I said that whether we set up a committee or not, the government will continue with its work. Parliament cannot take away the work of the government; we cannot. 

Honourable members, we took the furthest position from the original proposal of an independent body, which was a select committee of this House, and 35 members said they want  a select committee. We then asked for those who support the setting up of an independent body and 21 members put up their hands –(Interjections)-  Okay, honourable members, let us keep quiet and do it again. 

There is a proposal that we set up a select committee of this House. Those who are in favour put up your hands -(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, very often when you are conducting business as the head of this House, some of us pay attention and others do not. You clearly put the questions across, we responded, but people who were not paying attention are now coming in to divert the debate. Madam Speaker, announce the results and we go by that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you are strongly for a position, you will stick to your position. Those in favour of the select committee put up your hands – (Interruption) 

PROF. LATIGO: Madam Speaker, I am not sure whether we are not running into a procedural problem here. Under your guidance, a process took place whose outcome has not been fully revealed to the House or contested. We would have a big problem if we redo what we have not completed. Anybody, even when it would have been an inadvertent mistake, would then suggest that the process of Parliament was being short-changed. I would insist that whatever shortfalls that -(Interruption)

MR KAWUMA: Thank you, honourable Leader of Opposition, for giving way. The information I want to give is related to the attempt of putting the question to vote. As you were putting the question, hon. Kamanda Bataringaya was pulling an arm of a member down. (Interjections) - Now with such a practice, if we put the question to vote again, what is the outcome going to be? It is clear intimidation of members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are all adults, you are here in your own right, you should not be intimidated. If you want to take a position, take it.  

Honourable members, the proposal by hon. Seninde was that the government sets up a separate body to investigate this matter. The honourable members said “no, forget that, we want our own body here; we want a select committee”. Others said let us use our Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. Isn’t it? So, what do you want?

PROF. LATIGO: Madam Speaker, I rose earlier on a procedural matter. I was actually not in the House when the process of voting started, but I was watching the proceedings in my office. I remember clearly you said, “Keep your hands up because we are counting.” If that counting took place, then we undertook a process of voting. If there is a problem with that process, it will only be challenged on a procedural matter. Otherwise, the process stands.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not want to be taken to court for using small numbers. So, we are going to vote again for those who want a select committee and those against the select committee. Those abstaining please raise your hands too. 

(Members voted by show of hands)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know what the problem is? You are the ones who said you want a select committee and now you have abstained; why?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, Parliament is a place where we should have respect for one another. The election process was called and it took place. I have never seen an election which takes place twice, unless there is a court order or somebody has appealed or otherwise.  

In this matter, Madam Speaker, when you called the elections the first time, they were held and closed at 5.00 p.m. before counting took place. You should have declared the results first before starting on another process. Otherwise, -(Interjections)- failure to do that, then you can do whatever you want with your election.

MRS MASIKO KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, I think we should consult our rules. If there is an amendment to the motion, a question is put per amendment and both those for and against the amendment vote. The question was put once for those who are for the select committee, but there was supposed to be a second question for those who are against, which was not put, to dispose off the amendment. Now, after both sides have been counted and the motion is carried or not carried, we can then move on to vote on the next amendment until we reach the original proposal. That is how we have been handling Parliament business. I believe the process of calling for those who are against the select committee was in the right direction, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There were no abstentions. Now honourable members, 48 members voted against the select committee as against 35 originally. The earlier result was 35 for and those against are 48 –(Interjections)- Yes, it was 35 -(Interjections)- Now what do you mean by “shame to the country”? You are 35, they are 48; what do you want me to do? Do you want to vote or not? You voted and you were 35 for the select committee.

Honourable members, 35 members supported the select committee and 48 objected to it. We now go back to the original proposal by hon. Seninde for an independent body. We have to start with the farthest amendment, which said that we leave that and go for a select committee, which was lost. So we now vote for the independent body. I put the question for those in favour or against setting up an independent body. 

(Members voted by show of hands)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, three members voted for the establishment of the body, 56 voted against it and there were three abstentions. So, hon. Seninde, the motion for setting up the agency is lost. Now we go to the second part of the resolution. 

Honourable members, since we have rejected the independent body, there will not be a report in one month’s time. We cannot take the second part of the resolution since there is no body to do it. 

Let us go to No.3: “The Ministry of Education ensures that all schools acquire fire detectors in addition to other fire fighting equipment and frequently inspects their functionality”. Those who support this raise your hands. 

(Members vote by show of hands)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Nobody is against that part of the resolution and nobody is abstaining. So, that part of the resolution passes. 

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, as the debate was going on, there was a presentation that the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs of Parliament should take on the lead. I have been waiting for that proposal so that I may vote on it, but it is not being put.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is a proposal and it is your responsibility as a committee to take it up if you want to take it up. It is part of your work. We do not really have to vote on that. I put the question that the motion as amended be approved by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity to speak out my mind. I have no intention to challenge the results, but I have an intention to express my concern over the procedure. If we took this to set a precedent on which we will decide on matters before this House in future, then it will be very dramatic but also very tragic. 

Madam Speaker, as you were busy receiving results, you actually reached a point where you made a comparison between what looked like the previous results of a general election and results of a by-election. If we continue like that, this whole House is not going to do work systematically. I would like to implore that things be done on their merit. Even if we lose, we compare the equals of the time. The second set of questions –(Interruption)
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Alaso, I think we have rules in this House. We have rules that govern numbers when we vote. If you wanted me to say 10 people have won when many others have voted against, I do not know whether I would have done that. You are not going to take me to court on those matters. I am not going to allow it. If you refuse to vote, it is also your right not to vote. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESOLVE INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO APPROVE THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE (SCHEDULE NO.2) FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2007/08

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we adjourned having requested the Attorney-General to give us guidance on one of the provisions of the Budget Act. I see him here, so I hope he can give us the clarification. 

5.30
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My understanding is that we would like to guide ourselves on the meaning of a section of the Budget Act whose marginal note is “Supplementary Expenditure.”

Madam Speaker, it is a fact that I have seen two numberings. In one of the versions it is called, “section 11” and in the other version it is called “section 12” but the substance is the same. It is in three sub-sections. The first one says: “The total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what is appropriated by Parliament shall not exceed three percent of the total approved budget for that financial year without prior approval of Parliament.” 

Sub-section (2) says: “Where funds are expended under sub-section (1), supplementary estimates showing the sums spent shall be laid before Parliament within four months after the money is spent.”

Sub-section (3) says: “Any reallocation of funds shall be made in consultation with all the affected ministries, departments, institutions or organisations.”

Madam Speaker, I find that the number of supplementary schedules is not limited in principle. You can have as many supplementary schedules as are possible. - (Interjections) - If the cumulative total of these supplementary schedules is below three percent, the approval of Parliament is not required. However, if it becomes clear that the cumulative total of supplementary expenditure will exceed three percent of the approved budget, approval of Parliament must be sought prior to such additional expenditure being incurred. - (Interruptions) - Madam Speaker, may I be protected. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, members. Let the Attorney-General complete his submission.

PROF. MAKUBUYA: I asked some questions of the Minister of Finance before I came here and he has explained to me that the mode of preparing some of these supplementary schedules has caused problems. (Laughter) 

When you look at sub-section (3), it says: “Any re-allocation of funds shall be made in consultation with all affected ministries, departments, institutions or organisations”. What he has explained to me, and I think he is here so he can confirm or deny - (Laughter) - is that in preparing these supplementary schedules, he has normally recorded re-allocations for the information of Parliament. 

The schedules have included three types of resources. There are the additional resources themselves, which must not exceed three percent without prior approval of Parliament. They have also included re-allocated resources. They have also included non-resource tax expenditure and this one has caused difficulties. 

My view is that in the future, it would be very important to comply with sub-section (1) as it is. Separate the matters covered under sub-section (1) and if you want, you can add an addendum about re-allocations and non-resource tax expenditure. Madam Speaker, I should not get carried away. This is what I could get from the analysis of these provisions. Thank you, Madam. (Applause) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to seek clarification from the Attorney-General. The budget has been approved and it says “x” amount; re-allocation means those resources are no longer needed to provide for an activity which was approved by Parliament. That means those resources are no longer necessary and you have to reduce the budget according to the money which has been allocated. 

We want to ask the Attorney-General –(Interjection)– please listen, you must understand so that you can argue. We want to ask the Attorney-General, if you have done a re-allocation, are you not reducing the approved budget? What are you doing to the budget which was passed by Parliament? It is because we came here to agree on a programme and activities, which we are supposed to be provided for. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I want to be helped by the Attorney-General. In his concluding remarks, he did say that in future the section he quoted must be adhered to. What about in the current circumstances? What does he have to say about the legality regarding the current? He has talked of the future but we are dealing with the current here? What is the way forward? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think what we had asked the Attorney-General to explain to us is this issue of the cumulative supplementaries and whether you are allowed to exceed three percent without coming here. That is what we asked the Attorney-General to explain and he has answered. 

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, you are quite right. That is exactly what I was asked and I have tried my best to answer it, but I also appreciate the point being raised by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I think it is an important point. 

The Minister of Finance will have his view on the matter but in my view, the law itself envisages that there will be re-allocations and that these re-allocations are an administrative matter. The law, according to sub-section (1), divides responsibility; it says that if these cumulative supplementaries for additional resources do not exceed three percent, that is a matter for the Executive alone. However, if it is envisaged that it is likely to go above three percent, then do not go above three percent without the prior approval of Parliament. I see this as shared responsibility. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the reason I was asking the Attorney-General that question is because you can budget in a ministry so that you put money aside with the intention that at a particular time you will bring that as a re-allocation somewhere - (Interjection)- No, that is what is happening. 

The purpose of the Budget is that every ministry must be budgeted for according to the all the activities it wants and these activities are approved here in Parliament. That is why they were saying, if you want to do re-allocations, you must do it in consultation with those people. Now, when you are going to adjust an activity which has been approved here by Parliament, for example you are saying you are going to do road ‘A’ and then you change, for us when we are going to check on you we shall say, “where is road ‘A’?”  Now you are taking that money to another place; Attorney-General –(Interruption) 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for accepting this intervention. Last year from about the month of August to about the month of January, we had floods. None of us anticipated that these floods would come; just as I have already written to colleagues that we should also prepare in case these floods come again. Now, it is not within easy government practice so far that you plan for these emergencies and disasters. It is within the power of government - and I want hon. Nandala to know that – that when such things like the floods happen and you need relief, you intervene to save lives and re-allocations, re-adjustments in the budget are called for. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think our problem was exceeding the three percent. That is what was at issue yesterday. The re-allocations are expected. What do we do if there are floods or there is a disaster? Our problem was exceeding the three percent.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you have made it clear. I also want to help the Professor in charge of disaster or the minister of disasters. Minister of disaster, are you listening? Under Article 157, Parliament shall make a provision for the establishment of a contingency fund and shall make laws to regulate the operations of the fund. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, hon. Nandala-Mafabi has a rare propensity for picking quarrels even where it is not necessary. (Laughter) The proper title for the minister is the Minister for Disaster Preparedness. There is a difference between a minister for disaster and a minister for disaster preparedness and he is deliberately making reference to it. It is not English. Is he in order to address the Minister with wrong titles when he knows the proper title of the Minister? (Laughter) Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, he is out of order. Honourable members, let us go to the issue. We were dealing with the problem of exceeding the three percent and the Attorney-General has explained it.

PROF. LATIGO: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, we have a small problem here. It really amazes me that the Minister can come here and tell us that somehow they made a terrible mistake in including re-allocations in supplementaries. If the Ministry of Finance can do that, this country has a very serious problem. It means they are acting I do not know whether with their hearts or with which part of their body -(Laughter)- but certainly they are not acting with their heads. 

The law is very clear, that a re-allocation is not a supplementary and I do not need to tell anybody in the ministry this basic fact. Granted, this may have been some inadvertent mistake, but I also accept that I have a legitimate suspicion and I also agree with the Attorney-General that this supplementary schedule is in breach of the law because it must only include those moneys that are over and above those budgeted. Considering all that, I would ask that the ministry comes back with a new schedule but also with an explanation of the re-allocations that they have made and they wanted to include as supplementary -(Dr Suruma rose_) - I think it is important for Parliament to know this truth. Otherwise, I get the feeling that we are being taken for a ride.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Latigo, we had asked the Attorney-General to explain and he has done that but we have not heard from the Ministry of Finance. The Attorney-General has given the legal position, so let us now hear from the minister.

5.49
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. The supplementary schedules we have been submitting indicate the various categories of re-allocations of non-resource payments and of additional resources. The schedule we submit indicates all these three categories. The committee, in looking at the schedules, decided to add all of them together as if they were additional resources whereas they were not.  (Interjections) – Yes, that is a report which came to the committee. (Interruptions)- May I finish? In the schedules we have submitted, it clearly indicated the source of funding, whether it is additional or not additional. 

It will be clear that in the supplementary schedule No. 01, re-allocations were Shs68.9 billion and additional resources were Shs73.4 billion. In the second schedule re-allocation of Shs66.8 billion, additional resources were Shs60.6 billion. The total of the additional resources in the two schedules is Shs134.1 billion and this is 2.4 percent of the total approved budget. I beg to move.

5.52
THE CHAIRPERSON, THE BUDGET COMMITTEE (Mr William Okecho): Madam Speaker, I have heard what the Minister of Finance has said. We looked at these schedules, actually schedule No.2, again this morning with a representative of the Ministry of Finance and we made a discovery –(Interjections) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please allow him to tell us the discovery. 

MR OKECHO: The Minister’s brief, which I think all of you have a copy of, under point No. 9 states that there is a discrepancy in the total supplementary requiring additional resources resulting from the non-resource tax expenditure in schedule No. 2 of Shs 12.588 billion. This expenditure is non-resource from Government expenditure which does not require additional funding. It is only a book entry. (Laughter)

Now, when you look at schedule No. 2, we realise that that money was included in the schedule as additional resource instead of putting it as non-resource and that is a- (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Since you are talking of a book entry, this means it has a debit and a credit; show us those entries so that it becomes a book entry.

MR OKECHO: Please, that is not for me, I think –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, he was reading the minister’s statement. Paragraph No. 9 is what he was referring to.

MR OKECHO: That is the position. When we remove Shs 12.588 billion out of the total, we realise that actually we are coming down to a situation where the total expenditure over the whole year was 2.45 percent of the total approved budget. That is what we found out, and the minister I think should have stated that fact. If you need any further clarification, you can get him to answer. Thank you very much.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am a bit amazed at the contribution of the chairperson of the Budget Committee when he continuously says “we”. Who constitute “we”? I happen to be a member of the Budget Committee and I have not received any invitation from the chairman of the Budget Committee since yesterday. I have been in the country, my telephone lines have been open and my office is available but I have not received any invitation. I would not want to be associated with forgery. 

We have to agree that something went wrong and it is important that we go and find out what has happened and clean the system so that we come to this Parliament with authentic figures. It has happened before; the Minister of Finance has several times accepted errors in the figures and we have always gone back and corrected. I want to plead with the government not to start a wrong precedent particularly when it touches finance. I am begging the Minister of Finance and I am begging my chairman of the Budget Committee to act with integrity and to be very factual to this institution. Thank you.

MR OKECHO: Madam Speaker, I need to be very clear here. We have – (Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Is it in order for the chairman of the Budget Committee, my former boss, to mislead this House by saying that “we discovered” when actually he brought a report before this House? In such circumstances when there is an error like that, he is supposed to come up with an addendum to the report. Is it in order for hon. William Okecho to mislead this House? Is he in order to even lie before this House that a committee sat when there is no report, no minutes, no nothing and then he refers to “we” when he alone conspired with some few others to come and mislead this House? Is he in order?

MS ROSE AKOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to clarify on the point of order he raised. The truth is that there was a meeting and we deliberated –(Interjections)- The report is here. Two, I want to clarify on what the Minister presented. I believe every member has a copy of schedule No.2 –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a small issue of when you met.

MS AKOL: We met and produced this report. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: After our meeting yesterday, did you meet this morning on this matter?

MS AKOL: I can clarify that there was a meeting this morning together with members of the Parliamentary Budget Office in the Budget Office –(Interjections)- I am going to give you facts so listen. In the meeting I attended, the people present were the chairperson, the vice chair and members of the Budget Office. We also needed a clarification from the Ministry of Finance so we had a representative from the Ministry of Finance to clarify on the issues which were raised here yesterday. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It would appear that there were consultations but they did not constitute a meeting of the committee. Can we ask the Budget Committee to sit again and harmonise with all the members? (Applause)

MR OKECHO: I want to inform this House on what happened. When we received this schedule on the 17th June, we met as a full Committee of the Budget – (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I asked for a meeting as from last night when we adjourned the House. That is the meeting we are inquiring about. We know you met earlier, but after we met yesterday, did you meet as a committee? 

MR OKECHO: We met to consult with out technical people –(Interjections)- I, as chairperson, and the deputy and the budget office, which is a technical body supposed to do this. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have ruled that the Budget Committee sits within yourselves, not with your consultants, and harmonise this position. Please do that. 

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, I have here the letter to the Clerk to Parliament enclosing Supplementary Schedule, Expenditure Schedule No. 2 for FY 2007-2008. I will be happy to lay it on Table. 

I just want to state that this schedule indicates tables, which show each category of vote, the additional resources and re-allocations. It is here and it was laid on the Table in this House. It was also sent to the Clerk to Parliament on 4th June and it was laid. This is what was entered here, so any Member of Parliament certainly has this information. It is not true therefore that the additional resources have not been indicated to this House because they have.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, yesterday there was a question of legality that required an opinion from the Attorney-General. I just wanted to make this point, if you can protect me from hon. Banyenzaki. Yesterday there was a legal problem of whether the Minister of Finance had exceeded the limits provided for in the Budget Act, which limit is three percent of the total approved budget. You wisely ruled that the debate be stayed until legal opinion has been sought from the Attorney-General. 

He has ably explained that once we distinguish between re-allocation of the budget already approved by this House, these limits have a motivation behind the law, which motivation is putting a limit to provide checks and balances between the Executive arm of government and the Legislative arm. It states that the Executive can spend up to this point, beyond which they must come; the minister has come, so what is the issue? There are no impediments in the provision of this law. This is true. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me ask the minister; have you exceeded the three percent? - (Interjection) - No, then you did not have to come. If he has not exceeded then what are we debating?

MR KAMUNTU: This is the point I wanted to make. The figures that the minister has provided, together with the explanations from the Attorney-General, show that no illegality has been committed at this moment.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You have ably guided this House. First of all, we know that this House works through its committees and the Budget Committee is no ordinary committee; it is made up of chairpersons of other committees as well. Our Rules of Procedure state, in respect of quorum in committees, that unless the House otherwise directs, the quorum of a committee of the House shall be one third of its members. They also state what the number of members required to form the quorum for every committee, under sub-rule (1), shall be in addition to the chairperson. We have just received the report that the chairperson was there with his vice chairperson, meaning that there was only one other member in the committee.

The other bit is a procedural concern. Having guided the House on the basis of this rule, having made your ruling as Chair of this House and most importantly, well aware that we cannot all scrutinise the new documents that have been discovered or provided to hon. Okecho, is it still procedurally correct to continue to debate this matter? You have guided that the committee should scrutinise it and give us the results perhaps in the afternoon, so is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us stick to what we agreed. Chair, satisfy your members. Call them, sit down again and come back and report. Incidentally, I do not even know whether he requires our approval, but sit with your committee, harmonise and come back. 

MR OKECHO: Let me put the record right. We met twice as the Budget Committee. Yesterday when we left here, we wanted to clarify issues and that is the meeting that we held this morning. Secondly, I would like to inform hon. Ogwal that it was definitely not our intention – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please go and sit with your committee members, satisfy them about your consultations and come back and report. The House is adjourned to 10.00 a.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.12 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 3 July 2008 at 10.00 a.m.)









