Wednesday, 1 July 2009

Parliament met at 2.36 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. I also take this opportunity to thank you for the attendance you made yesterday at the workshop we had on the International Criminal Court. It was encouraging and I hope you now have the capacity to deal with the Bill to domesticate the International Criminal Court which has been with us since 2006. 

In the gallery, we have pupils and teachers of Sister Daggan Primary School, Kamwokya, Kampala Central, which is represented by hon. Lukwago. You are most welcome! (Applause)

We also have pupils and teachers of Kansanga Hill Primary School, Makindye East, which is represented by hon. - he is not here? I will not mention the name -(Laughter)- you are welcome.

2.40
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a concern which is, in my opinion, grave. It has to do with the functioning of the Soroti District Council which is currently facing a lot of challenges.

Just to give you a bit of background, there was a petition which was submitted to the Ministry of Local Government, in an attempt to remove the speaker. The minister responded to it but did not preside over that function. Subsequently, another petition was raised and it is still within the schedule of the minister to respond to it. 

Unfortunately, this has caused a stalemate in Soroti District and so, for the last two or three weeks, council has not been able to sit. However, following a lot of mediation in the last three or four days, the councillors agreed that they would sit, whether the petition had been sorted out or not. 

The interesting thing, which is our very big dilemma, is that having agreed that they would sit, the speaker, against whom there is a petition, has completely vanished and so council cannot sit, and the deputy speaker has not been delegated to preside over council. As we talk, the district councillors are seated in the Lukiiko Hall waiting to receive the budget, and to pronounce themselves on vote-on-account for the district but there is nobody to preside over those proceedings.

And then there is also a directive by the Minister of Local Government, hon. Adolf Mwesige, which was received on phone yesterday that councillors should sit but not be paid their allowances. 

The other dilemma is that by 10th, because of these new arrangements - the EFT and related matters from Ministry of Finance - the system should have been fed in with the draft estimates for Soroti District. 

Now, I want to draw this to the attention of government, that there is a stalemate in Soroti District and then two, to urge the Minister of Local Government to go to Soroti and preside over council, or if he is aware of the whereabouts of the speaker of the district, to go and get the speaker so that the speaker presides over council. But also to assure the people of Soroti District - because there is already information going around in Soroti that if the budget is not passed by 30 August, the central government is going to come and take over the district. 

And when the central government, represented by the Minister of Local Government, does not intervene to help the people of Soroti pass the budget by 30th or get their draft estimates fed into the system by 10th, we get concerned whether this is part of an effort to move in and recentralise Soroti District. So, we would like a very clear explanation. 

But most importantly also, the allowances of the councillors are an entitlement by law and I would like the minister to tell us whether he has really directed the chief accounting officer of Soroti not to pay councillors their sitting allowances. But even with that, the councillors have said they will go into council and pass the budget with or without allowances.

That is my concern, Mr Speaker, and I think this House should save the people of Soroti the stalemate and the dilemma. Most importantly, the Minister of Local Government should undertake his mandatory obligations. I thank you.

2.44
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Alaso for the concern she has raised. I have been following the situation in Soroti very closely. There is a council in Soroti which was elected by the people. There is also a speaker for Soroti District.

As far as I am concerned, there should be no reason whatsoever why the council of Soroti cannot sit because it has a speaker and it has councillors. 

The little I have gathered is that some politicians, including my sister hon. Alaso, have been mobilising some councillors not to sit in council, with a view to deny the council quorum so that they do not pass the budget. This is the truth of the matter. Now the reason for that manoeuvre is that the Speaker of Soroti District Council sometime last year, out of his own volition, crossed to the NRM party. 

Some leaders in Soroti have been doing everything possible to make the life of this man very difficult. The councillors were mobilised to petition for his removal. I received this petition as the law requires. According to the law, after receiving the petition, the Minister of Local Government should, if satisfied that there are merits in that petition, preside over that council for purposes of removing the speaker.

I would like to say that I analysed this petition and I found defects in it. I can bring them here by way of a statement if it is the wish of Parliament. The defects related to the manner in which it had been signed, and the law under which it was brought was wrong. I later on communicated back to the clerk to council of Soroti District Council saying that because the petition had been found to be defective, I was unable to preside over a council to remove the speaker on the basis of a document, which I considered a nullity. I declined to preside over that council! That is the position as of now.

As far as I am concerned, Mr Speaker, there is a Speaker of Soroti District Council; there is a council, which should have had no reason not to sit and pass the budget for purposes of allocating resources that would benefit the people of Soroti. That is the position and there is nothing else I can do.

I would like to appeal to the leaders of Soroti to work together. They should allow the district council to sit and pass the budget. If they wish to remove the speaker through a petition, the law is very clear. The courts are available rather than punishing the people by failing to pass the budget through the district council – (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, hon. Adolf Mwesige, the line minister, was not in the House when I started presenting this matter. Otherwise, I had just said that the councillors are seated inside the Lukiiko Hall and the speaker, who belongs to NRM, if you want us to get a little bit political, is nowhere to be seen. So, there is a stalemate because there is nobody to preside over the council meetings today. That is it.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, allow me to also ask the minister why he directed that councillors should not be paid their allowances. Let him tell us why he does not allow the CAO to pay them.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, I cannot account for the whereabouts of the Speaker of Soroti District Council now because I do not know where he is. Maybe hon. Alaso knows. Anyway, after this meeting, I will go back and find out. If it is true that the members of the council are available to sit and pass the budget, that is good news for me. I will encourage the speaker, wherever he is - I have his contact - to come and preside over the council. That has always been my wish.

Secondly, I would like to make it clear that I have never directed anybody in the leadership of Soroti not to pay the allowances of councillors. If you have evidence to that effect, I would be glad to see it laid on Table.

THE SPEAKER: I believe it is the consensus of the House that we appeal to the councillors of Soroti District Council to transact business as expected. Okay, let us hear from the shadow attorney-general. 

2.51
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In his explanation, the minister said that the Speaker of Soroti District Council crossed to the Movement. We all know that we are under a multi-party system. The law regulating political leaders including us here in this House is that you cannot cross the floor. The Parliamentary Elections Act, which is applicable to the local governments under the provisions of the Local Government Act, says that the moment you cross the floor you lose your seat – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukwago, when you say, “multi-party” I think the House of Commons is run under multi-party system. For your information, the current Speaker, John Bercow, is from the Opposition Conservative Party. So, you can see that a speaker can be from a different political party.

So, I think hon. Members, you will agree with me that we make an appeal to the councillors and Speaker of Soroti District Council to transact business as they are expected.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Today is 1 July; according to Section 6 of the Budget Act, it requires that by 30 June, each minister should have caused, to be prepared and submitted to Parliament, a policy statement of that ministry. But by yesterday 30 June, Parliament had only received one policy statement from the Office of the Prime Minister. (Laughter)

As I speak, we have only received three statements. Yet as Parliament, we are required to pass the Appropriation Bill by 30 August. So, the delay definitely is also going to affect our work. In that sense, I would like to appeal to our honourable ministers – (Interruption)

MR ATUBO: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable chairperson to mislead the House when the policy statement of the Ministry of Lands, Water and Environment was delivered before 5.00 p.m. of yesterday? (Laughter) It is on record; the statement was signed for. I do not know at what time she left Parliament yesterday, but I can assure you that the policy statement from the Ministry of Lands, Water and Environment was delivered before 5.00 p.m. of yesterday. Thank you.

MR NASASIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that we are disciplined ministers who follow protocol. So, now that the Prime Minister’s statement is already in, the others are just following. (Laughter)

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Mr Speaker, our policy statement has been ready for a long time now, but as you know, we are constrained to have it printed by government printers; they have been taking their time and we do not control them. So when the government printers produce these statements, we shall bring them. Merry Christmas. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think there is a legal requirement that these policy statements should be in by end of June. June has ended and, therefore, if you have not handed in your policy statement, what you can do is to express regret and promise to promptly bring it. So we expect you to do whatever possible so that between today and tomorrow, you hand in those policy statements so that we move. 

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, I also want to request that these policy statements be prepared together with the work plans and procurement plans as agreed, in order to ensure efficient allocation of resources. This is a new measure that the Minister of Finance put in place. We also adopted it as Parliament; as you forward your policy statements, those other two documents should also be in that policy statement. 

I would like to request Parliament, especially the sessional committee chairpersons, that any policy statement without a work plan and a procurement plan is not a policy statement and should, therefore, be rejected. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you are advised to clear your mail boxes so that they can put copies of the policy statements. Clear them to provide space for these policy statements. 

As far as the Order Paper is concerned, we shall make an adjustment so that item four becomes item three; item three will be considered later. We are now going to deal with the motion for resolution of Parliament because there is a timeframe within which it has to be passed.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW AN ADDITIONAL FINANCING OF US$150,000,000 FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING THE POST PRIMARY EDUCATION AND TRAINING PROGRAMME

2.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MICROFINANCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a resolution of Parliament to authorise government to borrow SDR 90 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group for financing the Post Primary Education and Training Programme, Phase I Project:

“WHEREAS, a financing agreement for Special Drawing Rights (SDR) 90 million is to be concluded between the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group and the Government of the Republic of Uganda for the purpose of financing the Post Primary Education and Training Programme Phase I Project;

AND WHEREAS, under Article 159(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda government is authorised to borrow money from any source subject to other constitutional provisions;

AND WHEREAS, under Article 159(2) of the said Constitution, borrowing by government has to be authorised or under an Act of Parliament; 

AND WHEREAS, in line with the above constitutional requirement, government has laid before this Parliament the terms and conditions of the stated loan for their approval and authorisation;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that the government is hereby authorised to secure the said credit of SDR 90 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group, upon the terms and conditions therein stated.” 

I beg to move.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Seconded.

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, as I have stated in the resolution I have just read, the terms and conditions of the said loan were laid before Parliament, and I assume that Members of Parliament read it. I just want to confirm that we have followed the procedure; we included the project components, the different phases and the schedule of implementation and the implementation agency is the Ministry of Education.

I, therefore, do not want to spend a lot of time on that, but I beg Parliament to support the resolution I have read, and also in line with Article 159 of the Constitution, to pass this resolution and authorise government to borrow the money. 

3.02
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Erinah Wangwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Copies of the report are on the table outside, and others are on the way coming in.

Mr Speaker, this is the report from the Committee of the National Economy on the request by government to borrow US$150 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group for financing the Post Primary Education and Training Programme (UPPET).

The request was presented to this House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the 17 June 2009, and referred to our committee under Article 159 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rule 152(2) of our Rules of Procedure. Therefore, the committee considered and scrutinised the request and now reports as follows.

Methodology

The committee held a meeting with the Minister of Finance – (Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. It is our practice here that reports are submitted to us before they are presented here. We cannot even keep track of the presentation with what we have received here. I have here with me a document from the Ministry of Education and Sports, “The criteria for selecting the schools to be funded” under this project, but what she is reading is totally different from this and is not the report of the committee. Can we follow our rules and give out copies so that we can follow the debate and meaningfully participate in the deliberations? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Proceedings suspended for ten minutes.

(The proceedings were suspended at 3.05 p.m.) 

(On resumption at 3.36 p.m._)

MS WANGWA: Mr Speaker, I want to apologise for the confusion that took place. This is because when we changed the Order Paper, the people in the printery also got a bit disorganised. But now the reports are here and ready for distribution.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I must say that, that cannot be a good reason for not having the reports in good time. In the first place, these reports should have been distributed yesterday. We have only altered the Order Paper here; so how could that affect- I think there must be another reason.

MS WANGWA: Mr Speaker, I sincerely apologise and with your permission, please can I go ahead and -

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MS WANGWA: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, before we suspended, I had already read the introduction and methodology. Now we will go straight to the –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are sorry for the time we have spent without carrying on the work. My understanding is that the committee had a clerk who went on leave without handing over the documents properly, and I think this brought a problem with the people producing the reports, and has affected our work. I am sorry for it. Madam, can we proceed?

MS WANGWA: Mr Speaker, let us go to page 2; the background of the report and the second paragraph. The UPPET enrolment driven expansion has resulted in a critical shortage of classroom spaces. By 2007, 243 out of 791 schools participating in UPPET had a class size of more than 80 students. Currently, available school infrastructure in terms of classrooms, science rooms, libraries, pit latrines and teachers’ houses, has not increased accordingly to match the rapid enrolment growth. 

Over 72 percent government USE schools are congested with some classrooms having over 60 students above the recommended class size. Basing on the student-classroom ratio of 60:1, 11,124 classrooms will be needed by 2011 to enable government to achieve better and more effective implementation of the UPPET/USE programme.

On the same page, 4.0, there are the details of the planned World Bank support to the UPPET/USE programme and the purpose is that government, with the support of the World Bank, plans to implement an investment programme to develop and expand physical facilities in existing government USE schools, to reduce congestion in the classrooms and other basic facilities in order to improve and have a more conducive teaching/learning environment. 

This proposed borrowing is intended to support the implementation of the Uganda Post Primary Education and Training Project (UPPET) through expansion of infrastructure in existing government schools to provide sufficient classrooms, multi-purpose science rooms, libraries, water and sanitation facilities to accommodate a growing number of UPPET students. Over 6000 classrooms and 405 multi-purpose science rooms are to be added to the stock of teaching spaces in government USE schools between August 2009 and December 2010. Under this, the project will undertake the following:

1.	The construction of 6,161 new classrooms and they will also be furnished and equipped.
2.	Construction of 2,296 five stance VIP pit latrines.
3.	Construction of 405 multi-purpose science rooms.
4.	Construction of 144 libraries.
5.	Construction of four-unit teachers’ houses in 71 schools.
6.	Construction of 41 administration blocks.
7.	Completion of 1,864 classrooms.
8.	Scholastic materials like text books will also be given to the schools.

Mr Speaker, the project targets to achieve the following:

1.	To increase access to lower secondary education.
2.	To improve the quality of lower secondary education through expanding the capacity of at least one national teachers’ college.
3.	To enhance the enabling environment for post primary education and training.
4.	To prepare a national skills strategy and investment programme for UPPET.
5.	Monitoring students’ learning achievement and strengthening the education management information system.
6.	Implementing a comprehensive curriculum with a mix of academic and pre-vocational subjects.

The other pages have the details of what I have already narrated so let us go straight to page 9; terms and conditions of the loan. The loan amount is SDR 90 million, which is equivalent to USD 150 million. The maturity period is 40 years including ten years of grace and the service charge is 0.75 percent on disbursed and outstanding balances. Commitment fees of 0.5 percent on withdrawn balances beginning 120 days from loan signature.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe we have different – because you are talking about terms and conditions of the loan and it is on page 11. 

MS WANGWA: I have just summarised the terms. On page 10, the observations by the committee.

THE SPEAKER: No, for us we are on page 11. I think we should go to page 12.

MS WANGWA: Mr Speaker, let us go to the observations by the committee and these observations are on page 12 in the report that has been distributed to Members. 

The committee observed that the project will not address all the infrastructural inadequacies in the USE schools earmarked in this project. There are schools with no administrative blocks, incomplete structures, multipurpose science rooms to mention but a few, but they are not earmarked to benefit from this project. This is because not all the required infrastructure in the selected schools can be accommodated within the amount, US$150 million, which we are seeking to borrow. 

Secondly, some schools are not included under this project but are planned to benefit from ADB III, which is scheduled to start in 2010. The project is meant to cover one school per sub-county at the minimum. 

During the scrutiny of the documents, the committee noted that some sub-counties were not catered for yet they deserve government USE schools. 

The committee also observed that with the creation of new classrooms and the subsequent decongestion, there will certainly be need for more teachers. The component for recruitment of teachers is not provided for in the project and yet it is important that decongestion goes hand-in-hand with provision of more teaching staff. 

The committee also observed that there is need to strengthen the monitoring and evaluation component in all government projects to ensure that projects are implemented according to plan. In many of the projects that have been undertaken, we realise that many of them have not performed to expectation. Therefore, the Ministry of Education is urged to strengthen its monitoring and implementation.

Government private partnership has played an important role in service delivery, especially in the area of health and education. The committee was concerned that this project had not taken cognisance of this fact and included the private schools in the project. 

The procurement of works will be executed by the school management teams. We noted that this may have weaknesses as it will divert the school management from its core activities to procurement and purchase of building materials. Further, some schools may lack the capacity to handle the kind of resources that will be provided under this project. 

In the provision of staff accommodation, the project focuses on teachers. There is no mention and provision for non-teaching staff. And in the schools we visited, we further noticed that some non-teaching staff hardly appear on the ministry payroll.  

The earlier projects in the education sector like NUSAF and seed school projects included the component of water harvesting and storage. This is a very important aspect and yet it is not included in this project. 

There are many teachers who are yet to be confirmed, while many head teachers have been in acting positions well beyond the stipulated period of time.  

The committee notes that the Education Service Commission last confirmed teachers in 2001, and this has a negative bearing on service delivery. 

During our visit, the committee noticed poor maintenance of school facilities, poor hygiene and generally poor administration, and this negatively impacts on the learning environment. Particularly in Kotido District, there was only one secondary school. The school is overcrowded and the facilities earmarked for the school will not address the problem of over congestion. 

In Moroto and Nakapiripirit, they had good facilities but there were a few students at the time we visited the area. We were made to understand that there was delay in delivery of food, therefore, the students stayed away from school. (Laughter) 

Still in Karamoja, they have difficulty in attracting teachers because it is a hard-to-reach and a hard-to-stay in area. So, our recommendations are as follows:

Some of the infrastructure, which will not be extended to particular schools but are within the scope of the project, should be provided for within the development budget of the Ministry of Education and Sports. This should be done so as to provide standard and uniform facilitation to all USE schools across the board. 

The Ministry, as the implementing agency, should take note of the sub-counties that were omitted, with a view of providing for USE schools in such sub-counties in the project implementation plan. 

The recruitment of teachers should be provided for to cater for the need for more teaching staff arising from the decongestion, thus creation of more classes. 

Alternative programmes should be created to include private schools participating in the USE private partnership schools in the spirit of government private partnership. Such intervention should be geared at ensuring that USE students have access to similar facilities both in the government and private schools. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports should take into account the uniqueness of Karamoja region and the islands. These are hard-to-reach and hard-to-stay in areas, and they require special intervention. 

Due consideration should be given to schools that do not have room for horizontal expansion.

The Ministry of Education and Sports should take care of the fact that many head teachers have been in acting positions for long, and they should be confirmed. 

The aspect of monitoring and evaluation should be emphasised to ensure that quality services are delivered during the implementation of the project.

The ministry should consider providing for another school in Kotido District to cater for the huge number of students in the district. 

The inspectorate aspect in schools should be strengthened to ensure that proper learning takes place in schools.

Lastly, the Ministry of Education and Sports should provide for the old schools that were not included under ADB II. 

In conclusion, this project is very critical, especially at this time, and the advantages of UPE and USE cannot be overemphasised, but we need this kind of intervention for value addition in our human resource. Investment in the human resource through provision of quality education and health is the way forward if we are to propel this country to the next development. 

So, the Committee on National Economy recommends that this august House approves the request by government to borrow US$ 150 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing the post primary education and training programme. 

Mr Speaker, I would also like to lay on Table the other documents that were considered: the project appraisal, the draft financing agreement and the criteria for selection of the beneficiary schools. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Chairperson and members of the committee for the report. 

3.53
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to thank the committee for the job well done. 

I just want to make one observation and ask for two clarifications. It looks like the authors of the report did a commendable job; other than just asking us to approve the loan request, they also brought part of the other committee findings like the status of secondary education and schools all over Uganda. I think this is a new style of writing for a loan request. My imagination was that a loan request would be specific to the purpose for which the loan is required. It should really desist from expanding to other areas which is routine committee work. 

Having observed that, I wanted to seek two clarifications: One, on page 12 of the report under observations, “The committee observed that some schools are not included under this project but are planned to benefit from the ADB which is scheduled to be implemented in 2010.” Can I be informed by the responsible minister which schools, districts and sub-counties were chosen to benefit from this project? Can we have a list brought to us that in Karamoja it is this; in Mpigi it is this; in Wakiso it is this, because the way I have seen things occasionally happening in this Parliament, we may blanketly approve this loan and then you find that the distribution of the schools is biased towards specific areas. 

So, can I be told, before I cast my vote later on, which are the schools we are specifically approving these loans for, so that the Members of Parliament can also go and tell their people that we have approved a loan for building a school in this sub-county? This makes it easier for the people down there to demand for those schools when the appropriate time comes. 

Two, it is on page 12. The committee made a very good observation that the procurement of works will be executed by the school management teams. The committee noted that this may have weaknesses as it will divert the school management from its core activities. What does the ministry have to say on this? Because from the ADB loans that my district benefited from, the structural engineering succeeded because the process of tendering and sourcing for the construction companies was done from the centre. The moment they got down, their basic work was to construct as to specifications. So, I am more comfortable with the Ministry of Education headquarters at the centre, approving and doing the bidding of those who will do the actual construction work, other than making it an issue of the district councils, where they will end up giving construction work to some councillors, and the standards will be compromised. 

So, can the ministry tell me and this House what they think about this recommendation by the committee? Why don’t we have a central bidding process and then we have standard schools of the same design constructed all over the country. Thank you so much. I beg to be clarified on those issues. 

3.58
MR SIMON ROSS EUKU (UPC, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): I thank you, Mr Speaker. This report was well done, but I have some observations that I want to make. I would like to get some clarifications from the committee whether this loan is within the pipeline projects of external borrowing, because I know every financial year the government plans for loans that are supposed to be borrowed? Each and every project within any financial year must always be planned. So, I want to find out from the committee whether this is in the pipeline.

Two, this House has over approved loans. In 2006/07, we had an external debt amounting to US$ 1.468 billion after being given that relief from MDI and HIPC. But it is hardly two years, and the loan has gone to 4 billion. Mr Speaker, if this House continues approving and authorizing government to borrow in this manner, within a year we shall find that the whole of Uganda has been made slaves or mortgaged due to this high borrowing. Within a period of two years, from 2006/07, the government has borrowed about US$ 2.5 million. This is a lot of money! And today we are approving it. So in the end you will find that we shall be slaves to the donors or to the people who are going to give us money. 

The committee did not give a comprehensive analysis on debt sustainability because the report that has been given here is flat.  They have failed to give direction to this House on whether, if you borrowed this money plus the accumulated debt, the country can sustain external borrowing. Mr Speaker, as we stand now, we have a seriously big total national debt. We have an external debt of 4 billion; we have arrears which are a debt to government of about 0.8 billion; we have a domestic debt which is about 2 billion; giving us a total of US$ 6.8 billion. So when you convert this into Ugandan money you realize that we have about 12 trillion; it is beyond our budget. At this rate, shall we really sustain our indebtedness? With these facts, I would not support that we authorize government to borrow this money because we are over indebted.

As I conclude, I want to go to page 11 of the report that has been produced; terms and conditions of the loan. I want to talk about the commitment fee which is 0.5 percent. Mr Speaker, if this figure of 0.5 percent is converted on withdrawn balances beginning 120 days from loan agreement, it is a very high figure. So, the cost of borrowing this money is higher than the loan we are seeking, if we consider the time the loan will take, which is 40 years. So, at the rate of 0.5 percent, it will be so high. I really appeal to this House that because of the indebtedness that we have, we should not approve this loan request. Thank you. 

4.12 
Mr MICHAEL OCULA (FDC, Kilak County, Amuru): Mr Speaker, the report itself is very good and well written, but the presentation leaves a lot to be desired. I do not know what the Hansard has captured. I would request that the Hansard does not only capture what has been talked about here but also the real report as part of our record. Otherwise, it may end up being lost.

We are again seeing the Ministry of Education and Sports engage in a project involving massive construction work. This is not the first time. We had the Programme for Alleviation of Poverty and Social Cost of Adjustment (PAPSCA). Under this, the ministry engaged a lot in the construction of schools, but up to now when you travel to the countryside, you see schools without roof tops and only walls hanging. PAPSCA was initiated around 1992 –(Interruption)

MR GAGAWALA: I would like to behave like an elder, but it would be very difficult for me after hearing a senior Member of Parliament in the shadow government, belittling our chairperson who presented a report in a summary form, and a report which he himself said was very well written. I could not sit down; I had to raise a red flag on this issue. Is he really in order to belittle our chairperson yet she was very eloquent, well dressed and very smart while presenting this report? 

THE SPEAKER: But I think the point of order should have been timely, because after saying this, he moved to about three other points. So, for it to have an impact it should be timely. (Laughter)

MR OCULA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your ruling. You know debates in this House have levels. At times when you do not understand at a certain level, you may rise up the way – (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Proceed with your submission.

MR OCULA: I was talking about a project called PAPSCA. It was a well conceived project, supposed to address the impact of social cost of adjustment. The World Bank came up with all those changes. 

Before he interrupted me, I was saying that whether you move to Masaka or Amuru, you find construction work that is not yet complete up to now. Similarly, there was a project that I worked for - the Northern Uganda Reconstruction Project - which had a heavy component of construction work. Up to now when you go to those areas, you find incomplete construction work. I hope this project will not end up like those ones. 

The loan being requested for is different from the other loans we have approved before, because the results are well laid down. I can see, for example, that over 6,000 classrooms are to be constructed, over 2,000 VIP latrines, and so on and so forth. It is actually supposed to be a different project. We have been approving projects that talk of capacity building and whose results we do not see. I hope this one is going to be for the benefit of the people. 

My final concern is on page 12 of the report under the observations where the committee says that some sub-counties do not have a single secondary school. Way back around 2003, while the Minister of Education was presenting the ministerial policy statement, I remember clearly, she said that the programme of government was that within two years, each sub-county in the country would have at least one secondary school. Up to now, 75 sub-counties do not have secondary schools, including one in my constituency, Amuru Sub-County. 

I would implore the Minister and the technical staff of the Ministry of Education, to add classroom blocks to other schools. However, they should first address the lack of secondary schools in the 75 sub-counties. I thank you so much, Mr Speaker. 

4.09 
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the committee for the good work done, and generally government, for the good intervention. 

Like one of my colleagues across there said, borrowing is not generally healthy, but in both the short and medium term, it is good, as long as the money borrowed is put to good use. In this country, there is a culture now that people use the money that we borrow the way they want. In this case, I ask the ministry and all of us to be serious, to ensure that this money is not wasted, because it is not the first loan and it will not be the last. 

We need to be serious, because in almost all our constituencies, we have seen shoddy work being done, with the people who take up the contracts not being punished. There is a problem in this country, especially when we get a loan. We tend to think that the loan will never be paid. The future generations will blame us. 

Let me comment on the issue of those who will be involved in procurement and awarding contracts. I see a contradiction, because these people are also supposed to be the supervisors. The moment we involve them in procurement and awarding contracts, they may not be able to supervise. It is good that the school management committees and the boards of governors will be trained to gain skills in supervision. However, there is another bad culture cropping up in this country. When people go for these seminars, the technical people usually use this to embezzle government funds. They will hike prices of everything and at the end of the day, the intention for which you have borrowed the money may not be realised. So, I think the ministry should be more serious. Much as the training of these people is necessary, it should not take much of the budget.

I read that the buildings will be designed to have a lifespan of 30 years. This sounds very ironical because in most of our constituencies, if they put up a pit latrine or even a classroom today, the same building will collapse by the following week. I do not know what measure the ministry will put in place this time.

The other issue is about the science laboratories. This is very wonderful, and I think we should support it, but I hope it will not be like the health centres in the Ministry of Health. We have Health Centre IIs in every parish but there are no drugs. It will almost be useless to have laboratories that do not have laboratory equipment.

I support the motion and I urge colleagues to support it, but I caution government and the ministry to put the money to good use. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.12 
MS RUTH NVUMETTA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee, particularly on two issues: One, for mentioning that the old schools also have a need. So often, we forget about them and think they will die a natural death. So, I hope this will be put in place. Secondly, for highlighting the islands because so often when it comes to schools, we have requested for boarding schools because of difficulty in movement, and we have been told that government policy is schools. 

This takes me to observation No.8, where the committee observes the fact that teachers have been provided for and non-teaching staff have not been provided for. If government policy is schools, then I would think that even the teachers should not be provided for since everybody is supposed to commute. If all the students are commuting, why shouldn’t the teachers commute? That would be my reasoning in this case. I hope that we will be able to actually provide for the teachers and a few teaching staff and we will think seriously about reviewing the policy on a boarding school everywhere, including the islands that are difficult to reach. Thank you. 

4.14 
COL DAVID GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Government projects can succeed or fail depending on the project design. This requirement for US$ 150 million is a good one. There are good reasons to ask for a loan to support the education sector because we all know what it is about.  

About the criteria, I do not know whether hon. Otto was asking for a list of schools. I have seen a list of schools throughout the country; you could do well to get a copy here. I was reading through this document and I am not very good at praying but this time I pray, hon. Namirembe, that you succeed in this one for as long as you are still the sector minister. Look at the procurement aspect that is being talked about in the report - “train members of the school management committees and boards of governors in line with PPDA requirements.” How quickly will they grasp the fundamentals of procurement in PPDA? 

I know about four of the USE schools in my area, but I pray – and I rarely do – that this thing really succeeds because it is very good –(Interjection – No, I really have little time. Let me finish with a few remarks and give others a chance.

We want to follow up this project. On page 6 of this document, it says that the school management team, including board of governors and staff, are to be trained in public financial management. Isn’t this more of a theory than a practical aspect? It says they are to be trained in public financial management and procurement by the Ministry of Education and Sports in collaboration with professional bodies. 

I am going to support this loan and we are going to pray for you, hon. Minister and your entire technical team, particularly in light of the remarks of the President at the time of presentation of the budget of the financial year 2009/2010. This US$ 150 million is not simple cash. So, I appeal to the technocrats to go back to the drawing board and ensure that certain loopholes are plugged so that this money can build the classrooms required in the entire country. Thank you. 

4.18
MS ROSEMARY NAJJEMBA (NRM, Gomba County, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a report well written and well presented. I also have a few comments to make. 

One of my comments is on procurement. Just like my colleagues have mentioned, I wonder whether they have the capacity to do this job. Bearing in mind that these are very poor people, I do not know whether if given all this money, they will be able to use it or whether they will not be scared or divert it. I think that if they are to do the work, they need to be supervised or something else must be done other than just getting a loan of this nature and wasting the money. 

I am concerned, and the minister should help me here. I have been looking at the criteria for selection of these schools and I have observed that when it comes to libraries, there is only one school in Mpigi District - where she comes from - and that is in Kamengo. I know very well that in my constituency, there isn’t even a single school with a library. When it comes to teachers’ houses, there is no school in Mpigi which is going to get teachers’ houses, and that is the biggest problem in my constituency. Teachers do not have accommodation and that is why they are not always at school. 

Mpigi, especially Gomba, is one of those hard-to-reach areas and the minister is well aware of this. In Luganda there is a saying that “Omugabi teyeseera”. I just wonder how the minister who is at the table serving, would fail to include any school in her district, yet she knows the situation on the ground. I am so perturbed – (Interjections) - She is patriotic. (Laughter)

4.21
DR BRIAN ASIIMWE (NRM, Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report. I have two observations to make. One is about classrooms. Indeed there are many schools which are congested in this country, especially seed schools, and we need classrooms. I thank the ministry for thinking about them. 

Most of our rural schools have been performing so poorly at senior four and at senior six level because they do not have enough teachers particularly science teachers. Our rural schools find it extremely difficult to attract good teachers. You will discover that most of the good teachers are in urban centres like Kampala, Mbarara and Jinja where most schools are performing very well. I would have loved to see many staff houses proposed, which would partly attract these teachers to rural areas. 

Although congestion can lead to poor performance in some areas, the biggest problem is lack of teachers and scholastic materials which the ministry is not addressing seriously. If we get another loan in future, that should be looked at.

About the quality of construction, it is good they have indicated so many schools are going to benefit with multi-purpose science rooms and classrooms, and we have given the responsibility to school management committees. I have no quarrel with that, but who is going to monitor this work? If technical companies that have been getting tenders have been doing shoddy work and they are being supervised by district engineers, I wonder what sort of supervision and monitoring is going to be carried out by these school management committees. The idea is good, but I am worried about the quality of work they are going to produce.

My constituency is going to benefit from the classrooms but none of the schools I have has a library. While at school, the children never get this opportunity. In the first place, there are so many students in very small classrooms. When they have free time, they have nowhere to read from. The ministry should have considered this and provided staff houses to attract teachers, and libraries equipped with books. Thank you. 

4.25
MR FRED BUKENI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion that this loan request be passed by Parliament. My problem is that the Ministry of Education, as indicated on page 6, is involving the Ministry of Works, Transport and Communication and they are also saying that they will hire consultants on a regional basis to do the same job. I want to find out who is going to be strictly in charge of the technical supervision. There is no mention of Ministry of Housing, which is outside the Ministry of Works. There is no mention of the district engineers in the local governments but rather what is being mentioned are district engineers under the Ministry of Works. Not all districts have these executive engineers who are more or less regional engineers. 

The Ministry of Education used to have engineering assistants for the schools under the SFG programme. However, with this increased responsibility and with responsibility not being centred in one particular area, I get concerned. This is because even the work that is being supervised in districts by professional engineers is shoddy. Our own schools and roads being constructed with engineers of the district monitoring them on a daily basis are not good. The Ministry of Education must come out clearly on this issue.

On the issue of training, when I look at the document, they are saying work is going to start in August 2009. This is next month. I have been trained several times in public finance and management, but it was never for this short time. I do not know what miracle the Ministry of Education has, if this is approved, so that they will be able to train all the centres that are going to procure, not only in financial management, but also in procurement, so that they start in August 2009. 

The other issue is the quality of the work not being uniform and yet it is approved for the same payment. The same amount of money is being paid for work which is not uniform in the same area with the same facilities. Why doesn’t the ministry put people in place to stand and say, “No, work which is not done and is rejected should not be paid for; work which is passed, with a certificate, should be the only work paid for.” 

This is a very good project, so I am surprised that some members do not want it. There is a party which is always singing that they built 20 hospitals and it is a big deal. How can the NRM government, which wants to build about 600 schools in the whole country, be stopped? This is a very good project and I support it.

4.30
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise to support the motion to borrow US$ 150 million to improve education in this country. It is education which can deliver us from the bondage of poverty. Once these funds are put to proper use as other colleagues have said, I am sure we will make a very big difference. 

I am concerned about the issue of the teachers. I note from the report that the proposal is to have four-unit teachers’ houses in 71 schools. That is just about 284 teachers to be housed. However, in the appendix, I do not see the list of the 71 schools to benefit. In any case, to me the issue of accommodation for teachers has been greatly under played to the extent that the performance of most schools has been greatly affected by the absence of teachers in the schools.

I am also concerned about the perpetual poor performance in inspection of schools. I remember some time the district inspectors of schools complained that most of the money for inspection was being handled by the District Education Officers, who would many times not pass over the money for inspection to them. We took a bold step to direct money for inspection specifically to be managed by the district inspectors of schools and allocated about Shs 2.5 billion for the purpose. I am surprised that it is no longer the money which was a problem. Where is the problem? Why do we have poor inspection of schools persistently reported in this country?

Thirdly -(Interruption)

MS EKWAU IBI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank hon. Epetait. The information I give you is that in Kampala at the moment, each time an inspector goes to inspect a school, the school is supposed to cough a minimum of Shs 55,000. I thank you.

DR EPETAIT: Hon. Minister, I think there is need for your ministry to design bold steps on how to handle the district inspectors of schools to do their job.

Provision of water in schools has been a big challenge. It was mentioned in the report that certain projects, like NUSAF and seed school projects, provided roof water harvesting programmes. I am saddened to note that even for those projects, in many schools, water tanks were just put there without gutters and so, they actually do not serve the purpose. I am proposing that the ministry undertakes to make sure that each school is provided with alternative water sources, either a borehole or piped water. The schools should be helped.

I am glad that at last one of my sub-counties is now included. I will do everything it takes to urge you, honourable colleagues, to support this programme. I have seen a number of schools. In fact hon. Euku, my colleague, I would like to inform you that a number of the schools which are actually proposed for a facelift were constructed by the UPC government. (Laughter) I think let us have an opportunity to have those schools also face-lifted because it would be counter productive for us to oppose a loan when the schools are going to waste. I support the motion.

4.34
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I also rise to support the motion to borrow for the construction of schools. I support the motion because I know, like my colleague has said, it is only through education that we can alleviate poverty.

When I look at the wrangles happening in the country regarding land shortage, I look at education as being the only way through which we can solve some of these problems. When our people are educated and they can find some other ways through which they can survive apart from using land, then I know some of the problems regarding land shall be solved.

I wish to correct something, possibly it was an omission; there is no sub-county called L. Kabatoro in Kasese District. There is Katwe Kabatoro Town Council, not L. Kabatoro. It is on appendix 5, page 2, and the same mistake is repeated under appendix 3, page 5.

I also wish to say, like my colleagues have pointed out, the money to be used to train the management committees may be too much. We could have possibly used this money to build some pit latrine in a school or to build another classroom block. 

The capacity of the management committees to manage and to even look for the best contractor to build the schools may be doubted. I echo what happened in Karamoja through the NUSAF programme. They used the project management committees to monitor and to even give contracts to people who are supposed to be given these contracts. The project in some areas was mishandled and some other projects were not even put in place.

I remember a time when we went there and the project coordinator was showing us a project which they put in place, the locals were saying the project was actually put in place by ADDRA, not NUSAF. My worry is that these management committees may take a lot of time to understand the whole process and even the money may be too much.

The other problem in Kasese District is the geography of the area. The geographical location and the geographical make up of the area makes education a little bit complicated, hon. Minister. In a sub-county like Kyarumba, there is only one government-aided school and the people from the very far part of the mountain may not make it to this school which government is aiding. Education in those areas is still not as easy as you may think.

A sub-county like Kyondo has only one secondary school which is also a private school. We are only lucky that it is under the USE programme. When you see the area it covers and you look at the children who commute from these mountains to access education in this part of the area, you really sympathise with them. We know that the drop-out rate in these areas will continue to increase even when we are putting free education in our systems. 

I would, therefore, request that we look at these areas and see whether some other alternatives can be considered, for example, supporting some of the existing schools and giving them USE. 

Also, for the two sub-counties that I am talking about, Kyarumba and Kyondo, some students now commute from the lower part of Kyarumba to access education in Kyondo. There is a big river and some students may even drown during the rainy seasons just because they want to access education in a relatively cheaper area.

I want to thank the ministry and the chairperson of the committee. I wish we could all support this motion. I want to thank you.

4.39
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think hon. Ocula was saying that this report was well written but that it would have been better if the whole of it was put in the Hansard for future reference. I think hon. Gagawala never understood.

Having said that, I want to correct the impression that the Minster of Education should have started with her place. That would have been treated as abuse of office. So, she did a good thing to consider other places first so that her place comes last.

On the issue of pricing, let us assume that the price of each classroom is 10 million. In a place like Teso, 10 million can be enough but if you consider the top of the mountains of the sun, the cost of a classroom cannot be the same as the cost of a classroom on flat ground. 

I think considerations should be made for different areas so that the costing of these classrooms is not uniform, like they did in SFG. In SFG, they said building specific classrooms costs this amount in every school, whether it is in Kawempe which has no land or Mbale in the mountains. This is the reason many of the primary schools which were constructed have collapsed. It is because the costs were more in some areas. 

What is this congestion? Congestion is a result of having one school in a very big place. Addressing this does not mean only adding classrooms. We should also take into consideration the distance children move in order to access that education. It would be better if more secondary schools were built in more localities. I think the policy of a secondary school in a sub-county should have been the first thing before going any further. As much as you address the problem of the schools in that area and the accommodation, you must also address the issue of the distance that these children move. Mark you, they move on empty stomachs and by the time they reach, they are already tired. So, even if you gave them the best classrooms, but they reach school when they are already tired, the output will be zero.

I have looked at the list of classrooms that are going to be built and I realised that there are some schools which will get zero. Where I come from, a school called Nambule S.S. will get zero because the number of children who will be in senior four in 2010 will be less. However, in order to build a library, one does not need to know the number. So, you can give them zero in classroom construction but give them a library so that they can share this. For some, you have increased classrooms, and for others they should get libraries. I think that would be a fair distribution. But where you say that you give classrooms as well as a library, what about the others? 

I also think that government should stop this tendency of saying that we should go to donors and get loans, like the ADB loans. We should also plan in our budget. We could, for example, say that the total number of schools we want to construct is X, so the donors do A and we do B. This business of saying that we are going to wait for another loan to construct other classrooms, I think a time shall come when they must stop us from getting the loan, and now, what shall happen to the construction of those schools? 

I think it is better that sectors like health and education should not be handled by donors. That should be the first call on our budget. If it is the first call, we are building capacity for our nation. I am not saying that we should not borrow. Let us borrow for other things but not things which are essential to our lives.
  
MR BAHATI: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving me the opportunity to give you information. It is friendly information. 

The last time we were debating to approve the ADB II loan, there were concerns raised by many members, especially about the old traditional schools which were not included on the list of those which were going to be renovated. Still on this list, schools like Kigezi High School, Nyakasura and Kabalega were not included. 

I just wanted to inform hon. Nandala-Mafabi, in line with what he is raising, that since then, we have been informed that government has earmarked, in the government budget, funds to renovate those old schools, and I want to appreciate the minister for that. I think this confirms that actually government is putting in money to repair our own schools using our own resources where we cannot use donor money. So, Government is in line with what you are saying. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, it is in line but it is not here as evidence. When did Government discover that Nyakasura, Masaba and Busoga College Mwiri - where we were - had been dilapidated? Nobody should tell you, you should see it for yourself. 

The problem we have in this country is lack of planning. If we had a plan and said that every five years we must rehabilitate schools, it should be a plan; why should we wait for 20 years when they are completely spoilt? If you do not rehabilitate, the cost of rehabilitation becomes more than the cost of construction. Let us have the words “maintenance” and “repairs” in Uganda. Short of that, even what we are putting up with borrowed money is going to need repairs and we are going to borrow more money tomorrow to do the repairs. I believe the best way is to borrow for development and not construction. 

Concerning procurement; I think procurement is a serious issue. But even if we said we go to the districts or central government to procure, there are problems. So, I do not know which formula to apply. Otherwise, training managers in procurement is like training people in accounting. If you go to Makerere University, you need three years to do B.Com. In same way, to train managers in procurement you need three years for them to understand it. When you go for ACCA and you are very dense, you may need about 10 years instead of a minimum of two years. There is a church-founded primary school in my area, for example; this church may select one of its best members to be on the board of management and she or he may not know how to even write his or her name. To teach such a person procurement would, I think, take some time. 

It is true there are examples of people who have been given money and done a good job. Maybe we should ask the bishops to do the procurement. I know there are those things that we can do ourselves, but on procurement, the Ministry of Education and Sports must think of the best formula. Otherwise, we might have a big problem in future.

Finally, to avoid more questions in future, we should come up with a plan detailing why the other areas may not be benefiting from a particular loan. There should be a plan saying that in 2015 or 2020, such a school will be repaired. I am asking for this plan because the schools in my area are not covered under this loan, yet the purpose for my being here is to talk for the people of that area and ask for their share. So, if we have a plan showing that there will be school building reconstruction in a given area in some year, my constituents can be told that in 2020, for example, repairs for schools in their area will be done. That is why we need that detailed plan. It would tell us what is going to be done in a particular place and when. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honestly, hon. Members, don’t you think we have sufficiently discussed this? What you must know is that soon we will be debating the President’s State of the Nation Address. I am sure issues on education will come up. I also know that as we deal with the Budget Speech, issues of schools will come up. So, don’t you think for purposes of this loan, we have sufficiently addressed the issues?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes!

THE SPEAKER: So, I think you should bear with me. (hon. members rose_) I will take note of you and I will give you an opportunity later. 

4.50
DR LULUME BAYIGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Mukono): I am sorry for insisting, but you had already selected me and my submission is short. 

THE SPEAKER: I think let us give him time to make his submission because he was here on time. I noted it. Make your contribution, but in less than five minutes.

DR LULUME BAYIGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On page 4 of this document, there are six project targets. We have dealt with the construction of classrooms, which is addressed by project target No.1. However, I would like to say that there are other targets, which to me are not being made clear enough. How will they be achieved? What will their budget share of the US$ 150million be? How is the monitoring going to be done? I know that the target of improving access to education has been given thorough treatment. However, my understanding is that improvement of access to education means reduction of the distances that children must walk to get to schools. I think the project can be redesigned to address that aspect.

The second one concerns the improvement of the quality of the lower secondary schools through the expansion of the capacity of at least one national teachers’ college. I would like to say that I have not seen this in both documents. As the Minister clarifies on the various targets that have been listed, I request he clarifies on this as well.

On target three - enhancing the enabling environment for post primary education - I would like to say that I do not know what this means. What does this mean? How are we going to address this? How is it going to be monitored? How is it going to be budgeted for? What is its share of this amount of money? 

Mr Speaker, before you put the question, I think the Minister for Education and Sports should be given time to respond to some of these concerns. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. 

4.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Mr Kamanda Bataringaya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank Members of Parliament for the support they have shown while contributing to this motion in respect of the loan. I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for having given my colleagues enough time to speak to this motion. Let me also take this opportunity to thank members of the Committee on National Economy for their good report.

Let me start with the issue that was raised by my colleague, hon. Odonga Otto, when he talked about the list of schools which benefited from ADB IV – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think hon. Odonga Otto had not got the document. He was provided with a list, which I think answered his concerns.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, it is true I have got the list, but for the record, allow me inform the House that I have seen five schools from my constituency being covered under this loan. I am very happy.

MR BATARINGAYA: Mr Speaker, the loan we are seeking is categorically for USE schools that are already in existence; we are not going to build new schools. That is why we are talking of 814 USE secondary schools to benefit by way of construction of new classrooms and completion of those that were left unfinished. 

Some members raised an issue to do with private schools. I would like to inform the House that private schools are going to benefit from a loan for scholastic materials, which will comprise 1,700,000 text books to all our USE schools, both government and private owned. These text books will be for Physics, Chemistry, Biology, Geography, Mathematics and English – the eight compulsory subjects.

On top of that, some of the Members raised the issue of laboratories without equipment. If they read our report properly, it is indicated that every laboratory we shall put in place will have laboratory equipment. So we shall be stocking all the laboratories that we are going to put up; with laboratory kits. 

Another thing that came up was the issue of teachers’ houses. For this we have only 71, but the criteria was to facilitate the hard to stay and hard to reach areas. These include Karamoja and Buvuma, but not all areas are hard to reach.

For the case of the libraries, we are introducing the double shift. We are going to put the libraries in the schools where we are encouraging double shifts.  Therefore, for my colleague from Gomba who said she does not have any library in her constituency, we are encouraging schools with the double shift; that is where we shall place our focus. 

I would like to end by thanking my colleagues once again for the support they have given me. The procurement is in line with the World Bank, and the supervisors will be the Ministry of Education, the department of engineering and I want to assure you that good work will be done. 

One Member asked which national teachers’ college is going to benefit. That is Kabale National Teachers’ College, which teaches sciences.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, the motion is for Parliament to authorise Government to borrow a sum of US $150 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group for financing the post primary and training programmes. I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON TOURISM TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON ECONOMIC PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENTS (EPAS)

4.59
MR JOHN BOSCO LUBYAYI (NRM, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I read the report, I wish to lay on the Table the agreement establishing the economic partnership agreement between the East African Community partner states on one part and European Community and its member states on the other. This agreement was initialled on 27 November 2007 and it was initialled for the Uganda Government by Hon. Eng. Nelson George Gagawala Wambuzi. I wish to lay it on the Table.

In accordance with rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Sessional Committee on tourism, Trade and Industry was mandated by Parliament during the Second Session of the Eighth Parliament to investigate the initialling of the Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs) by Uganda without due consideration of the different stake holders in the sector. 

The Southern and East Trade and Information Institute (SEATINI) on behalf of other civil society organisations also petitioned Parliament on the same matter during the same period. The committee considered Parliament’s request together with the petition of the (CSOs) and the findings of the committee are contained herein.

Mr Speaker, this is the methodology we used. During the second session, the committee met with the CSOs led by SEATINI and received the petition from them. 

The committee also received and discussed a written submission on the matter from the private sector foundation. 

The committee then proceeded to meet with the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry to receive his presentation on the subject. It is from these submissions that the committee drafted this report that was studied and approved by the current committee. 

The approval followed a workshop sponsored by AWEPA on 27th and 28th April 2009. At the workshop, the committee was briefed on the current state of policy in the EPA negotiations by the representatives from SEATINI and the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry.

The committee now wishes to present the report to this House for its consideration and adoption.

Background

The EPA (between the European Union EU and the various countries of the African Caribbean and Pacific – ACP Group) is a reciprocal WTO compatible trade arrangement that replaces the previous Lome and Cotonou non-reciprocal preferential trade arrangements extended by the European Union (EU) to the ACP countries. Under the Lome and Cotonou regimes, EU discriminated in favour of ACP exports (her imports from the ACP) by charging them zero or lower duties than similar imports from else where.

The ACP did not extend the same treatment to the EU. This arrangement which has been ruled to contravene WTO rules lasted up to the 31 December 2007. The EPAs, therefore, came into force on 1 January 2009 for those countries that initialled the framework agreements, or agreement. 

The trade chapter of the Cotonou agreements under which the EU extended non-reciprocal trade preferences to ACP countries expired on 31 December 2007. The Cotonou trading regime was not compatible with the international trade rules under the WTO because the EU discriminated other trading partners. 

International trade rules therefore allow countries to charge imports from selected countries; tariffs lower than what they charge others provided the two countries or trading blocks enter a free trade agreement or are in a customs union. 

Therefore, the only legal way that the East African Community partner states and other ACP states could have the preferential treatment on the EU market maintained was to negotiate a WTO compatible agreement. 

To guard against the legal challenges to the incompatibility, the EU sought a waiver from WTO members, which allowed the EU to derogate from her international trade commitments and to discriminate in favour of the ACP till 31 December 2007. 

The waiver was granted in 2001 and would be in effect till 31 December 2007, the same date as the expiry of the Cotonou trade regime. 

The expiry of the Cotonou preferential trade regime and the WTO waiver on 31 December 2007, coupled with the desire to consolidate the country’s main export market, were the main driving forces behind the EPAs negotiations.

The framework for an economic partnership agreement between the East African Community partner states on the one hand and the European Union and its member states on the other were initialled on 27 November 2007 by the following countries: The Republic of Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania, the Republic of Rwanda, the Republic of Kenya, the Republic of Burundi and the Head of Delegation from the European Commission in Uganda. The signing of the agreement is scheduled for the end of July 2009. 

These are presentations of all stakeholders regarding the EPAs. The Country Director of SEATINI made a presentation to the committee on behalf of all the 17 CSOs. The following civil society concerns were highlighted: - 

The market access offer as provided by the EPAs is questionable. It creates a commitment for us to open our markets to goods from Europe. Although we need some of the European products like medicine and others, we also need to build our industries. We risk killing our young industrial sector with the EPAs the same way the industries in Jinja were killed with liberalisation. 

The Asian tigers developed because they were producers, not because they were consumers. 

The deal only makes it slightly easier for the African, Caribbean and Pacific countries to export to Europe. In return, they require ACP countries to dramatically open their markets to imports from Europe. In addition, Europe is set to open up to other developing countries, which will make any gains temporary. 

Article 16(2) of the Economic partnership agreement on the most favoured nations’ treatment, implies that Uganda cannot have a better agreement with any other partner apart from the European Union. It is a restrictive article. 

Duty Free; Quota Free Market Access 

Uganda could have made use of the Everything-But-Arms (EBA) agreement with the European Union. This agreement is still in existence and provides for duty free and quota free market access. Although EBA has stringent rules of origin, the EPAs rules of origin are also bad.

Development

The EPAs are supposed to be a development tool but they have no development enshrined in them. The deal fails to support economic diversification away from low value agricultural production by restricting the choices of ACP governments to support the development of new industries.

Lack of Government Policies 

Uganda does not yet have government policies on some provisions in the EPAs. This will put us at a disadvantage in comparison with our partners in the EU, for example policies on competition, investment and fisheries.

The Signing Process 

The EU has been bulldozing the East African Community and her negotiators. There is need for space to examine these issues properly and their pros and cons with all the stakeholders. The civil society organisations were not involved prior to signing of the agreement.

Presentation from the Private Sector Foundation of Uganda 
The Private Sector Foundation of Uganda made a written submission to the committee. They noted that Uganda has to sort out her supply side constraints as a country. The ability to satisfactorily provide the quality and quantity of products expected by the European Union is paramount. Short of that, we will not be trading at all. 

The following issues were raised: 

Market Access Issues 

Transition period: Eastern and Southern Africa (ESA) has proposed to the EU that all taxes on goods from the European Union into Uganda will be taxed for 25 years from 2007 to 2033 to prevent European Union goods from out competing Uganda’s manufacturers and to enable Uganda’s private sector to anticipate the influx of the EU imports by building their capacity by 2033. 

The EU is yet to agree on the 25 years saying it is a very long period. However, if the rules between USA and Australia give the Australian private sector 17 years, 25 years between a least developing country and the European Union is not too long.

Sensitive Goods
Uganda has submitted a list of 2,135 goods that will be taxed over 25 percent because they are special to Uganda in many ways. For example, their production employs many Ugandans. However, the European Community says Uganda’s list is too long and Uganda has been asked to reduce it. Copies of this list are with the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry and a copy can be got from the private sector.

Uganda will try to reduce the list by removing education materials, drugs, pharmaceuticals and imports that are not currently imported in large quantities. It is important for each Ugandan producer to ensure that their future is protected and their products stay on this list to prevent out competition from Europe.

Trade Disruption

The European Union should grant a transitional period of at least one year to enable completion of the negotiations. Many Ugandan exporters may not compete if their goods attract import duty in the European Union. 

At the political level, a statement is now required to show that EPAs will not disrupt trade. The import duty on Uganda’s goods would make competing products from the developed world much cheaper and Ugandan exporters will lose out.

Quota free, duty free market access and the EBA: Uganda must preserve her preferential market access to the European Union, that is, the European Union must not tax any goods from Uganda and Uganda should be able to export any goods to the European Union. To date, Uganda cannot export sugar, bananas or beef because there are protocols governing trade in these goods, which protocols do not give Uganda a quota and, therefore, Uganda cannot export these three products to the EU. The European Union agrees that these quotas should be removed. However, major sugar exporters want the protocol maintained, denying Uganda the ability to export sugar.

The other concern, Mr Speaker, is rules of origin. Uganda has proposed very simple Rules of Origin while the European Union has proposed complex rules in a huge 82-page document. An agreement is yet to be reached. 

The private sector has sought technical advice from Uganda Revenue Authority on what the implications of the 83-page document are. This document is available in hard copy at PSFU. A two-phased approach has been proposed by ESA, to allow continued use of the existing rules while working on new rules for selected products like fish, textiles and agro processing, even after the EPAs come into force. Uganda recommends usage of “wholly obtained”, “change in tariff heading” and value addition up to a certain percentage. 

Mr Speaker, we have footnotes 1, 2 and 3, and they highlight rules of origin, “wholly obtained”, “change in tariff heading” to explain them further. 

Development Issues

Additional resources: Although the EU has given African Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) countries significant market access since 1975, trade between EU and ACP is decreasing. ACP exports to the EU fell by more than a half, from 8 percent in 1975 to 2.8 percent in 2000. It is therefore necessary that the European Union does a little more to prove that it is concerned about boosting trade between Uganda and the European Union. 

The 2000 agreement, called the Cotonou Agreement, had a Euro 13.5 billion European Development Fund covering the agreement’s first five years. Now the ESA countries want an additional fund to pay for the costs of opening up ESA borders to EU trade and to help ESA build its trade capacity by say, building and making power cheaper. Uganda is expected to lose over US $9 million every year because of not taxing goods from EU. Other countries will lose revenue as well. There is a table that is attached to show this. 

Development as a condition: The ESA negotiators declared in Khartoum in 2006 that if the European Union does not provide the additional development support required, ESA should not sign the EPAs. Given that the European Union may not offer additional development support, it is likely that ESA may not sign. This will disrupt trade as exporters who opt to continue without using the EBA will pay duty in the European Union.

Private Sector Development 

The Economic Partnership Agreements include Articles 92 and 93 which commit the European Union to provide support to the private sector in various fields such as infrastructure, among others. However, government is yet to show the private sector how this support, if the EU offers it, will trickle down to the private sector. 

The private sector should be able to access this fund to address its supply side constraints. The private sector should study Article 92 and 93 to ensure that they are comprehensive and prioritised. One key missing aspect is funding continued public-private dialogue. 

Another concern is the matrix. ESA has summarised all of its infrastructure and trade capacity requirements into one table. ESA proposes that the table is part of the agreement to commit the European Union to provide the required support. The European Union disagrees entirely. The private sector should take interest in the matrix to ensure it prioritises supply side needs. 

Mr Speaker, another concern is agriculture and fishers: elimination of EU subsidies and the double zero. Most likely, the EU will not remove subsidies given to its farmers. Recently, new French President, Nicolas Sarkozy said subsidies were a normal trade tool and no longer a taboo. 

The EU proposes to conditionally remove export subsidies on only those goods on which ESA eliminates import duties. These are mainly finished goods and agricultural products. This will put the Ugandan farmer in direct competition with the European Union farmer for the Ugandan consumer. This should not be acceptable according to the private sector. The European Union should remove subsidies unconditionally, and expect ESA to have strong measures to protect its producers from being out competed by European Union producers in the ESA domestic market. 

The Delayed Agreement 

Uganda’s main export to the European Union is agricultural. Given that it is now impossible to sign off all the six areas being negotiated, the negotiating forum has proposed to finish off development and market access as soon as possible. Agriculture and fisheries should be finished as well because fish and agriculture are Uganda’s major exports.   

Domination by Sea Fisheries 

At the negotiations, the exporters of sea fisheries tend to dominate negotiations as if Uganda does not export fish. There is need to give more attention to inland fisheries. For example, COMESA funded a study to guide the position on SPS issues for sea fisheries. The same should be done to inland fisheries. 

Services

No progress has been realised in trade in services. Service providers in Uganda are yet to be consulted on what the position should be. There is need for a national consultative symposium on trade in services. 


Mr Speaker and hon. Members, this is the presentation from the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry. The Minister of State for Trade briefed the committee as follows:

Initialling

The EPAs were signed by the East African Community as a regional block with the European Union. He informed the committee that he initialled the agreement on behalf of Uganda.  

Market Access

Regarding the market access offer and the offer of 64 percent liberalisation of products which are already zero rated, Uganda will be exposed to competition. Government is committed to protect her traders, however, some sensitive products like dairy and rice will not be protected. The liberalisation programme will start in 2010 because Rwanda and Burundi have just joined the EAC. The market will be opened up in 2015.  

Negotiating Process

This process is still on-going. It is prudent to conduct trade with an agreement instead of none at all. The process of meetings started in 2002. Cabinet met and made a resolution to initial the EPAs. 

Involvement of Stakeholders

The Minister further said that there was wide involvement of stakeholders to ensure that our policies are not infringed upon in the negotiations. The stakeholders included the following: CSOs, National Development Forum and the Trade Policy Forum.

The Most Favoured Nation Treatment

This means that we are benchmarking the EU as our best friend in the region. Preferential treatment is acceptable because if the EU signs a better agreement with another country, they will be obliged to do the same for us. 

Pending Issues

Discussions on rules of origin will continue till July 2009. Development will be renegotiated and will also focus on sanitary and phyto-sanitary measures. The agreement was initialled because of the desire to beat the market access deadline of December 31st 2007.

Supply Side Constraints

Uganda is going to get financial support from the European Union to alleviate our supply side constraints. 

Subsidies    

The European Union unlike the East African Community highly subsidises its farmers. However, this matter is being handled in the context of the World Trade Organisation. 

Observations 

Parliament was not briefed prior to the initialling of the agreement as had been promised by the ministry. Like the rest of the public, Members of Parliament only got to read about the initialling in the media after it had been done. 

The agreement may not favour Africa and Uganda if not well negotiated and implemented. Many of our infant industries are at risk of collapsing due to the provisions in the EPAs.

Uganda has to consult with a sufficient number of stakeholders. It was noted that our peasant farmers who are the majority are not catered for by the agreement.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, these are the recommendations from the Committee: 

The European Union should help the East African Community countries to build their capacity in the area of services. 

The European Union should also help East African Community countries to build their capacities for trade, that is, solve the causes of EAC countries’ non competitiveness in the global market. 

The East African Community must not lock itself in the EPAs with provisions that prohibit future development of our countries through value addition to our products. The EPAs, as it is, locks East Africa in the bracket of producing raw materials. 

The East African Community must not liberalise extensively under the EPAs because some areas like health are very sensitive to our population.

The EPAs should provide for a periodical review of the agreement. 

The negotiations of the EPAs should be given more time. The scheduled singing of July 2009 is too soon. Issues that are very important to the East African Community cannot be concluded within such a short time. For example, issues like agriculture and development are only referred to in broad and sometimes vague terms as opposed to issues concerning the European Union that are clearly spelled out in the agreement. This requires more time for negotiations.

Parliament should be enabled to monitor the different stages of trade negotiations.

The Executive arm of government should prepare a comprehensive response strategy that will enable Uganda to benefit from the EPAs.

The EPA negotiations should seek to help the East African Community achieve the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and any other development commitments that we have set.

The committee hereby presents this report for your consideration and urges the House to adopt it. Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much chairperson and the members of the committee for the report.

5.32
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Maj. Gen. Otafiire Kahinda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members, you have just received this report. It is imperative that we study the report and make intelligent input so that we can make a reply that is well thought out and well studied before we advice the House on the course to follow. 

However, I would also like to advise the House that sometimes some of these recommendations and observations we make are for academic purposes, which we must avoid. For instance if you say, “The agreement of this nature is to take care of our peasant farmers,” how do you take care of our peasant farmers other than having their products processed? We are not going to export potatoes; we are not going to export cassava. We can only export cassava starch and potatoes starch which are products out of industries. That is the best way we can take care of our farmers as far as these recommendations are concerned. Anything else is frivolous. 

I have also heard the chairperson refer to civil society organisations; we made consultations widely with civil society organisations that are relevant to -(Interjection)– I am making notes; I am not debating. And it is my right to reply, I do not know what procedure he wants (Laughter)

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I am sorry if I have upset Maj. Gen. Otafiire and my fellow ex-seminarian. (Laughter) The point I am trying to raise is that procedurally is it right for the honourable minister to begin pre-empting issues that should have been raised by the members in a general debate and he comes to respond to the issues at the end of the debate? Because as of now, I do not know whether we are procedurally moving the way it should have been. We need guidance.

THE SPEAKER: No, he is not part of the committee; he is not part of the people who petitioned but he has heard what the committee has found out and what it has recommended and I think as a stakeholder he is trying to present his part. I do not want to tell him what to deliver -(Laughter)- it does not prejudice you; you do not have to agree with him; you may disagree with him. I think he is just telling you his views so that when you start debating you know what he thinks and then you decide what you want. You should neither be pre-empted nor prejudiced. You should be bold enough to agree or disagree. (Laughter)  

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, we thank you for your guidance and also the request from the Minister that we should hold on until he presents a comprehensive response which will constitute some material for us to make a substantive debate. But in the Minister’s short remarks, which he has made, he has claimed that we do not export things like cassava and yet he knows the bulk of our coffee export is not instant. It is coffee that is basically raw. 95 percent of our tobacco is not processed in this country; it is exported in that form; cotton! So, really the Minister should cease fire for now -(Laughter)- and try to prepare his material so that we see what his opinion is and what the ministries position is before we can respond.

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was coming to that before this honourable gentleman in the Opposition interjected me. I was only guiding Members of Parliament as they are studying this report because this is not an ordinary debate; we have got many stakeholders, including the region and our trading partners. It needs a lot of diligence for us to be able to study a report of this nature and make our submission because we could lose out if we make the whole thing frivolous. 

So, I was only guiding Members as to what we should look at and help us to come out because it is in our interest that we should negotiate intelligently. And the House can best help us when we have given them these parameters for consideration, Mr Speaker -(Dr Epetait rose_)- Dr Epetait, you sit down. (Laughter)  

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are aware that the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry had promised to brief Parliament before initialling the agreement. And now the Minister is praying for more time for a comprehensive response from his side before the general debate ensues. 

We are also aware that the EPAs agreement is to be signed in July. May I now find out how soon we shall handle that debate because we do not want to be let down the way Parliament was earlier let down about the brief to it by the ministry? 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, before you come in, do you know the date when this is to be signed?

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, it is towards the end of July and it will be a process to be done over several days. So, it is not a point. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, can we say it is in the last week of July? We are asking you this to be able to know.

MR GAGAWALA: It will be in the last week of July, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Will the minister be in position to present his views next week?

MR OTAFIIRE: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, since we would like to do this thing on your behalf and do it properly, we are going to bring these answers for debate next week. We are going to study this thing and then bring it for debate. I was only guiding you so that when we come for the debate, we do not have to waste a lot of time on unnecessary issues but since you do not seem to appreciate my advice, I will sit down and hope that we shall –(Interjection)– aha! I have finished. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us commit ourselves that we shall receive what he is supposed to present to us by Thursday next week and immediately we shall set a date so that we scrutinise it over the weekend and then the following Monday or Tuesday, we will start dealing with this as a matter of urgency. I think this will be a solution. So I think then we should not debate it now. Let us go and read the committee’s report and get the minister’s response and meaningfully attack the issue. This then means we have come to the end of today’s business –

5.42 
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to request that the Minister in charge of East African Affairs to also provide us with adequate material that will help us understand the issues because as of now, only the Ministry of Trade was able to present some materials on EPAS to the committee but the substantive ministry is the Ministry of East African Affairs. It is important that we get presentation from that ministry. So I request that that report be presented to Parliament. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, from what I see from the report of the committee, when initiating it, hon. Gagawala was doing it as a team of East Africa. So, it is up to the two of them to liaise with the Minister in charge of East African Affairs to get one comprehensive response to this matter because they are not working as Uganda alone, but as the East African Corporation. But it is good advice that they liaise with the Minister in Charge of East African Affairs. 

5.43 
MR CHARLES OLENY (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When you look at this report, it basically deals with the agreement in question and I feel that the House would benefit if copies of the agreement are also availed in due course so that by the time we come for debate, we are fully abreast with the details of the agreement.

THE SPEAKER: So, let us task the chairman of the committee to get us a copy. Oh well, it is here, we shall get copies for the Members. 

5.44
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. At the beginning of business today, you adjusted the Order Paper and item three was moved forward. Members have since got copies and I seek your indulgence whether to lay on Table this report since we will be discussing the State of the Nation Address, so that we marry the committee report with the State of the Nation Address. I seek your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I have not been here but I thought you had already set the date when we will have the formal debate on the State of the Nation Address. Isn’t that the case?

5.45
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It had been earlier agreed that we would start debate on the State of the Nation Address on Thursday, which is tomorrow, but that had not taken into account the seminar that we had yesterday involving the ICC. I think in the circumstances, you may have to guide us on whether we deal with the report first.

THE SPEAKER: I wouldn’t have a problem starting tomorrow. It is true we did not but if you had planned for tomorrow, we could start tomorrow but if you think you need more time, then that would be Tuesday. You should have also indicated your preference. 

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, you recall that we were supposed to have had a reply to the State of the Nation Address by Thursday last week but we lost Tuesday because that was when our brothers and sisters in the NRM went for NEC in Entebbe. 

Again yesterday, we lost a second day when we had the ICC workshop. But as far as we are concerned, we are ready. We even earlier on thought that we were going to be put on the Order Paper yesterday to have our response to the State of the Nation Address. If we can be allotted time tomorrow, we are ready. 

THE SPEAKER: Has the motion that we use to debate been sent to the Clerk or prepared?

MR MIGEREKO: It has already been sent to the Clerk. 

THE SPEAKER: Then if that is the case, what will happen is that they will list it for tomorrow and then you will start. 

MR MUKITALE: In that case, Mr Speaker, it is very important that the third quarter performance of the economy report is laid on the Table so that Members can go and internalise it because discussing it after the State of the Nation - 

THE SPEAKER: I see no harm; do it. 

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I want to thank you for giving us this opportunity. The Committee on National Economy would like to lay on the Table the report on the performance of the national economy for the third quarter of the fiscal year 2008/2009. 

I now lay on the Table a copy and I request Members to internalise it so that when looking at the State of the Nation Address, we can compare the two. Otherwise, it wouldn’t be very meaningful. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, with this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.49 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 2 July 2009 at 2.00 p.m.) 

