
Friday 6th July, 2001 

Parliament met at 10.36 a.m in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as already indicated on the Order Paper, this morning we are handling the Rules of Procedure of the 7th Parliament. You may already be aware that Article 94 of the Constitution provides as follows that: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may make rules to regulate its own procedure including the procedure of its Committees.” 

Indeed no business can be transacted in the House without clear rules to guide us. It is in this connection that I wish to commend that we adopt these rules in order for us to handle various businesses, some of which are in fulfilment of the constitutional provisions. I must stress that for you to be an effective legislator, it is pertinent that you familiarise yourself with these rules. 

At this juncture I wish to point out that these rules are by and large the Rules of Procedure used by the 6th Parliament. So, the task before us is to adopt our Rules of Procedure. The copies, which were given to you, indicate that they are Interim Rules of Procedure but we have rules for the 6th Parliament. Now what do we do?  That is the question. The next item is to adopt the Rules of Procedure. I do not know whether it is these interim rules or other rules.

DR.BUKENYA GILBERT(Busiro County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have gone through these Interim Rules and I see some anomalies somewhere that may need discussions. Since there is important business to be undertaken, can we, in the interim period, adopt the rules of the 6th Parliament until we have gone through these?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, Hon. Members that was my Communication from the Chair. There is a specific Item on the Order Paper that I would like the Clerk to read out.

CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF THE INTERIM RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

MR. OKUMU RINGA (Padyere County, Nebbi): Mr. Speaker, since this is my first time to address this House, allow me to congratulate you upon your assumption of the highest office of the Speaker of the 7th Parliament. I would also like to congratulate the Deputy Speaker.

I have gone through the Interim Rules of Procedure for the 7th Parliament and noted that there has been a great improvement from the old Rules of Procedure, which were used during the 6th Parliament. I seek guidance from you whether or not we could adopt the old Rules of Procedure and subject the interim rules to greater scrutiny because it has brought in many issues that could enhance the operations of the 7th Parliament. If this proposal could be seconded, Mr. Speaker, we could adopt the other rules.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is the Motion to adopt the Rules of Procedure used by the 6th Parliament seconded?

AN HON.MEMBER: Seconded.

THE SPEAKER: Could you justify your Motion please?

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Rules of Procedure of any Parliament are an important instrument of the operations of Parliament. As a matter of fact, in the last five years, some of us who have been consistently attending proceedings of Parliament noted that if the Rules of Procedures are not properly drafted and internalised, a lot of time is wasted in irrelevancies and non issues and very little business is achieved. This being the case, and knowing very well that the 7th Parliament has a lot of legislative work to do, it will only be prudent that this august House considers this proposal so as to give more thought and input to the interim Rules of Procedure and hence the 7th Parliament will be able to take into account all issues that could be raised. And since this is not the time to debate it, these issues should be raised when the interim rules are properly scrutinised. 

With these brief remarks, I commend this proposal to the House so that we may expeditiously proceed on other matters. I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

MR.OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Mr. Speaker, since it is also my first time to be given opportunity to contribute to this House, may I send my very warm greetings to you on behalf of myself and the people of Otuke. I am confident that you are able to guide us and ensure that Parliament function, as it is required by the Constitution and wishes of the people.  

When I entered the House you were already making your remarks but I wonder whether somebody introduced these rules to the hon. Members and explained the difference between the old Rules of the 6th Parliament and why there was need to improve upon them.  
For the benefit of those who were not with us in the 6th Parliament, the old rules of the 6th Parliament were inherited from the National Resistance Council rules, which had a longer history in the older Parliaments. In the course of the last five years, we noticed that there was need for improvement on the old rules so a committee was appointed, I think it was chaired by hon. Ben Wacha, with distinguished Members like hon. Ogalo.  In other words, there was a Rules Committee. It took more than one year to look at the old rules, the experience we had gone through in the 6th Parliament and how best we could improve on our procedure.  

If you may recall, we even tried to pass these rules before we ended the 6th Parliament. We sat here and from that seat there, hon. Ben Wacha took us rule by rule and we substantially went through them, compared it to what we wanted. Unfortunately, bulky as it is, we did not complete it. 

I am happy that these old rules actually come from the experience we had in the last five years. Hon. Okumu Ringa and my colleagues think that we should subject this back. I am only cautioning the House that if we start with the old rules and we try to go through this one, we may actually be doing reverse work. My view is that these interim rules which we are trying to have in the 7th Parliament are the best which we improved on. The best we could do would be to adopt them since they are interim rule based on our old experience. And still, because the Constitution gives us the power to make our own procedure, this Parliament can change these rules at any stage in the course of our life here. 

Personally, looking at the old rules and these ones which to me are a very good improvement, I would rather urge this Parliament that we start with our old rules as it is and we continue. If there is any change in the middle, we can always change it. I urge other Members to do the same. Thank you very much.

CAPT.MUKULA MICHAEL (Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Mr. Speaker, may I also, on behalf of the people of Soroti Municipality, take this opportunity to congratulate you and your Deputy on this great constitutional assignment that the 7th Parliament has given you. May I also congratulate all the Members of Parliament of the 7th Parliament upon their election to serve the people of Uganda.  

I stand up to support the Motion moved by hon. Okumu Ringa that the old Rules of Procedure be adopted for purposes of enabling Parliament to conduct business until such a time that the 7th Parliament has been able to acclimatise and internalise the new procedures. The new Rules of Procedure, to both the 168 new Members of Parliament and the old Members of Parliament, need time to be studied. 

The best way would be to adopt the old Rules of Procedure and the appropriate Committee of Parliament, that is, the Rules Committee, would then introduce the new rules to the 7th Parliament and debate would then ensue.

Once the appropriate Committee has fully internalised and studied the new Rules of Procedure, and if there are any amendments that may arise from the Committee, the new Rules of Procedure would then be presented to the 7th Parliament. 

It is also important that the 7th Parliament, which has got new Members of Parliament, goes through an appropriate induction course so that the new Members of Parliament can internalise the procedural arrangement of Parliament. It would be unfortunate for Members of Parliament to learn through the process. We may give the appropriate legislative motions, inadequate insertions because we may have failed to internalise certain effective means which are encased or which we may not have fully understood in the new Rules of Procedure.  I pray that hon. Members of Parliament adopt the Motion to enable us conduct the business of Parliament. 

There is another issue that Members may not have understood. In the new Rules of Procedure, it is proposed that we consider a regional set-up in constituting the Appointments Committee. This set-up would imply that somebody from Kotido would now be able to represent somebody from say Busoga. The geo-political strategic interest that the individual region may want to insert or to know the individual Members of Parliament who have been elected may take time in the Appointments Committee.  So, the regional representation, which has now been encased in these new Rules of Procedure need to be studied properly before we can actually introduce them on the Floor of the House. Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

MR. MWANDHA JAMES (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I want to add my voice to those of the hon. Members who have congratulated you upon your election to the high office of Speaker. I also want to use the same opportunity to congratulate all my colleagues upon what they have gone through in order to come to this House. As a representative of disabled persons, I can now see that I am going to have many allies to fight for the rights of disabled persons. 

I would like to support the Motion by hon. Okumu Ringa.  I think it is important that we have an opportunity to look at these rules before we adopt them. Much as my colleague, hon. Omara Atubo, has said that we can change the rules any time, in the life of the last Parliament, we hardly made any substantive changes to those rules. Which means that once these rules are in place, we are going to be committed to rules we never had an opportunity to read, internalise and understand. However, I must pay tribute to the Office of the Clerk. The new Interim Rules are a great improvement on the rules we had in the 6th Parliament. I think this was as a result of the work of the Clerk and his staff, and for that, I thank them. 

In these new Rules, there are those we need to understand. As you know we had problems with the censure of ministers, now there is procedure laid out for censuring ministers.  We need to understand this procedure and if need be, refine it so that in future we do not have a problem.  There is also a new rule regarding the recall of Members, this is a matter that is so sensitive to all of us.  We are subject to recall because the Constitution provides that the electorate can actually recall us. 

Now we are laying down the rules to be used in recalling us.  We must be very sure that the rules we are laying down for ourselves are going to be fair to everybody concerned.  There is no hurry in adopting the interim rules. In fact, what I was going to propose is that once we adopt the rules of the 6th Parliament, we should mandate the Committee on Rules to work very fast so that within 30 days, they bring a report here on the new rules. I would like to take the advantage of improving on the old rules, and in this way Members will have an opportunity to read these rules, even to go to the Committee on Rules to make proposals for improvements.  

Therefore, I think we should not hurry to take on these new rules, we should take our time, get a committee but we must mandate it so that it reports back within 30 days so that we can actually have the new improved rules.  
I wish to support.

MAJ. KAZOORA (Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you Mr. Speaker, I think we should be very fair to the hon. Members who are new to this House.  First of all, they do not have the rules of the 6th Parliament, and I find hon. Mukula’s argument really very contradictory because these new honourable Members must fully participate and know the rules themselves instead of imposing on them the rules that we were using in the past. 

Even when we consider hon. Mwandha’s argument, there are certain decisions we may take basing on the rules of the 6th Parliament and in just a few days we find that we took them wrongly and we may not reverse them. For instance, if you consider what hon. Mukula said about appointment, probably we would want to change the mode of the Appointments Committee.  Now if we use the rules of the 6th Parliament, we may find that we have really committed certain mistakes. 

I would strongly urge honourable Members that some of these things really are just the normal ones. If we went through quickly and we concentrated on the crucial issues, I think we would not take a lot of time.  I really propose and urge that this Parliament takes the lead in formulating its own rules. Thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR.WACHA (Oyam North, Apac): Mr. Speaker, I think it is only proper that I should congratulate you on your election and congratulate your Deputy too on having been elected Deputy Speaker. I have no doubt whatsoever that both of you will do commendable work in the Office of Speaker. 

Those of us who were here in the 6th Parliament know our Rules of Procedure and their fundamental weaknesses. The proposed new rules were done in order to try to cure a number of those weaknesses. I am surprised that even those who were here who participated in debating in this House in the 6th Parliament are now the champions for having us condone those weaknesses and even saddle the new Members of Parliament with the weaknesses of those rules.  

I would have hoped that this time we are spending here we could have gone through those areas that have been highlighted as having been introduced in the interim rules. Fortunately, they are few and they are clearly outlined by the Office of the Clerk however, I want to caution that if we are to go back to the old rules, chances are that we will never, ever try to remove the mistakes, which are already there. I know because I tried in this very Chamber to have the old rules perfected and I failed.  I would have wanted you, Mr. Speaker, to give us some time to look through the areas that have been highlighted by the Clerk so that we can see whether there are fundamental differences from what we have been using before. I thank you Mr. Speaker.

BRIG.MUHWEZI (Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate you and your Deputy upon your election to that important Office, and I would like to take the opportunity also to congratulate my colleagues for succeeding in the parliamentary Elections.  

I was a Member of the Rules Committee in the 6th Parliament and I know the problems that our old rules had. I would like to thank our Chairman then, Ben Wacha for the efforts he put in to make this draft of the Interim Rules of Procedure.

I would like to be fair to the Members who have just joined Parliament.  I am sure if they were to speak for themselves, they have not had sufficient time to read this large draft.  They have been busy with the swearing in and with other orientation issues in Parliament. I think it would be fair if they had more time to read this draft. I propose that they be also given the Rules of Procedure of the 6th Parliament to read together with these Interim Rules so that when we are debating they do so from an informed position. We are lucky that both of you, Mr. Speaker and your Deputy, have been in the 6th Parliament and are conversant with our old Rules of Procedure. I think you will govern this House very well using the old rules as we study the new Rules of Procedure and compare them with the old ones.  

The Rules of Procedure of the 6th Parliament had strong points but also weaknesses. I think this 7th Parliament should borrow the strengths of the old Rules of Procedure and avoid the weaknesses. So, my proposal is that we support the Motion moved by hon. Okumu-Ringa to adopt the old Rules of Procedure, study the new rules and we have the old Rules of Procedure circulated to members and we also form a Committee. We should put in place a Committee to do the detailed work on behalf of this House and report to us so that we discuss when all the members are well informed about the old procedure and the new one.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. 

THE SPEAKER: I think to be fair, let us balance this debate by inviting some new members.  

MR.LWANGA MUTEKANGA (Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you Mr. speaker. Congratulations to you and your Deputy. The clarification I am seeking is, when I read this handout, second paragraph, you say: “At this juncture, I wish to point out that these Interim Rules are by and large the Rules of Procedure used by the 6th Parliament save for the following amendments or additions.” To me, that means that much of the rules used by the 6th Parliament are included in the Interim Rules save for the amendments. Will you please clarify whether my understanding is right, and if it is right what is the difference?  

THE SPEAKER: Your understanding is right. There are areas that require revisiting and these are the ones itemised in Roman numbers so that when Members go to study the Interim Rules, we stress the itemised areas for them to study and make an input when we come to debate. But by and large, it is the content of what you have in the Rules of Procedure of the 6th Parliament.

MR. KUTESA SAM (Mawogola County, Sembabule): Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification from you whether it is normal conduct of parliamentary business to amend what you do not have. We have amendments, not rules. These are draft amendments. We do not have what we are amending. Normally, when you want to amend a Bill, you bring the Bill and we amend it. I do not understand how we can proceed to amend what we do not have.  

Secondly, as you probably know, these Interim rules failed to pass in the 6th Parliament. It is not that there was no attempt to pass them. If the 6th Parliament could not pass them, how much less capable is a new Parliament that has not even read the original ones? Is it not fair that actually we give Members both copies and then form a committee that involves new Members? There are many people who can study these rules and pass on vital information so that we all make a contribution to the new rules and have a result that we can all adhere to and accept. Mr. Speaker, I seek that clarification from you because it seems to me to be the way forward. 

Let us have the old rules and these ones, which purports to amend the other ones. Let us put up a committee involving new and old Members so that we all adopt a document to which we shall all subscribe. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the position is that the 6th Parliament had these rules. The term of the 6th Parliament has come to an end and now we have the 7th Parliament. It has to have its rules. Somebody drafted these rules; it is not amendment. He must have borrowed from the Rules of the 6th Parliament and he is saying it is being proposed that these rules become rules of this Parliament but hon. Okumu Ringa has said that using the interim rules which we have not studied and which are making changes in those he knew, why do we not adopt the rules of the 6th Parliament while we take time to study and effect such amendments that we think necessary? I think that is what is being proposed. We cannot say we have rules, which we are amending. 
This is a different Parliament and the other was a different Parliament but we are saying let us adopt the other rules because the Parliament approved certain rules. Let us use those rules for the time being. Meanwhile, we should set up a committee to study and report within a given period of time. After that we shall then adopt it having had sufficient time to study it. I think that is what is being proposed.  

MR. MUSUMBA ISAAC (Buzaya County, Kamuli): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the question be put under the rules of this House – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, I think many members want to make contributions, and I had given the Floor to Prof. Kamuntu. I am going to balance the debate by Gender.   Let us proceed with the debate for the time being.  

PROF.KAMUNTU EPHRAIM (Sheema County, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to congratulate you for accepting the responsibility as the Speaker for the 7th Parliament. I want to congratulate you and your Deputy for assuming this heavy responsibility of guiding the House and wishing you success in enabling us to achieve our mission. 

I am a Member of the 7th Parliament but I was not a Member of the 6th Parliament. So I ask for your indulgence if I say something different from the experienced Members. We shall learn from those who were here before. 

I do not have a copy of the old rules I am therefore disadvantaged. I cannot debate whether they were effective or not. I have had an opportunity to look at the interim rules and the feeling I have is that it would have been of tremendous benefit if the author had led us through the rules as a Motion or a point of debate. He should also have pointed out where the amendments are necessary and where they are not necessary.  

I have listened to the Members who have contributed everyone says that this is an improvement of the previous ones. Therefore, as a new Member, I would like to start on the improved version rather than going back into the old one. 
I would believe that these rules are not curved out of stone. We would amend them as we get along.  

I would also think it is quite appropriate for a new Parliament with new Members to have gone through some orientation in order to make our work more effective.  Once we go through the orientation, we do not need to repeat mistakes, which take time in the House. 

In the same voice of efficiency and saving time, I notice everybody will be congratulating you I believe, and I also congratulate Members for being successful in the Parliamentary elections.  If we have 292 members and everyone congratulating you, you will see the messages you are going to receive.  Maybe if we appointed somebody to congratulate you on our behalf, then everybody would start on the point without having to repeat this point. 

Mr. Speaker, it is true we are new Members, it is true these interim rules were distributed to us when we came in for swearing-in therefore I believe most Members have had a chance to read through and we have something to start on.  I would therefore support the idea that we adopt these rules on the understanding that – (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member the Motion before the House is that we adopt the rules of the 6th Parliament.  So either you support the Motion or you oppose the Motion.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for your guidance.  I am opposing the Motion and as a new Member, I would prefer to use what I have than to go back to something that I do not have.  Thank you very much.

MS. NANKABIRWA (Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. Mr speaker, I stand to oppose hon. Okumu Ringa’s Motion.  Some Members were yearning for the opportunity to read through the Interim Rules of Procedure which was circulated three days ago, forgetting that what they are talking about are the Rules of Procedure of the 6th Parliament. Most of the Members have not even seen them.  At least we have kept these books for three days and I assume that Members have read them.  They were not given to us for putting in our study rooms. 

I want to thank hon. Ben Wacha’s committee that drafted the Interim Rules of Procedure.  This morning we have received the amendments.   I thought this was good ‘entandikwa’, this is a good beginning.  Why should we ask for more time to go and consider the rules of the 6th Parliament, which were enacted by a certain committee like these interim rules?  It was not the committee that sat here, all the Members of the 6th Parliament sat here and enacted the rules - (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Information on this from the Chair is that a committee studied the rules and a report was made to the House and the House adopted the rules.  I think what is being stated here is that since the Parliament approved the rules and worked with these rules for five years, why do we not use them for the time being without prejudice to adopting these rules?  They are not saying that the rules of the 6th Parliament will become rules of this Parliament but that for the time being, let us use them to carry out certain functions. That is the idea! But proceed hon. Member for Kiboga.

MS. NANKABIRWA: Mr. Speaker, I think it is more dangerous to pass something that Members do not have.  Therefore, I strongly oppose hon. Okumu Ringa and I beg the Members to read through the circular that was given to us when we entered here, the Interim Rules of Procedure.  Are there amendments? We are going to begin debating the budget but the Rules of Procedure of the 6th Parliament did not have any provision for the budget committee.   Hon. Ben Wacha’s committee and some other amendments have pointed this out.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE (Army Representative): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I congratulate all those who God has given the opportunity to be here and you Mr. Speaker and your Deputy.  I also want to thank God that he has guided us through this morning without rules and we are proceeding properly. 

The clarification I am seeking is, under what rules are we operating now? That comes from the point that we need to have something that is guiding us now.  I want a clarification, what Rules are we using now?

THE SPEAKER: For the time being, the Speaker is in the Chair and he is guiding the proceedings of this House but we do not want the Speaker to continue doing this. That is why we want some Rules that Members will know in future.  So this is a day’s affair.   After these proceedings, one way or the other we shall find the way out.

MR.AWORI (Samia- Bugwe North, Busia): Now that I have been called to order, Mr. Speaker, I also take this opportunity to congratulate you on your election yesterday. I also see this opportunity to congratulate my colleagues who survived and became Members of the ‘survivors caucus’ including your self. Of course I do congratulate my colleagues who have newly arrived in this House.  

On that point Mr. Speaker, the decorum of the House and how we conduct business, I have noted with concern that some of my colleagues who have newly arrived in this House even cross the Floor without –(Interjection)- I said “decorum” not “quorum.”  That is why we come here clad in this kind of outfits, and we came here quietly. I would have assumed that probably the Clerk of the House would conduct a small seminar to assist some of our new colleagues on how we handle some of the matters.  However the main point I am seeking clarification on is the procedure. 

One, I do not know the author of this document which we are now partly debating. I do not know whether it came from the House, from the Clerk, or from the Speaker’s House. This document outlining the revisions or amendments of the law –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, this document was prepared before the Parliament started its functions. The first function of the Parliament is to elect a Speaker and a Deputy Speaker.  So, there was no Committee but there were officers of Parliament. This is a proposal that has been drafted by officers of Parliament and it is being brought to you for approval or disapproval. We should not quarrel about who the author is. It is really the contents of the document that should matter. I think I have disposed of your procedural question.
MS. NANKABIRWA: Mr. Speaker, I beg to conclude by reminding Members, especially those Members who were part of the Sixth Parliament, that even the Rules of Procedure of the Sixth Parliament were first drafted by officers in the Clerk’s office. Somebody initiated the draft that we worked on. I thought that I should remind Members about that. Therefore, what is important is the contents in these rules but not who started the rules or where they were drafted. Let us sit down and disagree or agree on the amendments and then we move on. I beg to oppose the Motion strongly.

MS. ALASO ALICE (Woman Representative, Soroti): Mr. Speaker, I stand to oppose hon. Okumu-Ringa’s Motion on the issue of subscribing to the old Rules of Procedure. One thing I find difficult as a new Member is to subscribe to something I have not seen and I have not heard. I would still buy the idea of the Interim Rules of Procedure.  After all, the perception I get at this particular moment is that even if we have to take the old rules of the Sixth Parliament, we will take them as interim. To me, the interim rules of the Sixth Parliament are like the interim rules of the Seventh Parliament so we could as well work with the interim rules of the Seventh Parliament, which we have been looking through for the last three days.  

I also want to say that I would really appreciate it if we went together as we look at the reasons as to why there was need for some improvement. If the Rules of Procedure of the Sixth Parliament necessitated an improvement, why do we go back to that old stage? Does it mean that it was a worthless effort to make some input, at that time, to try to improve them so that when we reach this point we still want to go back to the unimproved version? That is my submission.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, don’t you think we have really exhausted the debate on the Motion?  

CAPT.BABU FRANCIS (Central Division, Kampala): Congratulations, Mr. Speaker and your Deputy Speaker. I welcome all the hon. Members. Welcome from the race.  

First and foremost, let me thank the people who prepared this working document, The Interim Rules of Procedure, because it is a working document.  Secondly, precedents are set, conventions are set, and we are here because of tradition. 

If you look carefully at the paper that has been given to us, there are some very salient points there, and these can be extremely dangerous if you do not look at them carefully. I just want to give you an example from page two. Point ix on page two talks about recalling Members of Parliament. Now, this is a very important area that each one of you should understand clearly before you approve. The other point that I want to bring your attention to is the censure of a Vice President. That is an important area too. You must understand it clearly. Therefore, you need a little bit of time to internalise these two areas.  

I want to implore you, hon. Members, new and old, to consider this. The Seventh Parliament must be empowered, and the only way you can empower the Seventh Parliament is to approve your own rules after understanding them and internalising them. Therefore, all those who are arguing against the Motion moved by hon. Okumu-Ringa are not being fair. We have started business and time is against us, so all we are saying is that the old rules can hold for a week or so, whilst you delve into these other ones, understand them, internalise them and then be able to adopt them as your own rules. They will be home grown by you, Ladies and Gentlemen -(Interruption).

MR.DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Hon. Francis Babu has just informed this House that the only way to empower the House is for us to improve and work on our own Rules of Procedure after understanding them, but we have been having them for about three days. I would like to seek clarification from him as to how we shall empower the Seventh Parliament by allowing them to approve rules which they do not even have copies of. How will they perform?  Can I get clarification?

MR.MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to seek further clarification. Do I understand that in the course of this House approving or adopting these rules, they will do so rule by rule? And if so, do I understand that in the process, this House can decide to defer its decision on a particular rule or rule sub rule and refer it to a Committee? If so, is it not possible to have a situation where we go through these rules one by one and those that are problematic or those that need further rethinking are referred to a Committee that we would have approved under these rules?  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have a Motion on the Floor.  The Motion is the item you see on the Order Paper, that is to adopt the rules that were given to you. A Member moved that instead of doing that, for the time being let this House use the rules that were being used by the Sixth Parliament. That is the Motion now, and I am going to ask you to pronounce yourselves on this Motion that Members need to study these rules and see the possible impact but since we have to work, let us for the time being adopt the rules that we have been using. It could be for one week, it could be for two weeks, and then later on we adopt the other rules. I think that is what you are saying, hon. Member.

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Speaker, I brought this Motion on the Floor of this House, and I would like to give information with regard to the substance of this Motion. This Motion has precedence because when the Sixth Parliament was constituted, it used the interim rules of the NRC. The Rules of Procedure of the Sixth Parliament were adopted afterwards. It is against this background that I still insist that this Motion does subsist. I thank you.

CAPT.BABU: Mr. Speaker, that is why some of us are requesting very strongly that the Motion moved by hon. Okumu Ringa be accepted so that we can go through these rules one after the other, understand them and then approve them. Therefore, hon. Members, I implore you to approve the Motion moved.

MAJ.KAZOORA: Mr. Speaker, do the new Members know what to do before you put the question? They should be told how to vote.

THE SPEAKER: Normally, we use “aye” or “nay”. If you support the Motion you say “aye”, if you are against you say “nay”. The Speaker will decide what has been carried. But I do not know whether you want to use that method. I can ask you to put up your hands. I think it is fair that way. Do you appreciate it? (Interjections). So, you will say “aye” if you support Okumu Ringa’s Motion and “nay” if you are against it.
MR.LWANGA: Mr. Speaker, I had an amendment to that Motion. 

THE SPEAKER: No, I am going to put the question. Hon. Okumu Ringa’s Motion says that until we study these Rules of Procedure, let us adopt the Rules of Procedure of the Sixth Parliament for the time being. 

(Question put and agreed to).

THE SPEAKER: So, the position is that for time being we are going to use the Rules of Procedure that the Sixth Parliament used, but we shall do something about these Interim Rules of Procedure. We shall see what to do with them. 

With this we come to the end of today’s business, the House is adjourned until Monday at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 11.40 a.m and adjourned until Monday, 9th July 2001 at 10.00 a.m)




