Wednesday, 8 July 2009

Parliament met at 2.21 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting. I would like you to join me in welcoming students and teachers from Star Primary Day and Boarding School, Namasuba, Masajja. I am not sure which constituency that is but they are here to observe the proceedings of the House. You are welcome children and teachers. (Applause)

Secondly, I want to remind you that on the 14 July, we shall have the African Peer Review meeting country report for Uganda here at Parliament, the one which aborted yesterday. So, I really want you, hon. Members, especially the chairpersons and the vices of the standing and sessional committees, to be there at 10.00 O’clock. We shall ensure that by 1.00 O’clock you are free to come and continue with other work in the House. 

I will also, later, permit for a brief statement to be made by the Teso Parliamentary Group. That is the only alteration I shall have on the Order Paper. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FINANCE BILL, 2009

2.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, The Finance Bill, 2009 be read for the first time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, I would like also to lay on the Table the Certificate of Financial Implications thereto. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to the relevant committee. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE EXCISE TARIFF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

2.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2009 be read for the first time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, I would like also to lay on the Table the Certificate of Financial Implications thereto. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to the relevant committee for scrutiny and report back. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

2.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2009 be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, I also take this opportunity to lay on the Table the Certificate of Financial Implications. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to the relevant committee for scrutiny and report back. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

2.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2009 be read for the first time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, attached to the Bill is the Certificate of Financial Implications. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to the relevant committee for scrutiny and report back. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE STAMPS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

2.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, The Stamps (Amendment) Bill, 2009 be read for first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded.

MR OMACH: I also lay on the Table the Certificate of Financial Implications thereto. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to the relevant committee for scrutiny and report back. 

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. These Bills come from the Ministry of Finance and they are the same people issuing Certificates of Financial Implications. It is like the left hand doing the job of the right hand. How can we be certain that there is no conflict of interest in this? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you are going to make my work difficult. Last year I had said that since these are the normal Bills relating to the Budget, they do not need Certificates of Financial Implications but you are the ones who insisted that you want the certificates. Yesterday I asked the Government Chief Whip to present and you said, “No, there are no Certificates of Financial Implications.” So, let us decide, do we need certificates for these Bills relating to the Budget? I think we will have to take a decision on that because last year you said, “No,” and I am just complying with what you wanted. 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The rules are very clear. They are supposed to submit Bills with certificates. But regarding these Bills being presented, it is just a ritual. These are correcting Bills: The Finance Bill, Excise Duty, Value Addition, and the institution which is going to implement them is the Uganda Revenue Authority. Apart from fulfilling the obligation, the certificates do not have any value but they have to submit them because the rules say so. Unless we discriminate that certain Bills should have certificates and others should not. I have actually been thinking about this seriously because these papers do not have any meaning but they have to submit them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, for me I have complied with the requirements of the Budget Act. The Bills are all committed to the relevant committees.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE TAXES AND DUTIES (PROVISIONAL COLLECTION) ORDER, 2009

2.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to present and lay on the Table statutory instruments: the Taxes and Duties (Provisional Collection) Order, 2009. Thank you.

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (RATE OF TAX REVOCATION) ORDER, 2009

2.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Value Added Tax (Rate of Tax Revocation) Order, 2009. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, those papers will be sent to the relevant committees for scrutiny and they will report back. 

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, I thank the minister for laying these Bills and the presentation of papers. But out of courtesy, he should have also apologized for being away and even explained to us as Members of Parliament where they were yesterday such that we know exactly what actually transpired. There are also financial implications for them not appearing here yesterday on the taxpayers; much as he has laid the financial implications for the Bills but there is also that financial implication for being absent here. I think we need some explanation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Members of the Cabinet apologized to the Speaker but the Government Chief Whip also apologized on the Floor of the House and we moved on. 

2.32
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It appears my brother, hon. Mutumba, was not in the House yesterday -(Laughter)- and maybe he could have read in the papers this morning and was able to get the impression that we did not give a pertinent explanation. I gave an explanation here and indeed apologized on behalf of Cabinet over the fact that there were other pressing national duties that Cabinet was attending to and, therefore, ministers were not here.

STATEMENT BY THE TESO PARLIAMENTARY GROUP ON THE FAMINE SITUATION IN THE TESO REGION

2.33
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi):  Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. I am standing on the Floor of the House this afternoon to present a statement to the Parliament of Uganda on behalf of my colleagues, Members of the Teso Parliamentary Group on the famine situation in the Teso region. 

The famine situation that I would like to highlight today is worsening in our region. A few months have passed now since the crisis of lack of food arising from harsh weather conditions in the North and northeast of Uganda with crop failure in the last two years were brought to the attention of this august House and accordingly to the attention of  government. It is very sad to note that this situation has ever since reached unprecedented levels with over 40 households in Amuria District, for example, with nothing to eat resulting into cases of death including the following: Atwanya of Achanya in Achowa sub-county, a one Ariokot Kevina of Atida village in Matheniko in Kapelebyong sub-county, one child aged below 10 years called Apidi from Achowa who died from eating poisonous white fruits because of nothing else to eat. 

It is a common sight in Teso today, to see people who because of their reliance on wild leaves, fruits and ants for food have been reduced to skeleton structures. And this is evident from the newspaper reports that all of us have seen. Cases of malnutrition among children below the age of three years are evident in all health facilities in the region as breast feeding mothers have nothing to eat to produce milk.

So far interventions by the government department in charge of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees remain wanting. Our continued appeal to government for immediate and adequate relief supplies has yielded very little making us become increasingly desperate and worried about the fate of our people. 

Arising from the above, we Members of the Teso Parliamentary Group sitting in Parliament Lounge on the 6 July 2009 decided to take the following deliberate actions: 
1.	Desperately appeal to the Government of Uganda to rescue the starving people of Teso.

2.	Take leave of parliamentary activities for at least one week beginning Monday, 13 July 2009 to enable us identify with the suffering people of Teso; share experiences with them and make further on the spot assessment of the situation.

We wish to make an appeal, and this is an earnest appeal to all people and organisations of good will including you, our colleagues, Members of Parliament to extend any form of support to the starving people of Teso. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, yesterday I had directed the Minister of Disaster Preparedness to meet the Teso Parliamentary Group this morning in order to deal with the situation but it appears that the outcome is not very satisfactory. So, I would like to ask the Chairperson of the Committee of Agriculture to appoint four Members of that committee to accompany the Teso Parliamentary Group to verify the situation on the ground and report back next week because we have done everything that we can. 

2.38
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri):  Madam Speaker, before the honourable minister comes to the Floor, I remember standing on the Floor of this House in the month of May this year and drawing the attention of government to the looming starvation situation in West Nile. And that time I said that people were surviving on mangoes and that the mangoes period was running out. 

If you read The Monitor newspaper of today, the highest incidences of death of people as a result of famine is in West Nile. The record is there; the statistics are there and even on Monday I was approached by my colleagues from NRM after they had come out of their caucus meeting because I think it constituted part of their discussion and they were asking me for particulars of the people who had lost their lives in West Nile as a result of starvation. 

Now that at this particular time that our brothers and sisters from the Teso sub-region have once again drawn the attention of government, wont it be proper that the minister comes up with a holistic address of the situation rather than us agreeing on four people going to Teso sub-region, then again tomorrow another four to Acholi sub-region, then another four to West Nile sub-region. Isn’t it proper that the minister who is here in this House comes out with a holistic package as to how to address this problem because it is not only unique to Teso? 

I sympathise with my in-laws from Teso but at the same time they also sympathise with me because their nephews and nieces are up there in West Nile. Can the minister come up with something tangible because people are dying? Up to what degree are we going to see the seriousness? Is it going to be when we Members of Parliament begin dying that we shall see that there is starvation in this country?

The situation is extremely bad. Even the honourable minister was in my constituency last month on the 17th and he saw how dry the weather is. People are so weak and desperate. Instead of coming up to talk, can we ascertain that probably over the weekend there will be a contingent of trucks taking food to the people? People are desperate; they do not need words but immediate intervention, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yesterday when I asked the minister to meet the Members, I did not say only those from Teso Parliamentary Group. The instruction I gave yesterday included all Members in the famine-stricken areas. But today it is the Teso Parliamentary Group that came to me to say that they have been in a meeting and they were not satisfied. The others have not come. But maybe the minister can tell us what transpired in the meeting.  

2.41
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER, RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yes we had a meeting this morning. It was late by nearly an hour and it was attended by Members of Parliament from Teso, Lango and Acholi sub-regions. We exchanged views on the situation and when the hon. Member says that he did not agree or that he wasn’t satisfied, I cannot blame him because there are areas which we couldn’t agree on. 

First, we get information from the districts and the Office of the Prime Minister is represented. There is a disaster preparedness officer and a disaster preparedness committee which is shared by the CAO and which is also attended by the LCV chairperson and by the RDC. These receive information from the corners of the district and that information is relayed to us. In addition, we get information from Members of Parliament and indeed from citizens who get information on the ground and on the basis of that information, we organise interventions.

As for the interventions in the districts, we have areas that are far apart from one another. However, when the food is delivered, there is a problem of distributing it. So, one of the issues that came up was the distribution of that food when it arrives at the district. How can the centre and in particular my office be assured that the food has been distributed to where it is most needed?

Thirdly, are the quantities enough? I have said that according to the Members’ descriptions, obviously what we deliver cannot be enough. But part of the problem is distribution of food within the district, because even in the areas where there is a problem, it does not mean that the entire district is desperate. Now rather than have food available to the areas which are needy, there is a delay from my office to send food, in which case it sometimes arrives when the situation is worse than it should have been had an internal mechanism been in place for the distribution.

Lastly, we couldn’t agree on whether the government is serious or not. I tried to assure the honourable members that we are serious. In fact a point came up on whether I am human or not and I wondered whether I look half human. But we are all in this together and we pleaded that we may be emerging out of the situation in some areas since the rains have come. That is why in the Teso sub-region, planting materials have been a priority. Yesterday we pointed out to the Ministry of Agriculture that for the last month of June, Shs 910 million has been made available for the purchase of planting materials and another Shs 600 million is coming in this month so that when the rains come, at least there is some effort. 

Obviously Members were saying that people are too weak or too hungry to plant but at the same time there is no way you can address a tomorrow situation if you do not also invest in planting. So, Madam Speaker, if it is your decision that a team goes there to verify, that is okay as far as I am concerned. 

I want to inform the House as well that at 3.00 p.m. tomorrow, the World Food Programme, UNDP, UNOCA and my office will sit together - because they also have personnel in the districts - so that we look at it globally and I will be happy if there is new information to that effect. For example, hon. Akol indicated that we had not addressed the issue of Kumi and indeed it had not appeared on my list, and I appreciated her intervention. So, we are looking at all this information coming in and we will do all it takes to make sure that we reduce the death rate.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you hon. Minister for accepting to take my clarification. I want to thank them for those interventions as government but the clarification I seek is that for every intervention to be successful, be it in the short or long term, you must involve all the stakeholders including the intended beneficiaries. Farmers in this country have got different well know and legitimate associations and groupings. I do not know whether those interventions try to involve them especially in the identification of those needs both for short-term emergencies and for long-term solutions to the crisis. To what level are the farmers involved? Thank you.

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want the hon. Minister to clarify on the following: now that women and children are dying and food affects the woman mostly because she is the one who has to go and look for anything; whether berries or fruits and she is now admitted with her children. Some women are pregnant and there are those with children below five years and they are all dying. Can you tell us the intervention since it is now a matter of life and death? Women and children, including the men who are supposed to be looked after by those women are dying. I want you to tell us the emergency interventions you have since it is now like Cholera, Ebola, and Swine flu. 

I would not like to hear things like, “We are going to meet UNDP”. Don’t we have our own money as government for emergency to buy food today or tomorrow and we take it to the hospitals and villages where these women are dying and then we can have these meetings? Hon. Minister, I want to be clarified on those issues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not think we should have a debate on this matter. This is the fourth time in the last two weeks that this matter has come up. The minister has spoken so many times; he has talked about the plans but obviously Members are not satisfied. I have agreed that the Members of Teso Parliamentary Group can go home for one week and I have sent the Committee on Agriculture to assist them oversee the process and come back with a report. 

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, I welcome that proposal that a team from Parliament should also accompany these people in the field. But as a Member of the Budget Committee, I recall that Shs 10 billion was planned for procurement of food under the supplementary budget requirement but this was basically for Karamoja alone. I do not know whether the minister has something ready because we do not want these unnecessary protracted procedures.

Secondly, we had a very bad experience last year where government provided something which is not palatable as food relief. For instance, Epuri puri is basically meant for brewing but this was purchased and distributed as part of the food and this is not acceptable. I think it is good that we get the Parliament to intervene in time and make recommendations so that the minister can be able to act according to the interests of the people. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I welcome hon. Tumwebaze’s intervention and through him I would like information to go through all the associations of farmers in all the districts of the country and in particular those affected by this drought that they participate within the governments in the areas so that they also help us in addressing this situation.

Hon. Alisemera, leaders also have to take certain positions bearing in mind what panic they can create in a country. When she says mothers are dying, children are dying - it is true some people have died but let us not make the country panic as if every man, woman and child is dying.

On whether the Shs 10 billion was specifically for Karamoja, according to the debate in the committee, yes. But as somebody in the kitchen, there is no way I could not distribute the food to other areas when I am assured that World Food Programme is currently covering Karamoja. And I want to ask the Members who are going to the affected areas, as you see the situation please let me know there and then. My telephone number is available and I can give it to you again for the record – 0772507183. I am ready to pick it any time so that I can act on the information you gather on the spot. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The team will leave on the 13th and report after one week. Our Committee on Agriculture, you are now overseeing the situation. 

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS OF THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON THURSDAY THE 4TH JUNE 2009

(Debate continues)

2.53
MRS FLORENCE SEKABIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I find the President’s address comprehensive, addressing all concerns of Ugandans at present. My focus is mainly on the social problems and evils that we are faced with which he duly commented on. But I will also look at human development and I will also say something about agriculture and if time allows, I will say something about the roads. 

We are now faced with many social evils and the President was concerned about the loss of lives especially due to road accidents and the murder of children and adults which has increased during 2008/09. As you will note, it was encouraging that the President took note of the fact that those suspects who were caught in child sacrifice had been taken to courts of law. He proposed to Parliament to come up with some amendments in the Constitution and I want to call upon the ministers responsible to act promptly and provide the Bills and other relevant amendments that we need to handle.

But it is also important for us to note that of recent, many women have been murdered by their husbands and this is not only happening in societies which we may think have not had exposure. It is true that even among those that we expect to be most aware, these things have happened. Other women have died back home in Kayunga after being hit by their husbands when they are pregnant and many other things are happening in this country. I propose that a budget be put in place to help those who investigate especially the Police to ensure that these culprits are got hold of and the punishment should be evident that the public can know and that we can be able to reduce on manslaughter, murders, sacrifice and so on.

It is also important that we start thinking about the security cameras. In the developed world, there are security cameras which help them to get evidence. This country is getting modernised because this is part of the vision of the NRM Government which is now in charge. I would like us as Parliament and government to start planning for these cameras to help us as we try to overcome these social evils.

I would like to say something about human development. I thank my government for UPE and USE which have helped the poor and especially in the rural areas to access secondary and primary education. According to the President, the numbers have been increasing from time to time. We are also aware there are some dropouts but we have to work to fight that and help the children to stay in school and complete their education. 

However, I want to say something about these shifts especially in secondary education where there are two shifts in the morning and in the afternoon. It is important that government thinks about increasing the number of teachers in such schools because they get over worked; in the morning they handle many students just as in the afternoon.

The parents back home in Kayunga are concerned that the standard is going down; the teachers are few, they have to do a lot of work. So we should think about that. I trust that the minister in charge will handle this.

I would like to talk about agriculture. Earlier on, we have received bad news from the Teso Parliamentary Group. According to the President agriculture production has increased. He says it with data and this we appreciate. But you will note that due to climatic change, like we get floods, reduced rains sometimes and high temperatures, there is a lot of famine now.

It is high time the government invested in irrigation schemes, country wide, not these small projects here and there. We need an irrigation scheme in Kayunga; we are surrounded by water: Lake Kyoga, parts of River Nile, River Sezibwa and other districts as well.

When it is dry, do not be surprised when I come to you in this Parliament to say I need relief food in Galilaya when we border with Lake Kyoga and the Nile on the other side. Irrigation schemes are very important and it is high time we planned. 

I would like to finalise by talking about the roads. I appreciate his comments and the provisions and repairs that are going to be made. For us in Kayunga, there was time when all the trailers had to be diverted to go through Kayunga on their way to Mukono. 

Right now the road is very bad. It is in the programme but I want to request the minister to move fast, put aside some resources and really there should be accountability to this. And for the resources that are available, work should be done as fast as possible because we may not be aware that soon it will be El Nino and again all the roads will be washed away because they are already weak. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to add to what hon. Sekabira has said. I do not know when the Minister of Works will give us a second route to the East. It is becoming a nightmare to travel between Kampala and Busia; it takes the whole day because of the jam. I do not know when you will give us a second road. You will answer later, but it is extremely serious.

Hon. Members, while hon. Sekabira was contributing, there were some consultations and the Prime Minister wished to say something about the famine, just briefly.

3.01
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Members, I am sorry I came late. I was chairing Cabinet, but I had alerted Prof. Kabwegyere to answer the issues but I wish to point out that the Minister of Finance has released to us an additional Shs 10 billion and we are urging them to give us more money because the issues are very grave and we shall handle.

Let us work together; let us not quarrel. This is a national problem and we shall work together. I thank you. (Applause)

3.02
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to comment on the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President. I also thank the Leader of the Opposition for the response and hon. Najjemba for the motion.

I would like to begin by talking about the GDP. We have been told that the GDP is consistently around seven percent. This is not a mean achievement and anybody doubting it can check with those countries in America, Europe, Asia and even some here in Africa. You will find that from the perspective of GDP we are doing very well and so I congratulate government and Parliament.

However, wherever you go people are saying they are poor. The GDP is high but what is the problem? When I looked at this, I realised that the strength of our economy is based on industries, manufacturing, service sector basically and very little from the agriculture perspective. This brings me to thinking that it is high time we seriously looked at the per capita GDP, which will give us an answer as to why people are really talking about poverty. As of now, our per capita GDP is about US $440 and that to me, does not have a lot of purchasing power and that is why people are crying.

This service industry which contributes 51 percent of our GDP – telecommunications, hotels and banks are dominated by foreigners. Go to all banks, Kenyans are there, hotels, everywhere Kenyans. So I think it is high time in the short term that we seriously invested where most of our people are in agriculture so that we can improve on the per capita of our people so that their purchasing power becomes high.

On the aspect of transport, I thank government for the investment they have put in this sector. The Shs 1.1 trillion had never been heard of in this country and that is why even the Leader of the Opposition was saying the minister has never brought accountability here as if other ministries have brought anything here.

District Urban and Community (DUC) roads have been maintained; national roads are well maintained and above all we have set up the road fund which is going to assist us in improving this sector. However, with this road fund, I want the Minister of Finance to tell us today the percentage of the taxes on this fuel which go in this fund because the ministry is dodging and we want to know how much we shall get. We also want to know the sharing formula of this money in the road fund.

The Leader of Opposition on page 4 said, “This massive road works programme is not driven by prudent planning, rational investment for well spelt out goals”, and he goes on and on. I want to assure the Leader of the Opposition that the sector has been having joint transport sector reviews. In fact, we have just had the fifth where we have set and focused on specific measurable, achievable and time bound targets on the issues. So I just do not understand what the Leader of the Opposition was talking about. Maybe he did not know –(Mr Byanyima rose_)- Madam Speaker, I have very little time. 

Let me now briefly talk about rail and water transport. I am very happy to see that Government is planning to rehabilitate and reopen the railway lines which had been closed. I am also very happy to see that Government is going to start implementing the East African regional railway master plan whereby we shall be working as a region and making sure that things are done properly.

Let me also briefly talk about what the Leader of the Opposition talked about on page 1 of his speech. He said that some Members of the NRM viewed Members of the Opposition as enemies. I want to assure the Leader of the Opposition and our colleagues that we view them as our colleagues. They are our allies, and I am sure we are here for the same cause. I think it was unfair for the Leader of the Opposition to think that we view them as our enemies -(Member timed out_)

3.09
MS MARGARET NALUGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Mukono): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand to support the motion moved by hon. Najjemba that thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of government policy contained in the address on the state of the nation by His Excellency the President, made in June this year. I want to thank the President for a well thought out and comprehensive State of the Nation Address. 

I want to talk about the issue of roads. I must thank his Excellency the President for the effort and commitment to improve the road conditions in this country, especially when he mentioned that Mukono-Katosi and Mukono-Kayunga roads were going to be upgraded to tarmac status in the Financial Year 2009/2010. The people of Mukono were very happy to hear this. 

However, I do not know the fate of Kisoga-Nkokonjeru-Buikwe-Njeru road, that ring road. This is a presidential pledge that was made in 1996. We talk of heavy traffic on Mukono-Jinja Road, but that is one ring road that could help us divert traffic because from Njeru at Jinja after the dam, you can go through Bukaya, Nkokonjeru and Kisoga. We can even divert that traffic from Kisoga so that you go to Ntenjeru and branch off to Buule, which is not very far. From Buule you can connect by ferry to Ggaba or you can get to a bridge somewhere in Buule and connect to National Water and Sewerage Corporation in Ggaba. I think that can go a long way in helping us solve the problem of heavy traffic on Jinja-Kampala Road. 

Another alternative could be the road from Mukono, Wantoni-Kyetume at Namumira. There is also a diversion that can go through Kkolo in Mukono Town Council then through Namilyango in Goma and it comes out at Jokas at Nambole. I think that can also save us the traffic problem on Mukono- Kampala-Jinja Road.

Mukono District generally suffers very bad road conditions. Most of these roads have been severely damaged by the heavy trucks that carry lake sand from the shores of Lake Victoria. Mukono District happens to be just around Lake Victoria. The district has only one piece of road unit equipment, and at this point I would like the responsible minister to tell us, when he makes a response, what happened to the road unit equipment that the districts were supposed to get –(Interjections)- not yet! Mukono has not got because we have only one and it is the district that secured it.

I appreciate that Shs 1.1 trillion has been budgeted for the road sector. My only hope is that it will equitably trickle down to the community roads, which most of the rural poor women use when going to hospitals and markets, and even our children when going to school.

On the issue of education, I appreciate government’s effort to secure a loan of US $80 million from ADB and US $150 million from the World Bank for the schools construction programme. In Mukono, we are happy for those schools that benefited but there is a problem. Mukono District created a new sub-county out of Mpunge Parish. That parish is extraordinarily big and the population is also big; I think it has over 40,000 people. This sub-county has several primary schools but not a single seed secondary school. The nearest secondary school is in Kojja, and that is 17 kilometres away.

My request is that the Ministry of Education captures this. As much as the Ministry of Local Government has not yet come out clearly on the status of Mpunge Parish and whether it will be elevated to a sub-county, the need really stands -(Member timed out_)

3.15
MRS MARY OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also add my voice to thank the President for a very precise and concise State of the Nation Address. I will concentrate on three issues. 

One, I want to thank government for the work it is doing on the Kampala-Masaka-Mbarara Road. I am saying this because we find it almost impossible to move on that road and for some of us, our backs were almost gone.

This is also good for us because as you may be aware, a lot of food comes from that part of the country: matooke, milk, et cetera. Because of security, the huge Lorries move at night so during the day, we are able to move without traffic congestion.

I want to very briefly talk about the high-yielding crops that the President talked about as having been developed by NARO. New high-yielding pest and disease resistant varieties of rice, coffee, banana and cassava have been developed. If we can take this up, we would go a long way in having food security in this country. 

I am saying this because one of the reasons we have these problems is because our food security is not very stable. Actually, if we had national silos, for instance, instead of taking this Shs 10 billion to buy food – I know it is commendable, of course, to have this money – we would move faster.

Allow me to also commend the President for his fight against corruption. There has been this song mainly from the Opposition that there is no political will on the part of the President to fight corruption. I would like to say this is mere politicking –(Interjections)– absolutely!

I have more than ten thousand examples, but because I am now left with only two minutes, I will just give a few. It is the President who championed the enactment of laws relating to passing budgets for institutions that fight corruption. The IGG’s Office, for example, is his brainchild.

As commander of the armed forces, the President ordered the probe on ghost soldiers leading to the prosecution of former army commander, Gen. Kazini, the Chief of Staff, Lakara, Brig. Kashaka and the former ISO chief. I know my friends in the Opposition have been saying that people from the West are untouchable, but these are very high-ranking officials. 

The President also dropped three ministers from Cabinet, and that is on record. Just last mouth, he laid a trap for the arrest of the chairman of Ntungamo District Service Commission on allegations of soliciting bribes for public jobs. That case is still in court.

The chairperson of Kayunga, who is NRM, was booted out of office but the President never tried to protect him. Is this lack of political will to fight corruption?

My understanding is that the President has never halted any investigations into any corruption matter. You will recall that last year, the President halted NAADS and PRDP because of corruption. What does this show? Is that lack of political will to fight corruption? I think we need to define terms. 

It is the President who complained to the IGG about corruption in the GAVI fund in May 2005 and ordered an investigation. Nobody else did that. In Mukono, the President halted funds going to the district because there were allegations that the CAO had misappropriated money. To my knowledge, that CAO was sacked. Is that abetting corruption -(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, one of the reasons it was decided that the CAOs become officials of the central government was to keep track of those people who are managing district funds. That was another effort to control corruption.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Mary Okurut, are you done?

MS OKURUT: No, I had just given way for information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But how much time do you have? You are very generous.

MS SAUDA NAMAGWA: Madam Speaker, allow me to give further information. The truth is that actually, the President is trying his best. It is because of that that he agreed to the decision that was taken by Parliament to assign a Member of Parliament to the NAADS committee. It was intended for us to monitor those funds very well. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, each Member has only five minutes. If you donate your time, that is your problem.

MRS OKURUT: But Madam Speaker, information on this topic was very vital. There was no way I could say no. Next week I will beg to lay on the Table all the examples, which I have gathered through my research, so that we can put to an end this song of there being no political will to fight corruption in this country. I thank you.

3.22
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the voices of those who have supported the motion to thank the His Excellency for his very good State of the Nation Address. I have not carried my copy of the book which contains that speech, but I have a copy of the Hansard, so I do not expect people to disturb by asking me to refer to the pages. 

I am going to highlight just a few areas. One, I would like to thank the President for being frank and saying that the agricultural sector is not doing well. With the cries from Teso that people are dying of hunger, that statement was a frank one. I think we should applaud him for that.

I would also like to ask government to put in more money because this is a fundamental sector. In the Bunyoro region, where I come from, 97 percent of our people are still surviving on subsistence farming. So for this sector to do well, government must invest massively in agriculture. I know that the Ministry of Agriculture is doing well through the NAADS programme, but there is need to put in a lot of money as subsidies to attract subsistence farmers to commercial production.

Let me also make a comment on the oil refinery, which the President said is going to be constructed in Hoima. I would like to say that the people of Buyaga and Bunyoro region as a whole entirely agree with him and applaud him for that. They are only requesting that when construction of the refinery is complete, they should be allowed to take up the jobs. They are also requesting to have a substantial share of the processed oil. I think that is okay; it will uplift the peasant class in Bunyoro.

Allow me to also comment on the industrial sector. I would like to say that I agree with His Excellency that there is expansion of the industrial and services sector. However, I think what we also need to analyse are the people who are investing in this country; who are the people working in these industries? Yes, let them bring the money – I agree with that – but it is very important that the jobs be given to our people. 

One time I went to Kabira Country Club and while there, I got to know that a graduate with a Bachelors of Commerce was working as a bar attendant while a foreigner, who I guess does not have qualifications, was working as a cashier. I think we need to reverse this as we talk about expansion of the industrial and services sector.

As I wind up, I would like to report that the roads in the Bunyoro region were not given good treatment in the speech, particularly the road from Kyenjojo to Masindi via Kagadi and Hoima, which was said to be upgraded to tarmac. This road is currently in a very sorry state. I would like to ask the minister responsible to let the contractor move in very quickly to rescue our vehicles. 

I would like to also request that this promise be fulfilled. The people of Bunyoro would also like to move on tarmac roads –(Member timed out_)

3.27
MR EDWARD BALIDDAWA (NRM, Kigulu County North, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to join my colleagues who have spoken before me in congratulating the President for this State of the Nation Address. Indeed, he fulfilled his constitutional mandate.

My colleagues have talked about a number of priorities of government. I will limit my remarks to one priority that is key to economic growth in this country, and that is the ICT sector.

Government’s commitment to leverage ICT for economic growth was enshrined in the President’s manifesto of 2006. I must point out that the President has been very consistent with this priority as we see in the budgets of FY 2006/2007 and all the subsequent ones.

In his State of the Nation Address, the President did emphasise the need for national information technology infrastructure. It is true that whereas we are a landlocked country, we have got very many attributes, as ably outlined by hon. Nyombi while he contributed to this debate. However, I would like to point out that if we do not utilise ICT to leverage the opportunities that are available, I am afraid we shall only be lamenting and congratulating ourselves on how we are gifted by nature.

The celebrated countries of Asia have been able to achieve success because they invested in two major items – road infrastructure and information technology. These countries have utilised ICT to minimise leakages and unnecessary expenses. They have also been able to use ICT to deepen democracy and get jobs for their citizens.

With the completion of the national information technology backbone that is being laid in the country, I believe this country will move forward greatly. We shall be able to get jobs for our people through the outsourcing project that was started in the ministry. I only implore honourable members to join hands in taking advantage of the ICT opportunities that are available to acquaint ourselves with knowledge on using the internet and computers, to make us become good legislators. That way, we will be ale to take services to our people. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.31
MS MABEL BAKEINE (NRM, Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank His Excellency the President for the State of the Nation Address that he delivered. I further thank the Government for its commitment to fight corruption. In particular, I would like to thank government for tabling to Parliament the Anti-Corruption Bill, 2008 and the Whistleblowers’ Protection Bill, 2008.

However, I would like to say that I have been wondering whether government will have the guts to bring to book people who have been reported and confirmed to be engaged in corrupt practice. I mean those people who have robbed this country of trillions of shillings, which would have pushed this country to higher heights in development terms. I am saying this because all of you know that unjust enrichment does not only result into an obligation to restitution; it will also call for compensation.

Let me make a comment about agriculture. In the address, it was stated that we registered an improvement of 2.6 percent in the agriculture sector. However, they only used livestock as an indicator for performance of the agriculture sector, which could have led to inaccurate results. What has happened to crop farming? We are all aware that about 40 percent of our production is based on crop farming. What are the yields like? Are they increasing, constant or declining? What is government planning to do to address the declining yields? 

As my colleague form Buyaga said, the state of our roads in Kibaale District is very bad. I know Government has got very good programmes for rural roads, but in Kibaale both the central government and feeder roads are all in a bad sate. The farmer we are trying to help to get to good markets so that he gains from his efforts ends up normally with no benefit attributed to his efforts. 

I would like to know from the minister about the plans that the government has and when UNARY will start its work to relieve our people of this staggering transport problem. I know monies have been sent to our district like other districts, but in Kibaale we do not see our roads being worked on. Reports have been brought but nothing seems to happen. We are concerned. The people think that the government just does not care. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, join me in welcoming students and teachers of St Mauritius Mixed Boarding School in Methane. They are behind on this side. You are welcome.

3.35
MR ERASMUS MAGULUMAALI (Independent, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Dear Members of Parliament, I thank you very much for this opportunity to contribute to the national address by His Excellency. 

I have three points to make and one is on health. The President did very well on page 34 when he said, “I would like to encourage the honourable Members of Parliament and the public to visit these facilities and report any anomalies ….” I am reporting now that the whole of Rakai District does not have an ambulance. Yes, we are on record. Funding is poor. Actually, Rakai has the lowest funded hospital in Uganda. That is a very serious matter in a place where we know that the genesis of AIDS originated.

Let me take this opportunity to also thank the President who, on page 35, had this to say: “I further stated that the whole country was peaceful and will remain peaceful”. That resolve - maybe I will take time off and thank the gallant soldiers of the UPDF for having done the commendable job of bringing total peace to this country. I pray that God gives us power, energy and wisdom to have peace in the whole of Africa. Let us pray for our soldiers in Somalia to carry out their mission so that peace prevails in the rest of Africa.

I beg to take this opportunity to say a word of sympathy to my brothers and sisters in Karamoja and Teso. It is a very unfortunate situation. However, I would like to point out that the President was soft with some of his words; maybe we will have to do this. We all want ecologically sustainable development. Famine is looming, drought is here; it is in Teso now and tomorrow it is going to be in Kooki. What are we doing? We are treating the symptoms. We are running around collecting money or allocating Shs 10 billion here and there to treat the symptoms of famine. 

If we were to take a deliberate decision to say that every Member of Parliament should go to their constituency and come back and report here on the situation in the environment, then we would be able to take a decision at national level. Just take off one day and go back to your constituencies and supervise, work with the people to make sure they plant trees. There is no medicine for drought. We have deforested and degraded the environment. It is our fault, it is our poverty. However, there is one thing we must do - we must protect mother Earth and we must take deliberate action to protect mother Earth.

I beg to draw the attention of Members of Parliament to page 33 where the President talked about creating jobs. We endorsed UPE and USE but there are no jobs, and this is where the problem is. The President was deliberate when he said that we must promote small scale industries. (Member timed out_)

3.41
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to add my voice to those who have supported the motion and to lay emphasis on a specific area in the address by the President. I think there must have been a reason why the President, on page 39 and 40, ended with the fight against corruption.

After discussing all the good things that Government was doing, he ended on the note that while all the other wars have been defeated, one still remains. There is a song in our church, which talks about standing up and it says, “When duty calls or danger, be never wanting there.” I would like to sing that –(The hon. Member sang: “When duty call or danger, be never wanting there.”) (Applause)

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. First of all, I want to recognise the hon. Gen. Elly Tumwine who is dressed in UPC colours. (Laughter) Is it in order for an honourable member to turn the Parliament of Uganda into a choir seminar session when we are discussing very important issues of the State of the Nation Address? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as I indicated yesterday, this is the State of the Nation Address and Members can use any means possible to impress. (Applause and Laughter)

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that wise ruling. I would like to inform you that as an artist, I use every means possible to express myself. 

I will go straight to my presentation on corruption. The President said, on page 39 - and he said this on Labour Day as well: “The remaining war that must be fought relentlessly and won is that against corruption.” Towards the end on page 40, he said, “While government will do all that it can, the war against corruption must be fought by everybody.” It is the duty of every citizen of Uganda to join this war. I want to use this opportunity to say that the war has been declared. I am very happy to say that while peace prevails in every part, the peace against corruption is not yet at rest. We still have that threat against everything else that we want to do. 

Many people have doubts and are pessimistic and they say that this cannot be done. I stand here to assure you that my experience has shown that any war in which you involve the masses, have the right cause, organise those people for a common interest, will be won and we shall win it. (Applause)

Let me take this opportunity to thank those who answered the call when we declared the Parliamentary Volunteers Anti Corruption Campaign. One hundred and sixty-five (165) Members of Parliament have registered in this war. We are volunteers because we want to support any effort whether individually, organisationally, nationally that will help us fight corruption, starting from the highest organ, Parliament. 

If we as representatives of the people start from here where we discuss budgets, where we approve funds, where we have funds that enable us to go down to our constituencies and explain what goes on, I will say that this is the best place. We are best positioned to lead this war as commanders in every constituency. We should mobilise the population at the national level, regional level, district level, county level, sub-county level, parish, village up to cell level and establish voluntary coordination units. We have already established them and I will call upon everybody to join them. 

There are enough resources within us. Not having resources is in itself a resource because that is when we become more creative. Let it be recorded in this House that as this budget starts, anybody who is corrupt will face the wrath of the masses who are going to be better organised, better coordinated and better equipped to deal with whoever plans to be corrupt. I thank you.

3.48
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take cognisance of His Excellency the President having fulfilled his constitutional obligation of giving us information on the state of the nation through his State of the Nation Address. 

Since yesterday, I have heard a number of my colleagues stand up one after the other giving praises. Yes, it is good to give credit where it is due, but it is also right that you also touch the other dark side so that the whole debate becomes balanced. 

I am going to limit myself to three key issues in as far as His Excellency’s address is concerned. The first one is the issue of energy. Eight years ago, I was here as a fresher in this Parliament and one of the first things that I raised that time was the issue of unending darkness in West Nile. That time I did advice government to go and collect the electricity poles, which were laid along the road for the purpose of presidential and parliamentary campaigns. Thereafter, they went a step higher; they hoisted the poles and even laid wires on them. If those wires were within reach, the people of West Nile would be using them for hanging their clothes to dry. 

In the same vein, we were given the impression that WENRECO was alive and existing in West Nile. I am here and my colleagues from West Nile on both sides of the House are here too; that has been a raw deal in as far as West Nile is concerned. Up to now, West Nile is still in darkness but the day when His Excellency President Museveni visits Arua, ministers, politicians, company employees, will work day and night to ensure that there is electricity in Arua. They would want to give His Excellency the impression that there is electricity in Arua whereas there is none. Immediately he checks out of State House, darkness as usual resumes.

In this very Parliament, we as an institution that appropriates resources did support WENRECO. We guaranteed loans to WENRECO in order for it to obtain funds and be able to construct Nyagak power hydro station in the present new district of Zombo. We even went further to give an enabling hand to WENRECO - that company of the Indian – but what has happened? They have vanished. Right now, Nyagak hydro power station is an abandoned site. There is not even a single soul in it. 

I wonder whether we are waiting for 2011 to resume construction because elections would be around the corner. We, as government, have even failed to supply heavy duty oil for the thermal plant that runs and provides electricity in Arua. Surely, are we serious? 

When His Excellency in his State of the Nation Address, on page 25, is talking about extension of the grid, what kind of grid are we talking about? Is it wires that are lacking in West Nile? The wires are up there. What is lacking is a source of energy that the people can use. 

All this even goes further to contradict His Excellency the President when he talks about creation of jobs with cheap electricity. That may mean a lot to people of other parts of the country, but for those of us who come from West Nile, we are tired of being relegated as a labour reserve for the sugarcane estates of Kakira and Lugazi. Now is the time for us to demand our share. Surely, let us walk the talk so that we can be able to say, “Yes, we are part and parcel of this country.” But as of now, I say this with a lot of pain in my heart; West Nile does not feel it is part of this country, when it comes to issues of electrification.

The second issue that I want to address my mind to is that of agriculture. Madam Speaker, this year, around the Holy Week in the month of April, I had an opportunity to be in Israel for two weeks, and later on I was made to understand that my hon. Minister for Agriculture also went there and she has her own stories to tell -(Interjection)- Yes, she also went there, the way I went; she has stories to tell. 

When we are talking about irrigation, financial year in, financial year out, we always indicate in our policy statements the need to use our water harvesting methods to ensure that, we are able to tame nature and be able to produce food for ourselves. 

In the 70s, when I was a student, we used to hear about Mobuku Irrigation Scheme. What has happened to that? I thought that by now, 20 to 30 years thereafter, we should have now expanded and had many more Mobukus, but even that one only – the time when my Minister for Health, Dr Stephen Mallinga, used to be very active in the Army, is no longer there. So the point I am making is that when you go to a country like Israel right form the North down to the South, it is green. I was surprised to see tomatoes growing along the Dead Sea; a pure desert area. Yet here is a situation where we are unable to feed our people and yet we are gifted by nature. 

The Nile is flowing all the way from Busoga; finds its way to the North and into the Mediterranean Sea; but we cannot make use of it, to the extent of the Biblical saying that: “Even those who have little; the little that they have  will be removed from them and be added to those who have more.” 

At this rate, Madam Speaker, are we serious that agriculture accounts for 80 percent of the employment of our people? Are we sure we are putting our money where our mouth is? These are the challenges. 

As I said, the honourable minister responsible for the docket was there. I believe during this budget process, she will be able to give us clear guidelines as to how we can put into practice what she saw in Israel; she didn’t just go there for a tourist visit; she went there in her capacity as a minister, to learn lessons and come and share with us, and I will be very happy to see how we share and gain as a country from her experiences. 

The third issue -(Interjection)– don’t worry whether we went together or not; next time I will arrange that and it will be a different matter. (Laughter) The third issue is the issue of education; yes, year in, year out, we are churning out graduates at all levels. But when we talk about education, let us address our minds to the quality of education. Let us not be hoodwinked about the large enrolments in primary schools, in USE schools and in the university. What are we churning out? Are we churning out graduates who have the knowledge and skills; who can be able to turn that knowledge into making them fit in society?  

I now wish to turn to His Excellency’s concerns on page 31; thematic syllabus. I raised the issue of this thematic syllabus on the Floor of this House and I am very happy our senior minister and mother of the nation, the Minister for Education, is here. Thematic syllabus has been brought into this country to kill education and to marginalise other areas. We are talking about thematic syllabus or curriculum, where pupils from P1 up to P4 are to be instructed and taught in vernacular. 

And by the way, I only see this in West Nile, in the Northern part of this country, and in a few parts of Busoga. But here in Buganda, children begin learning English as they are being breastfed. (Laughter) By the time they go to nursery, or to P1 and P2, they are already talking complicated and very fluent English. And these are people you expect to sit for the same PLE examinations with those from Terego, who you are telling to talk Ngonia? What are we talking about? (Laughter)  

Honourable colleagues, can we really be serious and see that this is a programme to kill education? None of you has their child in those schools where they say, you must be instructed in the local language from P 1 to P 4.  

3.58
MR SAM NJUBA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I intended to raise or comment on three points in His Excellency’s State of the Nation Address. 

I was slightly excited and provoked by my sister, hon. Karooro, when she said she will lay on the Table evidence of efforts by government to fight corruption. That is very pleasing. But I also want to tell her that I do endorse the Leader of Opposition’s view on corruption, that we are paying lip service to this. The evidence is there; look at the newspapers. 

A few years ago, we were told that all the people who were in URA were saved, and they would continue recruiting saved ones; but you can see what the saved ones are doing in town, and the number of cars that are double registered.

Secondly, I know she has a connection of some sort with Teso; she also reminded us of the silos. I wanted to remind her that if the NRM Government had not sold those silos, we would not be having the problem currently going on in Teso. 

Madam Speaker, I noted at the very opening part of the address of the President, the request, or the hint, that there is a need to amend the Constitution for nothing else other than denying bail for certain cases. This is very unfortunate. We must not continue, or regularly imprudently amend that Constitution. It is so vital; it is the agreement that brings us together; we must respect it. 

MS NAMAGWA: Madam Speaker, is it because my colleague is speaking from the Opposition side that he is pocketing all the time. I gave him a warning, but he has continued to pocket, and I am sure he knows the procedures of the House. Is it in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, unfortunately, I am watching his mouth. I wasn’t watching anything else. 

MR NJUBA: Madam Speaker, I thank you for your wise ruling. I do not know what bothers my friends about my appearance, but we can discuss that later after the House. 

The question of amending the Constitution is a serious matter and it calls for serious consideration. The crimes that are being addressed or are supposed to be addressed or denied bail are offences that can be handled in the present situation. For example, hon. Godi was denied bail for over six months and nobody complained that it was illegal. The judges must be allowed their discretion. They must operate as people with responsibilities in those areas, and what is lacking is facilitation. If we do not want people to stay on remand for long, or to have bail, let us provide enough for the judges; let us provide transport for the prisoners and let us have them tried. 

As we speak, there are people who have been in prison on remand for over eight years and very shortly I will direct a question on this statistic to the Minister of Justice. So, rather than amend the Constitution, we should go and examine what resources we give to those operating in those areas. 

But I also find it interesting that treason is one of them. History has it that there have been very few cases of conviction of treason in this country. But more importantly, we know that treason cases are political cases. Is it the President’s red light to us as the Opposition, to use treason to lock us out? This is a very important question, and I have history to back me up. It was on this Floor of the House that Grace Ibingira and others enacted the Detention Act. They were the first to report –(Member timed out_)

4.04 
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Mukono): Madam Speaker, thank you for the opportunity. I have been listening attentively to the lamentations on both sides of this Parliament, and it reminds me of a popular soap called The Rich Also Cry –(Interjection)- I will not go into the narrative of the soap, but it is interesting to hear our brothers on the other side also lament about the failures of government. So, the rich can also cry like they are doing. But I suggest that they should be ruled out of order and they should just cross to this side and we make things happen. 

The President began his speech with a moment of silence in memory of our friends who had passed away. Two of them were hon. Member of Parliament, Kibirige Sebunya, and Muloki, the Kyabazinga of Busoga. He also gave us advice about the accidents that are happening. I hope the President will be in position to pick a leaf from the developed countries that he visits, where the roads are of dual carriage in contrast to the roads in Uganda which are narrow, and of which speed alone is a cause of death to many Ugandans. 

On page 5 of the document, the President talked about other economies in which people have lost jobs in contrast to what is happening in Uganda. I have information that just a few days ago, 300 primary school teachers of Mukono District lost their jobs, and there is no explanation that has been given. The President talks about loss of jobs elsewhere and he forgets that loss of jobs is happening here, right in his government, where people have not been given an explanation. 

On page 34 of the address, the President talks about the construction of health centre IIIs, and rehabilitation of referral hospitals, but he forgets that some of us have been called to the community to fundraise for a government hospital in Kawolo, where the Minister of Health was also called in as a fundraiser and he shamelessly came and made his contribution. 

The responsibility of government is relegated to being the responsibility of the community, to fundraise for rehabilitation and equipment of a government hospital. Does the Minister of Health or the President know that there are very many government health centre IIIs that have no equipment; that have no health workers; and which have no drugs? A case in point is Ngogwe, and the Minister of Health is here; he can go and pick a leaf.

Lastly, I was disappointed that on the issue of health, the President did not talk about the HIV status in this country. We have fought this war and the President was given awards, but this time he did not mention it. To what extent has this government gone in order to prevent the spread of AIDS? As mitigation to the impact of AIDS, presently, AIDS continues to ravage our society. There are no government measures within the State of the Nation Address to ensure that the struggle against HIV/AIDS continues, particularly in respect to addressing access to anti-retroviral therapy in our communities where health access is a nightmare.

He did not also talk about the salaries, housing and allowances of our health workers. He did not even address the brain drain in our country, where our doctors are migrating from Uganda and going elsewhere, including Rwanda, which can pay them better. 

He did not even mention the rehabilitation of the Cancer Institute in Mulago, well-knowing that two high ranking officials in this country had passed away of the same. What excuse does the President have –(Member timed out_)

4.09 
MR ODONGA-OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will begin by making reference to the speech of the Leader of the Opposition, in reaction to the State of the Nation Address, and I will quote him on the role of Opposition Members of Parliament: “We are the ones who must dare tell the King that he is naked. We are the ones who must tell people that things could be done differently and better. We are the ones who must bring out the dirt and rot in government without killing the hope of the people; and we are the ones who seek to replace those in power in the next general election.” 

This is the spirit upon which I am going to make my submission, because I am one of those who should tell the king that he is naked, and I hope I will do that role diligently. 

I want to talk about three areas of corruption: justice, law and order, and succession. On page 40, the President talked about corruption. In law, we say if you come to the courts of equity, you should come with clean hands. There are those in this Parliament who should not even talk about corruption, because they do not have clean hands. 

I have strong reasons to believe as the Member of Parliament of Aruu County, that the President does not have clean hands in the fight against corruption in this country. He does not have the will, not even the capacity, to fight corruption. It now reminds me of the Kiganda saying in Acholi that the “fish starts rotting from the head.” 

The President has not come out clear to say he is fighting corruption in this country when among the grants this Parliament is sending to the local governments as per Article 259 of the Constitution, certain districts of Western Uganda get more money than certain districts of Eastern Uganda.

I raised the question in this Parliament; why does Mbarara get more money than Soroti District yet Soroti has a bigger population than Mbarara? A select committee was established and to date, no one has explained why certain districts of this country get more money than other districts, if it is not corruption.

The President talked about corruption, when 70 percent of all the army generals come from one village, and they do not see anything wrong with that but he still has to talk about corruption; with all due respect to the historical nature of the revolution - but it is not right. 

The President talks about corruption when more than 40 percent of the Cabinet ministers are from Western Uganda and only 1 percent from Northern Uganda in the names of hon. Hilary Onek. That is the highest level of corruption in this country. (Laughter)

The President talks about corruption when 70 percent of parastatals in this country are being controlled by people from one region of Western Uganda, and they see nothing wrong with that, but he still has to talk about corruption. 

The President talks about corruption when the heads of the Army, the Police and the Prison Revenue Authority and, let alone other parastatals, are all from Western Uganda, in a country of over 56 tribes and we do not see that as corruption -(Interjections)-  what are you talking about?

MRS MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order, first of all, to raise sectarian sentiments on this Floor, when sectarianism is a crime? Secondly, it is known this is a national Parliament and Government - look at the Opposition, could the President possibly get ministers from FDC for that case? Is he in order to keep misleading the public with issues and matters that are not substantiated?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the issue of distribution of jobs in this country was raised on the Floor of this House – it is in the Hansard. So, it is not something new.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you for that ruling. As I said earlier, my role is just to tell the king that, “You are seated badly. You have to organise how you are seated, otherwise we shall all be embarrassed”.

When we talk about corruption - in the CHOGM debate, I was almost skinned alive on the Floor of this House and the only crime I committed was to expose the level of corruption in this country. If it was not because of my fate, I would have set a precedence of being the first person to be suspended from this Parliament. The litany about corruption cannot end; the writings on the walls are clear and it is just a matter of time before we sort out these things. The only permanent feature in this world which does not change is time. It will always change whether you like it or not.

The second issue is on the justice, law and order sector. There is a lot wanting in the Judiciary, in the Police and in the DPP’s Office. We still have cases of malicious prosecution. We all know well when hon. Abdu Katuntu defeated the Prime Minister, hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, in Bugwere elections; he had to dress up from the Leader of the Opposition’s office because he had an impending arrest. There was an order that you do something so that this man is not sworn in. Where do we have justice, law and order when we can bring forged charges on distinguished Ugandans whose only fault is to defeat the Prime Minister in an election? How can you be charged for a traffic offence, like me, when you are being driven by your driver? And yesterday, I survived going to Luzira prison over malicious prosecution.

How do we explain the backlog of cases – yesterday, I was in Luzira; there are over 7,000 Ugandans who have stayed in Luzira Prison for over five years without appearing in any courts of law, and the worst victims are those who are brought by the court martial. They are just arrested in Army Barracks and dumped in Luzira Prison.

4.18
MR JOHN OGWANG (UPC, Kole County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to be very brief. I am not going to support this side or that side. I am going to say the truth and what I believe. 

One, I must thank the President; he delivered a wonderful speech, but I heard it in 2006. I want something new. There are old facts, they were good in 2006; I believed them and it was very interesting; but now, the President is only repeating himself. 

I know he has made quite a lot of changes; he brought peace to this country; unity was there when I came. People were united; but now, chaos. We are Ugandans; unity must be achieved. To achieve it, we have got to do away with poverty. We have got to do away with corruption. 

As far as corruption is concerned, in Uganda, that is our middle name. We are corrupt, starting from the three strong arms: Executive, Judiciary and Parliament. If you are going to change and make progress in Uganda, we have to change our attitude. We are very greedy. Some people want a little bit; some people want a lot.

Our problem is money and power, and they are not good unless you know them. When you handle money, and you have got a lot of money in your hand, feel it and it will not be good. But us, we have seen a little bit; if somebody gets a lot of money, it is not good; it changes you; you become somebody different; it becomes unnecessary; you talk big. But we must maintain unity. 

The next point is poverty. In Uganda, we are not poor. We heard people say that we are poor, yet we have a lot of money. The money we have got, the money we spend here, is not the money we work for. It is easy money, somebody gives you and you spend. But if you have earned that money, you will think twice before you spend.

NGOs and donors give us a lot of money; but for us, what we are good at, is to spend all that money. We beg, but when we get it, only the strong people get it - I do not get it because I am weak. This is why things are this way. People are fat; I have not seen anybody thin. We are all fat. (Laughter) To change that, we need two things; we need education. Our education system is not very good, although we claim that we have UPE, USE, and all that. They are not very good. You need to spend a lot of money on that -(Member timed out­­_)

4.23
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we debate the State of the Nation address, I have four major concerns. 

Regarding our economy, we have been informed by the President that it is now moving on well, and the per capita GDP is almost 440, from 246 in 1996. But the question I would like to pose here - having been given the various statistics, the GNDP and the GDP; the question is: why is it that our “growth national happiness”, in all our constituencies - when you look at our “growth national happiness”, the curve is going down? 

When you speak about the growth in GDP, GNDP, we must not forget that there is the other growth which is not talked about; “growth national happiness”. Our people - the development that is being talked about; that the economy is moving on well; is not reflected in the pockets of our people in Uganda. Madam Speaker, I strongly suggest that the moment we talk about any development, using various statistics, this must be reflected in the pockets of our people at the grassroots. However much you talk about development when our people are poor, I do not think we can really enable our people to understand what we are talking about.

When we look at remittances from our brothers and sisters abroad - even last week we have been reliably informed that our national budget is going to be affected simply because they cannot move on well; they cannot remit as they used to do. Yet when we are counting on where we are going to get some funding, these remittances are put into serious consideration; yet as we talk now, the remittances from abroad have lowered.

As we praise our brothers and sisters abroad, do we have a proper policy? Because, all these people go out there, on their own and when they are there, they try to send some money home, and at the end we all get something from them. I think it will be better - maybe by the Ministry of Gender - that we have a proper labour policy, as it is done in various countries; that we export labour officially, so that we can get more resources from these people abroad.

On transport, I thought and I was waiting to hear from the President, because in last year’s State of the Nation Address, the President was so much concerned about the state of our roads, and indeed, he said he was introducing a commission of inquiry into the road sector. I was waiting for the findings to show us that last year, we found out this and that. However much we inject into this sector - yet the commission was set-up by the President, and it was in State House - when the findings are not out; I do not think we can move any step, when the findings are not known.

Madam Speaker, the President talked about various referral hospitals, including the national referral hospital; and he said that the best way was public-private partnership. The only national referral hospital we have is Mulago. There is no nation that can develop when the health sector is not properly addressed -(Member timed out_)

4.29
MR FRED BADDA (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I stand in support of the motion, because it raises pertinent issues, some of which I am going to address myself to.

In the preamble, on page 3 of the speech, the President warns Ugandans about the major causes of accidents in Uganda, and he states that the major cause of accidents is over-speeding. I do agree with the President but I want to add that there is also something else that makes the situation even worse, namely having vehicles in dangerous mechanical condition move on the roads, especially on the highways. These vehicles have claimed a lot of lives. We have traffic police on all highways, but they let these vehicles go. 

When it comes to the people of Kalangala, we use ships and water automobiles, which need servicing like other vehicles. A few weeks ago, I raised a point for the minister, concerning the MV Kalangala which the people are very proud of. It has been running a daily routine and making a round trip of 160 Nautical miles a day, for three years, but it has never been comprehensively serviced. Now the people are worried that we may experience the situation of 1996, when the Kabalega ship had an accident, in which over 100 people drowned. 

Also recently in 2004, MV Bukoba had an accident on the lake and many traders lost their merchandise. This was because of negligence of duty on the part of government. You remember the ship did not have lights, and yet it was moving.

The people of Kalangala are worried that the service is overdue. When I asked the minister, on the Floor of the House, he said he was not aware of what was going to take place. Now, what should I tell the people of Kalangala? 

So accidents, especially on the Lake, are mainly to be blamed on government. I want to ask the minister to make a statement about this, and tell us when this ship is going to be taken to Tanzania on the dry bed for service, and how long it will stay there -(Interruption)

MS KABONESA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I have listened to my hon. colleague and neighbour. Last night as I was watching WBS Prime News, there was an advert by the Ministry of Works - this advert was also in the papers and they could probably clarify right here in the House - informing the public, and especially the people of Kalangala, that there was going to be rehabilitation of the MV Kalangala. They were actually warning the people of Kalangala to prepare themselves. So I am wondering whether this notice was not from the Ministry of Works, since the Member of Parliament of Kalangala is not aware. Thank you.

MR BADDA: I thank you for that information. I want to inform my honourable colleague that I am not aware. This one should be official because we have to communicate to our people so that they plan accordingly. 

About the same matter, this ship cost more than Shs 12 billion, and it was supposed to be a dual purpose ship. Surprisingly, according to the design, this ship only transports people. It cannot transport cargo; it has an empty space for cargo just because the design was wrong. What is the ministry going to do about this?

Before I leave the point on infrastructure; as the President talked about it, he talked about the importance of roads. In Kalangala, we have one main trunk road on Bugala Island, and this road is 70 kilometres. However, the residents are at a loss, and even me as a leader - we were informed that this road had been taken over by the central government. This road carries a heavy traffic load, including BIDCO trucks, timber trucks and fish trucks, but the road is in a sorry state. The district no longer cares about it and the central government is doing nothing about it either. 

We were informed sometime back that it was contracted to a company called INFROCO, but it is about four years now and nothing is taking place. So, if we want our people to get out of poverty - how will they get out of poverty when their merchandise rots on the way -(Member timed out_)

4.35
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion, and to also appreciate the address to this Parliament by the President. I think it clearly articulated the policy position of government in detail, and it was quite comprehensive. Because of time, I will limit my comments to three or four issues. 

The first one is on infrastructure. We do appreciate that the government has prioritised the issue of infrastructure, including the roads. I talk as a Member of Parliament from the Kigezi region. When you look at the number of roads outlined to be worked on, very few if any are from our region. 

More importantly, for those who have visited Kigezi, that is, Kanungu, Kabale, Kisoro and Rukungiri, you know that our terrain is not very friendly, and the money which the ministry gives us to maintain our roads is inadequate. When you go to Kabale, Kanungu and Rukungiri, the roads are impassable. So, is it possible for government and the Ministry of Works and Transport to factor in the issue of terrain when computing resources which go to some of these districts, especially our Kigezi region? I hope the minister will be able to respond. Do not only look at population and maybe size but they should also factor in the issue of terrain because it is very costly to construct and maintain roads in our region.

The second issue I want to comment on is the issue of health. I thank the President for commenting on issues of health. I think it is a challenge in this country with regard to the quality of health services that we are providing. I want to say that we shall not have significant improvement in the quality of health services unless the motivation and remuneration of health workers in this country is addressed. 

However, I do not see this coming out as a priority. I listened to the Budget Speech and I do not see it factored in. As a health worker I must say that we are not going to achieve much unless the question of motivation of health workers is addressed. That partly explains why most of our health centres and hospitals are failing to attract health workers.

In Kanungu District, I have said this before, we have only one medical doctor. The moment I go to Kanungu I transform myself into a health worker and I cease being an MP simply because it is difficult to attract doctors to work in Kanungu.

The other salient issue that affects the sector is the issue of drugs. This Parliament has been increasing the budget allocation for drugs but on the ground the drugs are not available. One of the reasons is the way the budget for drugs is managed by the sector.

If I could be allowed to explain; the money is put in two ways. The first one is that there is a credit line where money moves from Ministry of Finance to Ministry of Health and then to National Medical Stores where the various districts and hospitals order for drugs against the money allocated to them. However, there is evidence that the Ministry of Health sometimes uses this money for other purposes other than remitting it to National Medical Stores. That accounts for 30 percent of the budget. Seventy percent of the money for drugs is channelled through primary healthcare grants to districts and hospitals. The districts are supposed to spend 50 percent of PHC grants and 40 percent of the hospital grants on drugs. 

What we found out as a committee and what we know is that most districts spend only five to 10 percent of that money on drugs instead of 50 percent and as such even if we sit here and increase the money for drugs, we shall still have shortages in our health units.

As the Committee of Social Services we have not only recommended to Ministry of Health to make changes and administrative reforms on how this budget is managed, but to also strengthen National Medical Stores so that we can improve the availability of drugs. And I hope when we interact with the minister we will be able to agree on some of those proposals.

Concerning Mulago Hospital, I am happy that the President realises that we must improve the functioning of Mulago Hospital. He does propose a public-private partnership. While that is one of the proposals, I want also to say that the problems of Mulago include, among others, congestion. This is because the peripheral health facilities in Kampala are dysfunctional. What we need to do is either to build satellite hospitals in Kampala or upgrade the current health centre IVs into functional health centres so that we decongest Mulago Hospital.

More importantly, I think we need a women’s hospital in Kampala so that it addresses the concerns of women rather than congesting the labour ward in Mulago and then fail to provide services.

4.41
DR LASTUS KATENDE SERUNJOGI (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. I am in support of the motion moved.

First of all, I would like us to congratulate ourselves on the state of the economy because the growth of the Ugandan economy has remained at seven percent in spite of the global economic crisis. 

I have got some comments that I would like to make especially on the agricultural share in the total GDP. The agricultural sector’s contribution to GDP declined from 15.7 last year to 15.1. This is healthy in an economy which is transforming from basely agricultural to industrial. 

If this is a healthy structural transformation of the economy, my prayer is that the Uganda Bureau of Statistics should periodically avail figures on the actual number of adult Ugandans who are actively engaged in agriculture and those who are in the industrial and services sectors. This is because if agriculture’s contribution is going down, there will be less numbers of agriculturalists remaining and those are the ones engaged in agriculture on a commercial/large scale and who will be contributing to the industry. If we do not have these figures we will find a situation where we still have a large number of Ugandans engaged in agriculture but a few people in the industry, who may not be Ugandans. Also the labour in the industry may not be Ugandan and we will have a static state. So we need these figures.

Now my next area of concern is the inflation. It says that up to April 2009 there was an inflation of staple foods of 66.3 percent, emanating mainly from the fact that we have got neighbouring countries like Sudan and DRC providing good market. This is good for the producers who are selling directly as well as the processors. 

My question however, is, “What are the implications on say the urban and peri-urban low income earners who depend on markets procuring food maybe on daily basis with such inflation?” I know there are the demand and supply forces in such circumstances but the challenge to the Ministry of Agriculture is how to produce and get this in balance. 

Another challenge is the employers of the workers to be able to set wages which can be able to balance this sort of inflation. 

Also the local governments coming up with ordinances and by-laws to ensure that there is adequate food supply in their districts and villages in spite of the fact that we may have to sell out.

The next area concerns the progress towards PFA. I am glad that the President noted that there is need for constant turn out of new technologies by NARO. This goes to NAADS and so on. But for NARO to be able to turn out these technologies we need a lot of funding and this should be looked at.

There is need to note that NARO should be in place to use modern technologies like biotechnology which turn out technologies very fast. Unfortunately, I note that the Bill on biotechnology is not yet out to this House for discussion although the policy came out last year in April.

What I have also noticed in this address is the difference between the technologies and the extensions, which is the seed industry. I would like to say that the seed industry in Uganda is at a very low level. You can see what is happening in Teso. I know there will be money given to those people, but without addressing the seed industry that will not help much. So is our seed industry able to sustain this need? It is true we divested the national seed companies into the private sector. But the question is, is the private sector in the seed industry capable of sustaining this country’s need for seeds? I think these are issues that need to be addressed as we debate the President’s address –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us have hon. Mbeiza, to be followed by hon. Kibwika.

4.46
MS MARGARET MBEIZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaliro): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Because of the time limit, I will have only a few points to talk about. First of all, I would like to thank the President for this State of the Nation Address. I also would like to thank the mover of this motion who is none other than hon. Najjemba.

In his address, the President touched many issues. But I notice that he emphasized much on NAADS. This is good because we cannot live in Uganda without agriculture. However, despite its importance, agricultural activities are frustrated by civil servants. Much of the money that is injected into NAADS is either embezzled by the NAADS co-ordinators or otherwise they just do not follow the correct procurement procedures for NAADS equipment. A case in point is in my district. I have problems in that place. The money was given, but instead of the NAADS coordinator putting it to use, he banked it onto his account. I do not know whether the Minister of Agriculture is aware of such things. It is important that he gets to know of such to avoid statements that suggest that the President does not like Ugandans. What I know is that he does everything to ensure we live a better life. It is the other people who are frustrating his efforts. 

Let me comment on the physical infrastructure. I would like to say that in the last financial year, this sector was given a lot of money. Actually the people who argue that government is not doing much in this sector are mistaken; we are doing much. I am saying this because, for example, Bunagana-Kyanika Road, which my colleague, the honourable from there, was crying for has been done. Jinja highway to Bugiri is being done. I also know that many other roads will be worked on if we work as a team; Rome was not built in a day.

On peace and security, I would like to say that I visited Gulu and Yumbe districts through the Save the Children, Uganda sometime ago. And I can tell you that the situation was at that time very bad. People had no food; children were dying. Women could not sleep –(Interjections)– yes, because men could hide leaving women with the children. When problems of that nature surface, it is usually the women that take care of the children.

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, I wish to give this House information. With this splendid contribution, can I move that the Appointments Committee approves this lady for a ministerial job? (Laughter)

MS MBEIZA: Okay, Madam Speaker, as I wind up I would like to thank the President of Uganda for convincing other countries to join us in the war against Kony. When I visited those areas, the situation was appalling. And when we presented our report to this House with you in the Chair, people shed tears. I commend the President, the UPDF and all Ugandans who prayed for Kony to extinct from Uganda. May credit be given to God!

4.51
MS SARAH KIBWIKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also would like to join my colleagues in supporting the motion.

I would like, first of all, to thank the President for delivering this address to the nation. I also thank him for conveying his condolences in respect of the lives that were lost in road accidents and human sacrifice. In the same vein, allow me thank him for the sacrifice-break-through that we saw in Kiboga. I wish such effort had been extended to all parts of the country where human sacrifice is rampant.

As regards to road accidents, I also would like to thank the President for his advice on the speed of 80 and 100 kilometres per hour on tarmac and murram roads respectively. However, I remember that in the last session, the Committee on Physical Infrastructure presented to this House a report on the loss of lives due road accidents. After debating that report, this House duly adopted the measures that the committee had recommended. At an appropriate time, I will ask the responsible minister to tell us how far he has gone in implementing those measures.

On economic development, I would like to thank the President for diversifying the economy, which has helped the Ugandan economy to persist despite the threats of global economic crisis.

On page 6 of the State of the Nation Address, the President enumerated how the food processing and agriculture sub-sectors has contributed to the GDP. Many Members have been wondering why GDP does not reflect the living standards of the people. I would like the Minister of Agriculture to come up with policies of assisting Ugandans in the food processing sub sector and also other prospective farmers to help them get involved in food processing. If this is done, GDP will exactly correspond or reflect the lives of Ugandans. The problem has been that whenever there is a food processing sub sector, it is only the foreigners who are assisted thus the GDP reflects an increase whereas the lives of the people move in a different direction. I am sure if this is done, even the lives of the people will reflect the increase in GDP.

I want to thank the government for restructuring NAADS but I want to say that unless the Ministry of Agriculture also restructures its staff, NAADS will not succeed. The NAADS programme has failed to integrate traditional civil servants into the programme. This has been a question ever since I joined Parliament but the Ministry of Agriculture has failed to restructure its programme.

As I wind up, recently the UBOS report reflected Busoga region as the poorest region but I remember there was a zoning programme that was done by Busoga and there was money, which was supposed to be disbursed to implement this zoning. At an appropriate time, I want the Minister of Agriculture to inform us on how far he has gone and why that money has never been disbursed to Busoga. If that is done, I am sure that next time the per capita income of the people of Busoga will increase and they will also be happy that as the economy grows, their lives are also improving. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.57
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute towards the address of the State of the Nation of His Excellency the President. I would like to sincerely thank our President and the government for the great achievements that we realised during the last financial year and the efforts made to achieve more in the next financial year.

I think nobody can doubt that our economy has been growing steadily and indeed it is growing by seven percent. Despite all the global financial crises, we are still surviving. There are no factories, which have closed and the industries are still continuing. The teachers are still in class. Somebody said 300 teachers were laid off but I think it was not because of money but because they were not qualified. In that regard, we are not badly off so the President is right.

I would like to talk about agriculture and rural development. We embrace the NAADS programme, which has been transformed from time to time and we are supporting only a few farmers. With this food crisis where inflation has gone high because of food and people are dying, I think we need to change our strategy. Instead of selecting six farmers per sub-county, let us use this money for buying tractors in each district, seeds and planting materials. That is what my people want. We have a saying that the knife of hunger is slow and does not kill. We are ready to work using the available materials so we need seeds, planting materials and mechanised agriculture so that the little rain that we have during this period can be used to plant and avert the hunger crisis.

I would also like to talk about equity in education. Our government would like to see that we emphasise science and technology. For people to pick up science subjects, you must have good science teachers, good laboratories for Physics, Biology and Chemistry. In Koboko, we have five government aided schools but only two have good laboratories and the rest do not have. We have seven sub counties and only three have government aided secondary schools. Without laboratories and teachers, we are sending mainly arts students to Makerere University. 

I would like to give you an example. Last year, the whole of Koboko District sent only two science students to study medicine and agriculture. This year there is only one. I have seen the list of those 11 to be funded by government and all are studying development studies. That means that in Koboko we shall not have scientists, agriculturalists and doctors and yet the people of Koboko are very intelligent. I would like to give a good example of myself and my children who studied in Kampala. All are doing engineering, medicine and so on and this is because of good schools but the students in Koboko will not reach that stage because they are unable to afford. So I am urging government to provide proper science laboratories and teachers.

I would like to talk about infrastructure. I am happy that the President has mentioned the list of roads to be tarmacked and Koboko has one of them. I think this time round in the next financial year it will be tarmacked otherwise hon. Baba and I will be labelled liars. Please let us have this one tarmacked. It is better to have few done rather than have a long list and excite us that the roads will be tarmacked when this is not the case. 

Also about the 21 bridges, this money was given a long time ago in 2005 but up to now, the money has not been used. I understand that last year the number of bridges was reduced to 14 yet nothing has been done. I am sure at the end only four or five will be done. What is happening? Is it the engineers or the Ministry of Finance? Please, whatever is planned must be done. I hope that this financial year these bridges will be done and the roads tarmacked. Thank you very much.

5.03
MS GRACE OBURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. Whereas the President addressed the nation on the state of the nation, he forgot one big sector and that is the elderly. The elderly are not addressed in this address and they are not protected. There is a minister in charge of the elderly but there is no structure as to how the elderly can reach the minister. These people are vulnerable, weakened by hunger and young people have resorted to killing and harassing them for land because they are not protected. 

These people are not even considered for NAADS programmes because they think they are useless and that they are old. They are not old, they are still living and they still need to be fed and protected. You will agree with me that this is a databank for knowledge and that is where we resort to for knowledge. We are here because they are there. If we do not care for them, who will care for them? We need to protect them. 

Regarding roads, I would like to thank the President for the road because now we can travel safely to Tororo. However, we need to work on the railway in order to protect these roads because heavy trucks from Mombasa carrying goods are already spoiling these roads and if you drive carelessly you will find yourself getting an accident because of the tilting on the roads. 

We have been talking about the railway line from Mombasa to the Southern Sudan. Even last year in the State of the Nation Address it was stated but we are taking long and we are still carrying out research and studies whereas I read in the East African newspaper that the Kenyans are already constructing their railway line on the other side of Pokot up to Southern Sudan, thus cutting us off. So, we shall not have that railway line from Kenya. The traffic from Kenya will reduce if the Kenyans build their own railway line on the other side of Kenya.   

Regarding NAADS, I do not know when the evaluation will be done so that the next set of six farmers per parish is given inputs because the year has already ended and there is no evaluation done yet. So, we need the next set of six farmers given inputs.

Regarding health centres, I would like to thank the President. We still have health centres, however, these centres are there as white elephants, without equipment and without staff and yet I understand that health centre IIs are supposed to be equipped by districts. But most of these districts do not have the capacity to equip these health centres. Can the Ministry of Health really get out and show us the way forward because this is the first health centre where most people go to for first aid. 

Finally, we have been talking about food but what do we have in place to help us not depend on handouts because when NAADS is giving out seeds, they give them when the season is gone, and there will be no impact yet the money will have been spent. Can the Ministry of Agriculture really give out the seeds in time for people to plant such that they have food? 

5.09
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Western): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I join my colleagues to thank His Excellency the President for his State of the Nation Address in which he pointed out very critical issues concerning the political and social-economic spectrum of this country. 

My contribution is guided by the conclusion of the President. The President in his conclusion said that we should look to others to supplement our efforts instead of thinking that they will be the ones to solve all our problems. I concur with His Excellency the President. 

Uganda is a landlocked country therefore our position to benefit from advantages of trade is minimal. In this House, in yesteryears, we debated and Parliament passed a resolution for the Government of Uganda to enter into a working relationship in rail transport with a company in Kenya in the names of Rift Valley Railways. That was aimed at solving our problems regarding transport of goods from the port at Mombasa. I wish to hail the efforts of the President that he is currently in talks with the Kenyan Government to ensure that the railway transport system can now be operational in this country. 

Madam Speaker, I established that the bottlenecks that we have as a country are the ones that are retarding our efforts in promoting our exports and indeed increasing the costs of our imports in this country. For instance, for a container bringing goods from Dubai, one would pay US $1,000 and from Mombasa to Kampala, you would pay two and a half times more. This is a demonstration that we cannot break even in trade. 

This is what the President mentions as the current plans that we as a country need to do. I think it is important that if Uganda is going to position itself well in the East African Common Market, then we should be serious in having the railway transport network operational within the country. 

It is not by accident that all these achievements we have seen in this State of the Nation Address in the road sector were after thorough planning. A road fund was introduced and that is why we see many roads being tarmacked and resurfaced. There was a deliberate move to have our road sector improved. I urge government to have the same prevail in our rail sector.

I wish to talk about famine, which was mentioned in this State of the Nation Address. Some regions in this country are better endowed in natural resources. Some regions have fertile soils and ample rainfall but others are naturally disadvantaged. Why can’t we have a proper programme in which regions with plenty can always come to the rescue of those regions which are in scarcity? 

I wish to agree with the Opposition Chief Whip, hon. Kassiano Wadri, when he asked, “How can a country as dry as Israel produce more tomatoes than Uganda, which has plenty of rain and fertile soils?” I think we need some re-orientation as a country. If we are looking to our NAADS Programme and to agriculture, this agriculture must be re-oriented to become commercial –(Member timed out_)

5.15
MRS JOYCE KWEBIHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the President for a very wise and patriotic State of the Nation Address. Many people have spoken of things which have not been done but I would like to speak of something which has been done and achieved, at least in my district. 

I thank the President and the entire government for a very strategic policy with targets which can be achieved. I again thank the government for having results oriented management. In this connection, I speak of the recently received electricity in Kyenjojo District. I am happy to say that we are now out of the darkness; we have light in many areas and towns around Kyenjojo District. I thank all those who contributed to this. 

I remember in my maiden speech in the House, I spoke about electricity. I was so concerned that we were in darkness, but I am very proud today to say that what I was speaking about has been solved by the patriotic leadership of our President and the NRM Government. (Applause)

I want to specifically thank the current NRM Chief Whip, hon. Migereko, who was then the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development. We pressurised him a lot. Many times, we would send him chits and go to his office to see him. It feels so good to achieve something like this in my district. Now our health centres and schools can at least have light and we expect to do much more. 

However, I feel very sorry for the Chief Whip of the Opposition who was talking just some minutes back about the darkness in Arua. Hon. Chief Whip of the Opposition, I understand what you feel and I know something will be done. (Applause) I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.19
DR BRIAN ASIIMWE (NRM, Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to also thank the mover of the motion and His Excellency the President for the good State of the Nation Address. I have a few points to make regarding the speech. 

I will also join my colleague, hon. Kwebiha from Kyenjojo, to thank His Excellency the President and the Government of the Republic of Uganda for extending power to Bundibugyo District. (Applause) Although it is not yet lit, the poles and the wires are up. (Laughter) I am very confident that soon it will be switched on. 

I only have one problem with this development. The people of Ntoroko County where I come from only admire the wires and poles; the majority of them are not going to benefit from this power. This is because the lines just pass by and go to Bundibugyo town and to Nyahuka Town Council. It is only a very small fraction of my constituency that will get this power. I am not blaming this on the Government so much, but I must apportion blame to the technocrats in the Ministry of Energy for avoiding to connect major townships or trading centres along the way to Bundibugyo town. 

One of the big trading centres, which is expected to become the district headquarters for Ntoroko District, Rwebisengo, is just eight kilometres away from the road to Bundibugyo. I even made it very clear during that time when they were putting up the line that there should be an extension from the main grid to Rwebisengo Township. 

One of the areas that require power urgently in this county of mine is Ntoroko Landing Site. Ntoroko Landing Site is a very busy landing site on Lake Albert and many investors have expressed interest in putting up a fish processing plant. We get a lot of trucks from Kampala collecting fish from Ntoroko Landing Site but there is no power and other forms of energy are very expensive. So, we hope that government will soon address this problem and extend power to Ntoroko Landing Site and to Rwebisengo Trading Centre, which we expect will become the district headquarters soon.

Still on the issue of power, on page 25 the President said that it is a very primary requirement for development, especially in putting up small scale industries and cottage industries to create employment for our youth. We are all aware that many of our youth are not employed in this country and we would like to create jobs for them, but without extending power to these areas where such cottage and small scale industries can be put up, we still make these people unemployed. 

Secondly, I would like to comment on disease outbreaks. The President talked about containing polio, which broke out in this country recently in Northern Uganda, in Amuru. Diseases, especially preventable and waterborne diseases, in my area are due to lack of safe water. 

I remember during the budget presentation, the Minister of Finance mentioned Ntoroko as one of the areas where designs had been made to provide safe water, but these designs have been made for a very long time and no safe water has been provided. Much of my area does not have safe water and this has made waterborne diseases such as Cholera very prevalent. I urge government to look into this problem. 

Three quarters of our county does not have safe water. We get boreholes which dry up because of the nature of our terrain; we live in the rift valley region. So, drought is very rampant in this area and getting safe water is very difficult. 

5.24
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for availing me an opportunity to join my colleagues in thanking the President for his State of the Nation Address. I have a few comments to make. 

Whereas I agree that our economy is still robust and doing quite well and attracting quite a number of investors, I want to caution that given the current international economic crunch or recess, Uganda, like any other developing country, will most likely be affected come tomorrow. We, therefore, need to be aware of this and put up measures to ensure that our robust economy is not brought down to its knees. 

The most recent World Bank report indicates that US $1.2 trillion was received by developing countries about two years ago. About a year ago, it reduced to US $7 billion. This year, it is expected to be halved to around about US $374 billion for the third world countries, and Uganda is one of those third world countries. 

There is no question and doubt to the fact that we are going to have this recession affecting our people. What does this mean? This means that there will be loss of jobs and there will be rampant poverty amongst our communities. The government needs to be cautioned about this and not take things for granted. 

Secondly, I would like to comment on the issue of corruption. Learned colleagues know that it is law that forms the basis of justice. You and I are legislators and we have a number of laws as enumerated by my colleagues, but most of them are not enforceable. Most of them are not being operationalised properly. There is a very common adage in law that if you cannot enforce, please do not legislate. We have a problem with this. Our laws are there but some of them are not enforceable. They are very weak. 

I agree with the President when he suggests that for certain crimes like embezzlement and for hardcore criminals, we should curtail bail. I think even if it may raise the eyebrows of human rights activists, if you have declared war, the possibility that blood is likely to be shed cannot be avoided. 

Thirdly, we have talked about everything: wonderful investments in agriculture, wonderful investments in our infrastructure and wonderful investments in the energy sector – but all these would come to a halt if the issue of climate change is not effectively addressed. We all know that the effects are very bitter especially to the third world countries. Areas that are going to be affected by this are: 

One, food security; we have already seen it here with us in Teso sub region, West Nile and even in some parts of Western Uganda. Recently, some parts of Isingiro needed some food relief. 

Two, water scarcity; you have seen the waters of Lake Victoria receding and there is no question about that. That means that the effect is going to be very massive on power. Look at the trees being cut every other day! We have lost almost two thirds of our tree cover in the last quarter of the century. 

Human health; incidences of disease have increased. Look at the conflicts emanating from scarce resources, pasture, water and the fisheries sector. Look at Migingo. What do you think is happening? Migingo has always been there but because the resources in the water are reducing, you can see what is happening to us and our neighbours in Kenya. 

What do we need to do therefore? I think we need to develop climate related policies, and we need to put in a lot of money on climate change issues. We also need to create awareness amongst our people and as much as possible look at the meteorology department –(Member timed out_)

5.30
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I will start by thanking His Excellency the President for the clear and precise exposition. Because I have got little time, I will not go into details. 

Maybe I should also take the luxury of thanking the Leader of the Opposition for his response to the President’s speech. It shows us how the other side thinks about the nation. No wonder God gave us two eyes, so that we have a binocular view and we can see from different angles. However, there is a phenomenon called parallax – the apparent change of an object being observed due to the change of position of the person observing. We can see the same thing as if it has changed position whereas it has not. So you have to be a very good analyst to see things in proper perspective.

When it comes to the President’s speech, he uses statistics, and that is my diet. The Leader of the Opposition seems to be worried about the statistics and he calls them rosy, but this is the information we have got. 

We cannot do without statistics. Actually, my recommendation would be that every ministry should have a fully fledged statistics unit. The Uganda Bureau of Statistics was enacted to give us aggregate statistics but the administrative ones should come from various ministries. Ministry of Education, for example, normally has very clear information because they have clear statistics. 

Someone was talking about agriculture. It has taken so long for us to carry out an agricultural census and when things came out, they were a bit fuzzy because there was no well presented data.

On page 6, the Leader of the Opposition again talks about rosy statistics on education. Sometimes when people are talking about education, they want to distort issues. In the past there was education for a few and that is what they call good! People used to go to the Science quadrangle; there used to be less than 300 people graduating in the whole country. Is that a case of rosy statistics? That is the reality; education has increased.

I would like to comment on corruption, brought out on page 39. The Leader of the Opposition assists us to define corruption thus: “For us, hon. Members, any serious effort to collectively fight corruption must start with the classification of corruption for what it really is - plain theft.” They are looking at corruption as one thing – plain theft.  May I suggest that government comes up with a paper showing us the forms of corruption because when you talk about corruption, people seem not to understand? 

There are so many forms of corruption, including bribery, extortion, patronage, and so forth. The biggest form of corruption in our country is in procurement. I request that the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Act be brought back so that we can have proper procurement methods. You can see corruption is killing the delivery system. In our area, you might find that a road of two kilometres can be made using Shs 15 million instead of Shs 2 million just because of corruption in procurement. 

We need government to come up with model procurements; for example, a model road, a model hospital, a model school. We can then see how much should be spent under normal circumstances so that we can outsmart the corrupt ones. Without that, definitely we shall not be able to outsmart them. 

We should first of all be able understand what corruption is. We should define it well. That is the only way we can fight it. Knowing the disease is half way to curing it. That is what our people in the health sector say. If we have not defined corruption well, definitely we shall not be able to solve that problem. I am sure many of us could have corrupt tendencies and we are not aware. Even abuse of office is definitely corruption –(Member timed out_)

5.36
MS CATHERINE MAVENJINA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute on the State of the Nation Address. I thank the mover and seconder of the motion, hon. Rose Najjemba and hon. Alex Ndeezi respectively. 

On page 14, it is stated that the government focused on increasing resource allocation towards infrastructure development particularly the roads and energy. I would like to propose that some provisions be created specifically for the motorcyclists, commonly known as boda bodas, towards the sides of the roads. Clearly mark for them an area so that we can avoid road accidents. 

I appeal to government to put more effort in mobilising and sensitising the population, especially women, so that they benefit from the government SACCOs, which have reasonable interest rates and good recovery periods. Currently, there are many private micro-finance institutions with very high interest rates, which give loans to our people and force some of the people to go into hiding. I know of a situation where some people were forced to make announcements on radio that they were dead yet they were hiding because of the loans which they had incurred. 

On page 33, it is stated that in order to create jobs for a work force that is already educated and skilled, some cottage industries that may not require electricity, for example handlooms, will be created. I appeal to Government to promote this industry very quickly beginning with West Nile region where the power shortage is very acute and very many of our youth are still unemployed.

As I conclude, I would like to thank the President, the UPDF, the Police, the Prisons Forces and all the people who contributed to enable us enjoy the excellent security that we are now enjoying throughout Uganda and with our neighbours. I can assure Parliament that in West Nile, buses move during the day and night. You can even drive to West Nile with your eyes closed. Thank you very much.

5.39
MR SAMUEL ABURA (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion and I sincerely thank the mover. The most delighting section is that of the road network, in which Karamoja was officially, for the first time, in the frontline of those who are supposed to be elevated to tarmac road. I am very grateful.

The President talked about security, especially regarding the rebels, because it is complex; it involves child sacrifice and accidents. But for the rebels, we are eradicating them; that one is over. He talked about the rebels and we missed one thing; and the most important one, which was the fires - the burning of the schools; there was no mention of it. We are sitting on a time bomb; as Kampala expands and develops so many urban suburbs are coming up: townships, municipalities and so forth.

The area which was one time planned for the depot of fuel has been engulfed inside the city. Should any accidents occur the whole of Kampala would be burnt. So we appeal to the Minister of Energy in this aspect to relocate the depots Caltex, Total, Shell, to 24 kilometres away from the city. That is the only way we can be safe.

On the accidents, surely these are rampant. It is no longer a matter of the roads; the roads are being improved. This is –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable member for giving way. In modern planning, petrol filing stations are not allowed within urban areas, they are just situated as you leave the town and preferably always on the left hand side of the road as you leave. But here alone, in the CBD, we have more than 10 petrol filling stations. If any fire should break out here, those who will survive, will go and eat their chicken. (Laughter)

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yes, hon. Abura has raised a very pertinent point, but I would also like to supplement the information given by hon. Okello-Okello, that many of these stations were inherited from the UPC planning, and government is trying to correct -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Members, on a very serious note, how could it be that plot No.1 Kampala road, is a petrol station; here, near Parliament? Really, there must be something wrong with planning. (Laughter)

MR ABURA: Many thanks, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Okello-Okello. It is good sometimes to have Opposition, because you can see what hon. Okello-Okello has contributed; it is a positive one. When we come to fighting danger we come together. 

I would like to say further that, on the disarmament in Karamoja, it is a process but we need to revisit guidelines, which are no longer really followed. We are not working together anymore. There should be some co-ordination between those who are disarming - every time the cattle are taken for compensation, they say, “Now you people, you wait”. It has become politicised. We need to address that issue.

Thank you very much, but we need to see that we change the fires; the petrol stations; and especially this one near Parliament. We should take some measures and close it.

5.45
MS BETTY OCAN (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. Let me start with a general remark on this. If you read, you find that we have many challenges which are not highlighted, and one warned us. When we talk about drought or climate change, where has it been highlighted? Where is it? There are many others, even HIV/AIDS.

I do not know whether in Uganda it is important that when somebody becomes a President, he or she has to strip off some other responsibilities of the parties because in most cases, then it is to protect the parties, not the people. Maybe we can run away from that politicking. Well, it is food for thought. My idea is that we really need to think along that line so that the President is balanced and treats Uganda as Uganda, not taking the Movement first before Uganda.

Let me even comment on the Presidential advisors. We have very many of them. I really do not know their work if they cannot advise the President; to just take some little time to highlight the problems of Uganda to the President. When we talk, we talk mostly about things which are for highly placed people. We leave the majority of the population – over 80 percent of the population is not properly embraced here.

When we say depreciation is a “positive: blessing – my person in Odek sub-county used to buy salt at Shs 500 but now the person has to grapple with maybe Shs 1000 for a kilogram; and the soap used to be at Shs 1200 a bar. Now when you go to Dino, it is at Shs 1500. Those are the things that matter. They matter most to our people, but it is not there in this State of the Nation Address.

When we talk about agriculture - take the example of the population of cattle. It says that in 1986, the population of cattle was 3 million, and right now it is 11 million. But we forget the increase in population and also the time. We do not just keep on marking the time. As the time moves, we need to be more advanced. But it looks like we are proud that right now the animals are more compared to 1986. I think this comparison with 1986 is a very big problem, and we need to think of how the people are, instead of comparing the situation to 1986. Are our people alright? 

We should also take cognisance of inflation, and not just think of 1986. Well, perhaps that is the baseline of where the Movement Government takes growth seriously from.

About corruption; there is “zero tolerance” to corruption, and it has been highlighted in the 2006 NRM manifesto. However, recently, it was all very clear that Uganda is third in Africa as far as corruption is concerned, which means that from 2006 - when we say, “zero tolerance” - it was also manifested here when we fought the Temangalo issue, other things notwithstanding. Do we really have the will? Even if we put laws and bring more structures to fight corruption, if the will is not there -(Member timed out_)

5.51
MS MARGARET ALEPAR (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me add my voice to my fellow colleagues’ in thanking the President for his constructive and focussed State of the Nation Address. I want to limit myself to a few issues. 

Agricultural growth in terms of livestock multiplication: growth of numbers is good for all livestock and other domestic animals but the question is, “How much do we know about the holding capacity of a given area; the animal population; its quality; and the animals’ impact on the environment?” It is an agreeable fact that when we talk of growth, we need to think of animal population, their quality and their impact on the environment, because these are to be factored in for sustainability and marketing. 

However, what I see is that the agricultural and livestock census was not carried out in Kotido, and possibly in the whole of Karamoja. This could have been done by random sampling, rather than carrying out a census. If the livestock census was done in Karamoja, the issue of people complaining of the number of stolen livestock would not arise, because the livestock would have been recorded during the census in that part of the country.

Looking at page 8, paragraph 11, on increasing coverage of telecommunication and internet services countrywide, I want to thank government for this policy initiative. The challenge, however, is that some citizens have abused these services by using them to plan robberies, murders, rapes and blackmailing other citizens. 

My proposal is that apart from phone tapping, phone owners should also be registered and be known to government for easy tracking, so that these services are not abused to cause disharmony in society.

I also want to comment on the progress of human development focusing on health. I want to thank government for the construction of the health centres, and improving on the supply of drugs. But the challenge that I see, is the shortage of medical staff, particularly in Kotido District. We have a doctor who is contracted to the district by Doctors for Africa, an Italian-based organisation, and one retiring doctor who cannot carry out surgery. So we propose as people of Kotido that the Ministry of Health undertakes affirmative action to ensure that native students are trained by government, to sustain this demand for services. 

Similarly, the Ministry of Health should co-operate with the district of Kotido, to attract and sustain medical staff from other parts of the country, in Kotido. 

I also want to comment on peace, security and good governance of our country. I want to - (Interruption) 

MR ABURA: Thank you hon. Alepar for giving way. On the issue of health centres in Kotido, since 1964, the President by then, Kabaka Mutesa, came to Karamoja and donated his salary for the sub-counties in Karamoja. Kotido is still using that dispensary up to now. So there is a genuine need for the hospital. Now Kotido is a district and soon we shall even apply to become a municipality. I would like government to support us in Kotido. Thank you.

MS ALEPAR: I want to thank my colleague for that useful contribution and I believe Kotido will get a hospital, because we now have only the health centre IV, which is managing a population of 175,000 people.

I was talking about peace, security and good governance with special interest in Karamoja. This attracts our attention. We all need and support peace, security and sustainable governance for the whole country. I want all Ugandans to join us and Government in the pacification of Karamoja. 

There are also a few challenges that accrue from this disarmament. There are saboteurs within and without Uganda who support gun trafficking and the sale of ammunition in Karamoja -(Member timed out_)  

5.56
MR JOWALI KYEYAGO (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the President for the Sate of the Nation Address. I want to restrict myself to page 32 where the President was talking about UPE. 

It is good that the President has clarified on the feeding policy under UPE. In my constituency, the President had been misunderstood on the feeding issue under UPE. The perception was that pupils should not be forced to bring food to school.

When he talks about parents being responsible for providing food to the children, I think if he got onto air and aired more messages on that, it would help a lot. I am saying this because head teachers are finding it a problem asking for food from the children; they do not have the mandate to enforce such a thing.

When I went to Ghana on a parliamentary mission on budgeting, I found UPE taking root there. It was actually more or less similar to ours. The only difference is that they have a clear policy on feeding the children. Feeding is part of UPE. So when the child goes to school, everything is catered for. Therefore, in this situation, where teachers cannot force parents to bring food and at the same time they cannot chase children, it is like telling a parent to bring the child and allowing it to go without feeding. My request is that Ministry of Education and Sports takes up this issue so that it can design a policy that complements the existing ones, but incorporating feeding.

I also read, in the President’s speech that now that minimum wage for teachers has been raised to Shs 200,000 he did see any reason for teachers to absent themselves. However, I would like to say that there are two things here. Originally, teachers used to line up for salaries at the districts. The district officials could use that to discipline teachers who were absentees. This is no longer the situation – it is not possible to enforce such measures because teachers know that their salaries will be credited onto their accounts no matter whether they teach everyday or not. Headmasters also do not have any measures to enforce discipline among absentee teachers. 

Secondly, there is the issue of payrolls. A school could receive a new teacher in a given month, but after sometime that same teacher will be transferred to another school, maybe in a hard-to-reach area. When that teacher goes there and finds uncomfortable life, he goes his ways. At the end of the day you find a school payroll full of teachers’ names, but when those supposed to teach in that school are not enough. There is no system to check that out. 

I got excited by the President’s remarks on the road users when he said that if all of us became careful, we would have fewer accidents. That is wonderful. I only ask Government to design a system of sorting out the bad drivers, which would go a long way in reducing accidents. Anyway, when you look at the road designs that we have in Uganda, take the example of our modern road from Jinja to Bugiri; it has got no clear provisions for other road users.

On Prosperity-for-All, when I read the State of the Nation Address, the text on this was thorough. However, I noticed that it missed a point on the South Busoga Forest Reserve. The issue of that forest requires government to take a stand. I notice that it is taking so long for government to intervene, yet the people living there are occupying the forest illegally; they are there because of the presidential directives. Unfortunately, they are dying everyday; they cannot plan ahead because they are prisoners of hope –(Interruption)

MR KATURAMU: Madam Speaker, I wish to thank the hon. Member holding the Floor for giving way. The information I would like to give relates to the fact that there is no space to allow construction of provisions for other road users. What I am saying is that we do not clearly mark road reserves in this country. Any Member who has travelled to Tanzania will agree with me that all roads in that country have clearly marked road reserves. The intention is to provide room for putting up any other facility by government. This is not happening in our country.

MR KYEYAGO: Madam Speaker, I was talking about forest reserves and saying that, much as I appreciate the intervention by Government in terms of NAADS, SACCO support and the road network, the people living in the forest reserves cannot plan because they do not know their future. They do not know when they will leave the forest, and what crops to produce. Government keeps on promising to solve their problem; in that situation, people have failed to plant crops that can give them maximum yield. I request government to demarcate this forest; its problem is very unique. I think it is high time government came up to solve this problem.

6.03
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by thanking the mover of the motion. Like other Members have said, I also would like to thank the President for the good State of the Nation Address, more so, the mood in which he was, and the confidence he exhibited. I also would like to thank the Leader of Opposition for the good “fight-back” spirit in which he reacted to this address. 

I would like to thank the President for emphasising the issue of climate change. It is true we are now discussing hunger, but when you analyse it clearly, you realise that one of the causes of famine is the rain pattern that is being elusive. That is why most people did not harvest anything good from the last season. As a country which has been depending on nature, we should stop lamenting. Parliament should provide a vote on money for irrigation water - for production, since appropriation is our responsibility. That is the only way we are going to tame nature. 

The other point relates to corruption. I would like to point out that corruption is not partisan in nature. We need to move down to our districts where we are dispensing money. As Members of Parliament, we should not become hostages of corrupt councillors and civil servants who do the tendering, and are failing to supervise projects, if we are going to effectively fight this vice called corruption.

On the issue of the financial and banking sectors, I would like to say that although we have so many banks, the Ministry of Finance and Bank of Uganda should be very careful with Treasury Bills. As long as Bank of Uganda is going to give Treasury Bills to commercial banks, they do not have to risk with the private sector - to lend money to the private sector where there is risk of recovery. They would find it much easier to actually give the money to Bank of Uganda, which is risk free, and that causes problems for the private sector, and those who would want to borrow this money to create employment.

On the question of USE: I would like to thank the NRM government for UPE, USE and the intended Universal A-Level education for 2011. However, I would also like to urge our local districts and ourselves, to go down, because the biggest challenge out there is failure of completion, high drop-out rates and retention challenges. Hon. Minister of Education, even after addressing the lunch question, there is a lot that we need to do, to ensure completion, if we are going to get value for money.

On the economic crisis; I would like to assure those who were questioning the President’s intention, that whereas there is the actual economic crisis, there is also a psychological one, and this one can even be more dangerous than the actual one. So I think the President was trying to assure the country, and it is also very important. 

At the same time you can see that the President has gone further with the Ministry of Finance to indicate a stimulus in the agricultural sector, which is much needed, because when we are not very sure of what is going to come from foreign sources, you better plan inward and make sure that we support agriculture. 

I would like to urge Parliament to support the agricultural sector more, as this would go a long way in helping this country.

On roads; we in Bunyoro appreciate that for the first time we have seen a road tarmacked from Busunju to Hoima, and from Kafu to Masindi, but we have a problem on the Albert and Greiben in Butyaba-Wanseko, where the oil logistics (companies) have very many trucks with heavy loads on loose murram. If 20 trucks pass after rain, they wash away the whole road. We need immediate intervention to upgrade those roads so that the oil investment can continue.

On the question of the delayed early production scheme of oil, I would like to thank government that when we conceived the early production scheme in 2006, we were dealing with the initial Nascent 6 discoveries. We have now discovered oil in Amuru and North of Hoima. It is important that as a country, we anticipate the bigger problem of planning for a much more viable, bigger and feasible refinery in that area. (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, 33 members have contributed to the debate today, and I want to say that I have ensured that all the Members who had intentions to speak today and were present have been able to contribute. So, I adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you.

(The House rose at 6.08 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 9 July 2009 at 2.00 p.m.) 

