Wednesday, 6 July 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament Buildings, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Chairman, Mr Ekemu, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to order.

MR D. LUBEGA: Mr Chairman, as you are aware, 103 Members of this Council are also Constituent Assembly Delegates.  It has been hitherto not been easy for these Members who are at the same time Delegates to attend two meetings going on simultaneously.  Questions have been raised in this House as to how and when the timetable for NRC and CA meetings would be harmonised.  I promised the House that the matter was being addressed and that soon I will be coming to inform the Members of the position agreed upon to ensure meetings of both Houses so that they do not meet and clash.  In my capacity as Chairman of NRC Committee on Rules and Orders.  

I am happy to inform Members that the Business Committee of the Constituent Assembly discussed the matter on Thursday, 30th June, 1994 and it was resolved as follows: One, that on Mondays and Fridays when NRC does not sit, the CA will sit full time - that is from 8.30 a.m. to 1.00 p.m. and from 2.00 p.m. to 6.30 p.m. Two; that on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays, when the NRC sits, the C.A. will meet from 8.30 a.m. and adjourn at 1.30 p.m. to enable the CA delegates who are also Member of NRC to attend the NRC meetings on full time basis.  This arrangement will ensure that meetings of both Houses will not clash, as has been the worry of some Members of this House and Delegates in the CA I thank you, Mr Chairman.  (Applause)

MR NABURI:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for giving me the opportunity to contribute on the Motion in the House.  I would like to begin by thanking the House in the mature and sensible manner in which they have handled the Motion that was last week rejected by the House.  This shows indeed the revolutionary methods of work, which this House has adapted in accepting to recede the resolution, which was earlier on passed. 

Secondly, I would also like to take the opportunity to thank the government for having exhibited the spirit of understanding in listening to the voices that were raised in this House regarding the President’s Policy Statement to the nation, which was delivered here.  Indeed, this is again a clear manifestation that we are here to work in harmony with the government.  We are not adversaries.  

Having said that, there are many things, which the Members think had not been covered in the Policy Statement, delivered by His Excellency the President.  There are, indeed, many even according to me - which should have been highlighted but to me, I took that as an indication that the situation must have improved tremendously.  However, there are some problems, which if left unattended to or talked about in this House, will continue to crop up every now and then.  One of such problems, which I would like to talk about is the issue of insecurity in this country.  I am not just talking about insecurity in Karamoja.  I know there are many robberies here with violence that are taking place in our Capital City; on our roads, in the City and also in the countryside.  

I know that there is a problem of cattle rusting which has become a concern in this country.  As a Karimojong and coming from an area where this evil is pronounced, I want it to go on record that those of us who belong to the progressive forces in this country would like to see this evil put to an end.  (Applause) There has always been cosmetic courting on the issues of cattle rustling.  I want to state here now that - this is a serious issue which is not only affecting the neighbouring districts of Karamoja, that is Acholi, Teso, Sebei, Bugisu and Lango, but it is also one evil which is extending to the neighbouring countries of Uganda. (Interruption)

MR APUUN: Point of order. Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I do share with hon. Naburi the problems in Karamoja Region - which emanates from Karamoja region and I wanted to inform him about what is going on in Karamoja and also what is actually misquoted about me in the New Vision.  Is it in order Mr Chairman, for hon. Naburi just to brush things aside when I wanted to contribute? Is it in order Mr Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN:  That is not a point of order.  Please take your Seat. Hon. Naburi. Proceed, please.

MR NABURI:  Mr Chairman, I think I would like to say here that whether it was point or order or clarification, I have not really brushed anything from what the hon. Member was trying to covert me.  I would like to say here that this issue of cattle rustling is a serious issue.  I was in Karamoja five days ago and it is serious, it is starting again.  I want the Movement Government to understand that the machinery the government has put in place to fight cattle rustling in Karamoja is not doing exactly what they are supposed to do.  In fact, a whole Office of a special Assistant -(Applause)- has been created in the Karamoja Region.  That office instead of addressing a problem -(Interruption)

MR EKWARU: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to give this information. When the President visited Kapelebyongo in Soroti District on the 17th of February; he assured the congregation, which was listening to him that the Karimojong were to return guns within two weeks.  Within two weeks the Karimojong were supposed to return the guns either to the NRA or to a group, which had been formed as the vigilantee in Karamoja, but upto now - in a place like Okoboi, Akwyitoling - the Karimojong are still carrying guns.  Which is an indication that the problem of cattle rustling between the neighbouring districts with Karamoja will still continue until otherwise stern action is taken.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR NABURI: Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  I would like to concur with the hon. Member who has just given that information but this portrays exactly the type of people who are handling issues of insecurity in Karamoja.  I want it to go on record that these are double dealers.  They say one thing here and they practise another thing in Karamoja.  (Applause) 

I have risen up in this House on many occasions and I have requested government that we open a debate in this House; even if it is going to last us one week and discuss thoroughly the problems of cattle rustling in Karamoja and related insecurity issues but I am waiting for that day.  I am waiting for that day.  

Now, I have reached a state where I will have to come to this House, give a private Member’s Motion so that the issue of Karamoja; the issue of insecurity is discussed here and government advised accordingly.  (Applause) 

I want to say here - credit must go to the Movement Government.  The Movement government has organs in place in Karamoja, which have not helped the government.  A typical example is the recent creation of a Special Assistant for Karamoja.  The President’s Office has availed those office resources.  There is a lorry, UC 1357 - that lorry, instead of doing work of security in Karamoja, is now busy doing business in Mbale.  I have seen it on the 4th carrying charcoal; on the 8th it was transporting passengers.  It is being seen around Busia.  Some of my Colleagues here from Karamoja - unless if they do not want to call a spade a spade, they have seen this lorry transporting merchandise from Busia to Mbale.  That lorry for a month now, has been doing business instead of doing the business it is meant for in Karamoja.  That vehicle has nothing to do with the Ministry for Karamoja.  We are being told and we need transparency in dealing with insecurity.  We are told that the President’s Office and I demand that the Minister in charge of the Presidential affairs comes here and tells us how much money has been availed to the Department which is supposed to handle insecurity in Karamoja.  I am reliably informed that recently about three months ago - that Office was given 43,000,000/= Uganda money.  

That money has disappeared in individual pockets.  This we are not ready to tolerate it. We want to know what is happening.  There was the Tinyefunza Committee.  Tinyefunza is one of the all advanced NRC Members from Karamoja in addressing the security problem in the region but now under the new arrangements we have been left out.  We have been left out in discussing issues related to Karamoja.  I am told only few days ago, the Special Assistant was in my county which I represent in this House together with hon. Lorot: he collected people and discussed issues of the insecurity without informing us and in that meeting there was a resolution by the natives that they were not going to stop rustling into one of the counties inside Karamoja. (Interruption)

MR APUUN:  Is it in order Mr Chairman, for hon. Member taking the Floor to talk about somebody who cannot defend himself, and who is outside this House and besides that is it in order for him to talk about that lorry when we know very well that, that lorry is doing some good work. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Order hon. Members.  This is a part of a General Debate.  The hon. Member is in order.  Please, proceed.

MR NABURI:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Now, I want to touch on a very sensitive issue.  Whether we like it or not, as a House - you created a Karamoja Development Agency here by a Statute.  Whether we like it or not there is a Minister for Karamoja and until the President scraps that position of a Minister for Karamoja.  But now there is a serious development - whereby KDA is being by-passed; whereby the Ministry for Karamoja is being by-passed.  We are now being told that there is another organisation called the Teso Commission, which wants to address the problems of Karamoja.  I understand these great men - the Presidential Commission for Teso; I am told and NRC Members of Teso will bear me out that this Commission has -(Interruption)

MISS OMARA: Point of Information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Member on the Floor, that there is a Teso Commission, which was appointed by the President, and among its terms of reference, is stamping insecurity in Teso once and for all.  One of the problems of Teso is insecurity resulting from Karamoja but they have taken over the Karamoja probleMs

MR NABURI:  Mr Chairman, thank you for that information, but what I am trying to say is that these great men and ladies in the Teso Commission now think they have neat answers to Karamoja problem.  I would like to say here that they do not have the answers.  The answers to Karamoja will come from the people of Karamoja. The people of Karamoja are the ones  -(Interruption)

MR PULKOL:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor, hon. Naburi, that the recent development to organize a National Conference on strategies for peace and sustainable development in Karamoja and neighbouring districts is being organized by the Karamoja pacification committee headed by Brig. Sheikh Ali, organizing secretary is the Presidential assistant for Karamoja Peter Lokeris and the Vice-Chairperson from the Presidential Commission for Teso. 

Now, what that initiative is all about which the hon. Member needs to be informed, is if we can mobilise a national consensus both inside Karamoja and outside Karamoja to come out with strategies for long lasting peace and development, not only inside Karamoja but also in the neighbouring districts bordering Karamoja, we will have done service in this country and when official channels like KDA are blocked like the Ministry for Karamoja Affairs which is charged with such responsibility.  When such initiatives do not come from there, then where else can we go to as progressive people inside Karamoja and those outside Karamoja?  What we are calling for is that all the progressive forces in this country in Karamoja and neighbouring districts and other districts of Uganda should really cherish and join this force to chart a new course for this country.  Thank you very much.

MR ELYAU:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I think, we are missing a great point in this issue.  I was supposed hon. Naburi, the fact remains that what is a troubling problem in Uganda is the illegal guns. If illegal guns would be removed from the Karimojong that is the end of everything.  Today -(Interjection) yes just this morning a Member from Karamoja challenged Government that the Government has not protected the Karimojong, that they are protecting themselves with their own illegal guns.  You can see that issue. So, I think that illegal guns should be handled as an issue.  If there were no illegal guns, the problem would not be there.  How can you get protection when the guns are still there?  So, I am saying let us tackle illegal guns in Uganda, that is the problem.

MR NABURI: Mr Chairman, while I agree with hon. David Pulkol for the information he gave, I do not entirely object to all the progressive forces - to all the people who which Karamoja well to come together and try and diagnose the solution to the Karamoja problem.  I have just seen a letter its hon. Ongora Atwai having it, which is inviting a certain group of people for a meeting I think tomorrow.  I want to say here that I have not been rejected by the people of Karamoja and I have never failed in any of the elections and I can be listened to in Karamoja but what I want to say here, the measure Teso Commission and those who have got together with a Teso Commission are using is wrong.  I have received a programme for a conference scheduled to begin on the 16th.  I have gone to the Minister for Karamoja, he has no idea.  I do not think even the Prime Minister’s Office, which seems to have been drawn in by this group is aware of what is going on.  I am told this group has gone ahead and has solicited for funds -(Interruption)

MR KATEGAYA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman and hon. Members I get the concern of Naburi about this problem but the Office of the Prime Minister is aware of this conference.  It is aware. 

MR NABURI: Mr Chairman, what I want to inform this House is that this is not the first conference we have ever organized.  We have organized conferences inside Karamoja, we have organised conferences outside Karamoja but if the people in Soroti think they will have neat answers to Karamoja problem will be wasting their time.  I am told that this conference is going to involve spending close to 60,000,000 Uganda shillings; and a conference will last three days. Hon. Sekitoleko the Minister for Agriculture recently sent equipments to Karamoja using her resources of her Ministry and they have started working on a dam.  I do not know how much she has spent.  If that Shs.60,000,000 was given to her tomorrow, she will do three dams for the people of Karamoja instead of -(Applause)- because what I know - what I know is that bullet men - I do not know the list of the participants - these bullet men will come here, they will be accommodated in beautiful hotels here.  (Interruption)

MR BUTELE: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, with the greatest respect for the greatest Member from Karamoja, is he in order, number one; to be jealous, number two; to undermine what he himself cried for that the problems of Karamoja must be solved by the people in Karamoja and Nebbi; and when a committee was set here in 1989 or there about, which did not work, this is exactly what people wanted for all the elders and MPs and administrators from all the neighbouring districts to come together with Karimojong and they are there.  Is he in order to avert this peaceful intention and which is backed by the Government and by the people of all the area, is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN: He is not averting but I think he is lamenting that he should be incorporated.

MR NABURI:  Mr Chairman, I am not saying that is bad. But what I am trying to say is the method used to leave out a whole Ministry of Agriculture to leave out KDA, because part of the problem of Karamoja is development. If there is this money, why can we not involve? (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Please, hon. Naburi wind up your Contribution.

MR NABURI:  Mr Chairman, I would like here to say that I think what is important now is really to get hold of a real problem in Karamoja; the problem of insecurity.

MRS MARY OKER:  Point of order.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. My point of order is that if the point hon. Naburi is raising is affecting Karamoja and the neighbouring district then I do not see the reason why this conference should take place here in Kampala.  They will not see the reality of the fact.  The meeting should take place either -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, are you informing or you are raising a point of order?

MRS MARY OKER: Order, I am saying, order.  Is he in order that the meeting should take place in Kampala or should it take place in Karamoja?

MR NABURI: Mr Chairman, finally, I would like to say this that, this Government the NRM Government, if we really want to get the root of the problem of Karamoja, recently there was famine talked about.  The Government is going to set up a commission of inquiry of independent people.  I would like to propose to Government that a Commission of Inquiry composed of highly qualified people including experts in criminal procedure should be instituted by Government to go into Karamoja, interview people and come to Government with complete recommendation on how the problem of insecurity in Karamoja is going to be addressed.

The second point and last one then I sit down, I would like the Government to address and this I have been prompted because the hon. Member from Nyabusozi yesterday raised the issue of water. That is really a cardinal point. Let us address the problem of Karamoja.  KDA now has the capacity and has people in place who can dig a dam in less than Shs.20, 000,000 let us really avoid KDA resources let us give resources to Karamoja.  For instance, last year we were given Shs 39,000,000 we ended up getting only Shs 9,000,000 as a development budget.  What is Shs 9,000,000? So, I am appealing, let us not do cosmetic dressing let us appoint a commission of inquiry to go into Karamoja and let it come with a solution to Karamoja problem.  Be it security or otherwise.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

DR HIGIRO SEMAJEGE (Lwemiyaga County, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am thanking you for giving me this chance to speak and also I am very grateful that our House has known its responsibilities and we are really doing a good job. Because without this, I would not have had chance to make a comment on the Communication from the Chair.  A lot was said and that Communication is excellent in this way but there are a few points which needed to be stressed and which were not as stressed as I would have liked.  

Number one, is a question of life; and the life I am talking about is water. Water is life; without water, animals suffer and die.  Man and other crops do not survive, Mr Chairman, we know that in Uganda there are very many belts which are very dry but which are very important sectors of our economy.  These sectors have periodic long draughts.  This has been known for very many years, but it appears were still dependent on whether on chance.  You hear of famine -(Interruption) 

MR OKODI: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, while Uganda is endowed with plenty of water resources, I want to say there is luck of planning on the part of Government.  I am saying this because there is a famous Kacumu Water Works, which is feeding Lira town with water, a distance of about 40 KM.  Between Lira Town and Water Works itself there are settlements and therefore, people lure thirst for this water.  This water is just passing without catering for those people who are around.  This is a very unfortunate situation.

MR ORYANG:  Point of information. Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to give further information to the Informer and the hon. Member holding the Floor.  The Kacumu Water Project although outside Lira is meant for the Municipality but along the way the 42 KM run there are tees, if you know what tee means.  There are tees that are blocked up waiting to be connected to areas that are ready. The problem now is that the water is being paid for; it is not free of charge.  The service is to be paid for.  So, until and when the schools enroute - the centres enroute are ready -(Interruptions) I was saying when the schools and the trading centres on the way between Kacumu and Lira town are ready to pay for water there is no reason why they should not be connected.  It is not true that no body is thinking about the Institutions enroute.  This has been thought of a long time ago at the time of planning.  Thank you very much.

DR HIGIRO:  Thank you for your information.  I am very pleased that one of the Informers said that there is water but we lack planning. (Interruption)

MR MARWAS:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, our Rules of Procedure are very clear and Members, is the Deputy Minister of Local Government in order to come with his bag in the Chamber?

THE CHAIRMAN: It contains his documents. He is in order; please go ahead, hon. Member.  He is in order go ahead.

DR HIGIRO: Mr Chairman, I thank you very much. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, please take your set.  Order, please.  Hon. Deputy Minister of Local Government what is special in your bag?

DR HIGIRO: Mr Chairman, we are saying that the problem here is that we do not have a coordinated effort to develop water for both people, crops and animals; and the reason for this, water has not been taken as an important factor in our development.  In other countries where are item is very important, it is shown by the fact that there is an institution looking after that.  I know there is a Ministry, which cares for water, but sure secondary, it is in a serious way, there is nothing specific, when in Egypt they know that Swiss Canal is important there is a Ministry, which deals with the Swiss Canal. When they know that the pyramids are very important and tourism is important, there is a Ministry for Tourism.  

We have got a Ministry here for Custodian Board, we have got a Minister for Karamoja, we have got a Minister for Luwero but there is nobody who cares for water in Uganda Specifically. (Interjection) No, I have said it, I said that he has got so much on his hands that water really is a tiny part of his responsibilities. What I know is that there must be somebody who should specifically look after water.  In my place, in Lwemiyaga, people have been blamed, there is no development.  

But every year whenever there is a drought, people have to leave their homes in search of water.  It is periodic.  It happens also in Nyabusozi, and it in many parts of Uganda, and if there has been a Ministry as I know there is a Minister here, what has he been doing?  I mean what credit is there?  If the people of Uganda know that they have to migrate periodically because there is no water.  Cows have to die because there is no water and a Ministry is there for five years and no fruit.  I think that we are concerned; the Government should  -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for an hon. Member in his Contribution to censor a Cabinet Minister in this way?  Hon. Higiro is aware that there is a Minister responsible for Water, the remarks he is making implies that there is no Minister, there is nothing being done about water and, therefore, it is like a Minister not being in existence.  I think it is censoring the Minister, Mr Chairman.  Is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the hon. Member is making that Contribution very well aware that the Minister is present, and he will be answered in due course.  Please, preside with your points.

MR HIGIRO SEMAJEGE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I was not censoring, I was just telling you, that the Minister is there, he has done probably his best, but very little is seen in my area.  I think that is why I am saying that in the Speech of the President, knowing that there is famine in the country, knowing that people do not work in several times, knowing that schools get closed because children must follow their parents going to look for water.  I think it is worth for water that the President would have mentioned it, how he is going to solve it; and it is a very serious matter, not for Lwemiyaga.  It is not for many parts of Uganda.  

Another point that was mentioned - well it may not be in certain area but I want to mention it, because I see somebody shaking his head, but I am sorry, I will not answer that.  

Another point which was mentioned and I was very happy that it was mentioned, was tourism.  The President mentioned one country, which gets 13 billion dollars out of censoring. People go to the scenery and yet we have got a lot more, among the things which I wished to hear, they could have said was, in various countries we have got Bigo bya Mugenyi, this is an asset for the whole of this nation, and it is an asset for East Africa, and it could produce money on tourism. With little to do, all that investment that is indeed is a small simple road to that area, and I wish the Government should take it up. I have said it many times, but nobody seems to care, I would hope that, this time somebody will take up this point, since the President himself has realised that we have got assets which can produce money without spending a lot on it.  So, let us have a road to Bigo bya Mugenyi and let the world know that they can reach there.  This is our heritage and which we must be proud of.  

The third point is on divestiture. You know we made a decision and we approved it, and it has been going on; this House would have like to know so far what is the progress, secondly we would like to know what is happening to the process, we hear certain things have been sold, now is there a fund created, for special fund of this money, or is it going to the general fund, so that we just send it now such points should be known.  

Secondly, we know that Parastatals were initially established so that once an enterprise is ready, it would be sold to the local entrepreneurs, that was the objective but eventually it became a fact that parastatals were gifts of those who supported the Government, and therefore, they died the death we know.  

So, the entrepreneurs have not been helped now, now that we are investing this money which we are getting should specifically be used to assist local entrepreneurs coming up. Otherwise, if we do not do that, if we spend this money otherwise, we are going to see that once again we have thrown the economy into foreign entrepreneurs, and foreign entrepreneurs do not last long, we need to have local entrepreneurs to attached the foreign entrepreneurs, the two must be together.  A country without local entrepreneurs does not find it comfortable with the foreign entrepreneurs.  So we need to know whether this money is being used, Mr Chairman, to give easy credit, to attract local entrepreneurs -(Interruption)

ARUNA ADAM:  Point of information.  History is still in our mind. You remember in 1970, the target was tourism - that was because Uganda had built enough hotels. Now, when we privatise these hotels, my fear is that the hotel owners, if they were foreigners, may connive with tourists, instruct them to bank their money outside and come here just operate on local currency.  So, it is important that hotels should be owned by Uganda or by the Government, so that there is no such conniving, Mr Chairman.

MR HIGIRO SEMAJEGE: Mr Chairman, I was saying that this House needs to know that the decisions made here, especially, on the diversity is being profitable to the nation.  The fourth point, which I like in the Speech of the President, was that -(Interruption)

MR WENENDEYA:  Point of information. Thank you Mr Chairman. May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the money from the divesture of assets is being banked in the Bank of Uganda on a general account, and as a result, it is used by the Government on other things.  The point over here, Mr Chairman  -(interruption)

MR KATEGAYA:  point of information.  Mr Chairman, Members, since we are hon. Members here, I think we shall abide by the truth.  Mr Wenendeya is terribly telling lies to this House, the money is banked as by law in a Commercial Bank and we have directive that his money should not be used by for any general purposes. It is supposed to help young entrepreneurs coming up; that is the position.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order; please take your Seat hon. Member.

MR SENDAULA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman in view of the fact that the Leader of Government Business has explained exactly what happens to the money from companies that are divested, and in view of the fact that it has been stated that hon. Wanendeya had not research researched his story.  Is it in order for hon. Wanendeya not to withdraw the statement that has made in this House, because he is known to be continuously making statements without carrying out enough research?  Is he in order not to withdraw the statement he has made?  

THE CHAIRMAN: What the Rt. hon. Prime Minister gave was the correct position as far as Government is concerned, we do not want to dwell on anything else.  Please, hon. Higiro go ahead and wind up your points.

MR HIGIRO SEMAJEGE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, the other point which I need to stress, and which was mentioned here by His Excellency the President was about some ways where Ugandans can enrich themselves, while we can improve our standards of living and he gave an example of flowers.  Flowers can earn a lot of money.  This, in fact, I remember in my maiden speech, I mentioned that, if we wanted to privatise and that is to develop flowers we could make more money than we are making on coffee and for a very short time. This is something, which needs capital.  It is very, very lucrative, but initial capital is substantial.  

So, out of the money, I may suggest that we are getting from this divestiture, some of the money could be very useful, if it could be given to those who are capable or producing flowers for export, rather than being put somewhere else.  I am sure the Government is capable on that.  So, it is possible, let us identify those who have got good areas for flowers and even be assisted with special facility both in interest and capital and also facilities or this is something we can do, and eventually after two years we shall all benefit.  With these points mentioned, I hope that, something will work our and I want to be among those who definitely support the Motion that was on the Floor that the President’s Speech was extremely useful, it was clear and we need this kind of speeches not just once a year, possibly even more time.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE MINISTER FOR NATURAL RESOURCES AND MINERALS (Mr Henry Kajura):  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like with your permission to briefly to the various which have been made by hon. Festo Higiro. It is true, that water needs a lot of funding for it to make an appreciable impression.  

Back in 1989, the number of people, the percentage of Ugandans that had access to got drinkable was about 18, at the moment it is 30 per cent, so there has been some progress, however modest in terms of need.  There are organisations that are assisting us in this country in the provision of water and to limit extent sanitation. These are RUWASA in Eastern Uganda, which is perhaps the best funded by DANIDA, we have WATSAN, World Rutheran, and I can see hon. Peter Akure agreeing that they are doing some good work in Karamoja, Water Aid, Akavu in West Nile and so forth.  but these resources are not adequate to make that impact that we would want too, to look forward.  

However, currently, we have under active work, a Water Development Plan for Uganda, which if completed, we hope we will be able to attracted further funding from the donors. Now, hon. Higiro comes from a dry area, just as the Member for Kazo does. Now, in the past, these areas, say about 30 years ago, these areas were served by dams, these dams following the usual neglect that this country went through, have silted and are no longer serviceable.  This also applies to areas in Nakasongola and other parts of Uganda.  With the changing weather and climate that we are experiencing, it has become obvious that total dependence on rain fed agriculture, will not help Uganda’s Agriculture develop.  

So, we have to think actively on another alternative, and it has become progressively clear, that there is need to revive and reconstruct the dams that were built in the days of the British. Since we could not manage any resources from within the Budget.  We have made approaches to IDB, which since sent in an expert from Bangladesh, and he is working with our people, who have developed a programme, worth some dollars 20 million which we hope IDB will accept and fund. We cannot be sure as to when, but there is hope that they will.  

The purpose of this 20 million fund will enable us to acquire equipment, first of all to enable us to detail the existing dams, there are many in the country but over the years, they have been rendered useless, by - I think were all neglected by Ugandans, I think everybody waited for Government to desalted and - that it is.  So, we hope that, as soon as the funds are being made available, and the equipment has been received.  It will be possible to start actively on dams  -(interruption)

MR OKWERA: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I seek clarification. In Kitgum District, we had many water dams, and these dams are playing very important role, one, in providing being with water of drinking, two, to provide also animal with water for drinking.  Every rain season, water runs from Kotido through River Gabo, River Aswa and off to the Nile without this water being tap, and the dams were there. Can the Minister tell us when he is going to rehabilitate these dams and put them to use again?

MR KAJURA:  Mr Chairman, the dams in Kitgum Districts are part of the dams that I am referring to, that have been silted.  the Avist which is an Italian NGO is doing some valuable work in Kitgum area.  I believe the hon. Member should be aware of there their presence there - I would ask the hon. Member  -(interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Avis is not touching water at all. Avis is on the rehabilitation of dispensaries and hospitals only, and right now they are constructing on refugees and Lacuro Refugees Camp; they are not touching on water.

MR KAJURA: Mr Chairman, maybe, this is prioritising; that maybe they have realised that there is need to attend to dispensaries in the first instance, but I know, they are also attending to the water sector.  So, there is some work being done all over Uganda and the programme on dams covers the whole country, it is not only places in Karamoja.  So, we could do with more resources in the water sector, but this is not to say that nothing is being done as, the total resources that are sunk in water every year.  (Interruption)

MRS OKER: Point of order.  Mr Chairman - another national resources, we are on this side trying to put our ears to hear what he is saying, but we cannot hear anything. He is not in order he should speak so that we can hear. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, please use the microphone, and hon. Members, please, keep - (Interruption)

MR KAJURA:  I am sorry, Mr Chairman, if I am not being heard by some hon. Members, what I was saying in conclusion, that the water sector provides roughly dollars 50 million in terms of services, it is not enough in terms of what we are asked to provide or to meet the expectations of the people. But our programme which we have should take us - by the year 2005, we should have been able to provide good drinkable water to at least 50 per cent of the population. If and when this House is able to vote on more funds for the Water Sector, obviously our contribution or output will be greater.  But we continue to search for funds and we are continuing to make progress although it is not true, the Members of this House’s expectations, but if we can reach 50 per cent to provide water to 50 per cent of the population by the year 2005, when I talk about drinkable water within easy access I am talking in terms of 2 kilometres from a home to the source of water.  So, we are doing something and we could do more and we shall continue to solicit more funding from internal sources and also external sources.

DR YEKKO (Kween County, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Chairman, for allowing me to contribute on this Motion.  Well, having listened to what hon. Naburi and others, I have three points to talk about; that is on security, famine and tarmacking roads. 

About the insecurity, having listened to what hon. Naburi and others have said, my emphasis here will be to elaborate on serious note, on the trends their security has taken place since the beginning of this year.  Whereas, from the beginning of this year, people in Kapchorwa have lived in relative peace with our neighbours from Karamoja, from around December to about March this year, and many of you, especially, those from districts who neighbour Karamoja understand that there are negotiations going on to hold a conference on 16th of this month as regarding how to bring security in Karamoja and neighbours. 

It is regrettable that since April, up to last week on 28th of June, there have been six threats originating from Karamoja region and mainly hitting Kween County where I represent, and over six people have been killed and many others wounded.  The last two raids involved the killing of two civilians when they were traveling and were being driven towards Moroto District.  And then on the last week on Wednesday another group attacked the LDU Barracks in Kiriki and killed one soldier and they wounded others.  

It is observed that part of this could be from the withdrawal of NRA who were originally attacked to Mirikajore, just Bunya and Kiriki strong to the escalating security. Well, these places I have mentioned just in Kajore and Kiriki, are for this cattle rustling.  And it also doubted whether the Karimojong understand peaceful negotiations.  Because you remember that in February as the hon. Member from Soroti has said, His Excellency has given the Karimojong some two weeks to handle over the guns, up to now they have not handed over.  And then also at the beginning of this year the Karimojong moved away to neighbouring districts including Kapchorwa, and while they were there, it is found that they never indulge in any cattle rustling again.  But since April up to now, they have started raiding.  

So, I do not think these people will ever understand any peaceful language, I think some other methods we have to use in order to bring peace, is to convince the Karimojong and their neighbours and latest attacks which was last week which was in the LDU Barracks who have no animals seems to indicate that this is a move to complete the delay - the peace negotiations going on.  I think the Karimojong want to open, to create a corridor where they can pass without any interference at all.  When they want to continue their raids.  It is therefore, a constant view of people of Kapchorwa that unless stand measures are taken over by the government, conditions which existed in 1986, and 1987 may arise again.  At that time there was total insecurity in the whole area.

On the second issue of famine and relief food, much has been said about this by Members who have spoken earlier.  Well, I have a subcounty in my constituency known as Nyenge Subcounty, which borders Moroto District.  This area suffers from - it is in a rainy shadow so there is no rain, there is recurrent drought every year.  So that is a place which is so suitable for rearing livestock and in the 1960s it was one of the biggest sources of livestock in East Africa.  Then because the Karimojong were and are still very interested in animals, they have therefore taken away animals from this place since between 1970s this place has no more animals that is cattle mainly.  People who are now resettling, are indulging in unpredictable crop production.  It is unpredictable because of the persistent droughts, as there is always constant famine in the area. I am grateful to government, for having supplied 150 bags of maize flour last week, that is a good - people of the area are grateful for them, I have mentioned to them that they gave them 150 bags after a period of over 6 months since they got a last supply.  Well the problem I have here is that, it is in the method of this distribution of food because these people who are trying to resettle in this area, are few.  Government really takes them as a priority because they are only about 1,000 families they say they more interested in those places where they are more people who are starving than less people who are starving.  

So, you will find that food is taken to a place like Moroto where they are over probably 50,000 people who starving and leave 1,000 people in Nyenge because they are 1,000 they are not considered a problem but they continue starving.  They went to Moroto more regularly.  The issue here is that satisfying of 10,000 people does not satisfy hunger of 1000 people, for example, if they are - if there is hunger in Moroto or Pallisa and each has 20,000 people who are starving, that hunger in Moroto and Pallisa will not be satisfied if food is taken to 200,000 people who are displaced by RPF in Kisoro or Kabale.  I think there is no logic there.  

So, the issue I am bringing here is to take what is due for that area and what is due for the other one.  If they are 200,000 people on the other side, take there 200,000 bags, and if they are 1,000 people here taken them 1,000 bags and not always consider the ones who are the majority and leaving the other who are few to continue starving.

MR ATUTO: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the current speaker holding the Floor that, it is not only in Sebei that the impact of food has not been felt. In the whole of Soroti District in fact, we are still wondering whether the two vision has been food.  In my County for example, we have received food twice only, the first consignment being about 20 bags per subcounty, and when you divide it down to the parishes you will end up with two bags.  The second consignment was 36 bags per subcounty. Again when you come down to dividing to parishes, it becomes useless.  So, up to now we are wondering whether the money, which was released, has actually been used to the purpose of saving lives in the starving districts.  Thank you.

DR YEKKO: Thank you for the information.  And whether even transporting this food when I am referring to Moroto passes through my constituency.  So this food going to Moroto passes through that place, is creating a political because people are wondering is the government serious on distributing food. After all even the famine which is in that subcounty is directly by the people from Moroto District who are always being supplied with food.  So, the relief is bringing the political problem to our side that we are not pressurising much no the government.  And that will even be worse when the food is from one programme who even decide where to take the food.  It is not the government of Uganda, which decides where to take the food, but it is the World Food Programme, which certainly is shaping our government. 

Well it is true that on that issue with the President’s Speech was on the tension to tarmac many roads in Uganda, one of them is Kapchorwa inclusive that if funds are permitting.   Therefore, my question here is, is it at all in the Budget of 1994/1995 whether feasibility or not because we are already beginning to experience a problem.  People at home are always at our necks asking when will the tarmacking of the roads start?  Because they think the President’s Speech is overall that you have to be implemented. (Interruption)

MR KANYOMOZI: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor, the President just mentioned that he was going to look for funds.  He did not say that we were going to get these roads tarmacked, for if I am sure if he gets the funds then the intentions will be fulfilled.

DR YEKKO KISA: I am quite informed about that, that the President has said that if the funds permit him.  But the question is the Budget is also just a proposal; he did not propose in the present Budget or not; he said that is a different thing, if he did not include it in the Budget.  I have said this because there have been many promises to the people in Kapchorwa - sometimes when the President visits Kapchorwa.  He promised us feeder road equipments, which he said would come at the beginning of this year.  People are now asking, the year is ending and the road equipments have not come.  

The same about electricity; we were informed there will be electricity by the end of, I think by the beginning of this financial year.  The financial year started but there is no electricity, which actually has put us in an embarrassing position; we as leaders for that area. With those few words, Mr Chairman, I support the Motion.  That you.

MR DIDI AGARD (West Moyo, County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Chairman, for allowing me to make a statement covering some of the issues that Members have raised during their contributions from the motion - Communication from the Chair.  From foreign affairs I have identified the main issues as relation to their neighbours particularly Rwanda and Sudan, and how the interact on us.  In the recent OAU Summit, there were queries raised about that, East African Community, and performance of the Ministry.  I was able to collect this poem for Members’ contributions from the Hansard and from highlights in the Press. 

Allow me to start by speaking that many of the issues seem to be based on either non-reporting or misreporting by our friends.  I do remember for example, that two weeks ago, when a Member imputed that the visit by His Excellency the President abroad to solicit for investments was an exercise in futility. I did not make a correction here, but it was not reported in the House.  So, that shows that either the Press has already developed their bias and they would like actually even some of these references of putting foreign affairs in a spot light. Are references really aimed at a government?  I will try to be very frank and answer therefore, accordingly. 

 I would like Members to realize that any such position based on temptational voting or based on envy, either for performance of government or not, I mean performance of government or Members of government, should not discourage you from looking for the truth.  Because very often temptation requires that if already you have a headline, let President walk out of summit.  Even if you are given an explanation, you are not interested.  So, I will be general in this remark, it is because most of these specific details are obtainable either in documents that have since been passed.

Let me start with the matter of all questions, of all biases, the case in Rwanda, it is obvious that, that is a bit noble for certain sections of the Press to which for the living public to think that Uganda support the rebel movement there, the RPF.  Now this has been recarried especially, in second status of the Press, continuously.  And many other people have wanted the reference Uganda to be continuous so long as the reference to Rwanda is still current in the agenda.  This is despite the first people themselves.  We all know that from 1991, when the OAU Summit encouraged a regional resolution to conflict and in this particular case, the neighbouring countries under the chairmanship of President Mobutu was asked to promote reconciliation in that area, in that country will all the neighbours participating with the OAU supporting.  As a neighbouring country, Uganda fully lived to its commitment and attended all the meetings that were held in Arusha, which resulted in the Arusha Accord.  The provisions of that Accord have been made public; and they are available for those who still would like to assess to them.

Now, despite all that, you also know that in transparency Uganda had been in contact with every party that was interested on this Rwandan issue.  For a start the OAU was encouraged in answer to allegations that Uganda might be involved, to post forces, OAU forces on the border.  This was done, the French at one stage to show them interest, they were allowed to put their forces on the ground.  What happened from those two forces was that, very often humbly we would go and make a statement or did not see this.  And when attempts were made to take this matter to International it was Uganda who requested the United Nations to bring UNOMUL, you may like to make distinction about these things.  UNAMIL is what is in Rwanda at the border, it is a bilateral arrangement between Uganda and the UN, and it is dispel all allegations that, there may be linkages or movements of the rebels in Rwanda coming to Uganda.  That UNOMUL still exists, and in fact Uganda’s role has been appreciated.  (Applause)

Now following even the 6th approach when President Habyarimana and his colleague President of Burundi were killed, at least CNN has been very prominent in showing to the World what has happened.  The first causalities were members of political parties in Rwanda; this is all known. Then it has come to light that certain forces had every force as their agenda, and the use of Machetes force have been clearly shown to the World.  For those who would have wanted that Uganda was involved.  I think it is clear, therefore, that if you wanted any involvement would not be engaged in exporting Machetes and wars.  So, let us please, realize that you cannot have wishful thinking; your wish cannot be transformed into an internationally acceptable fact.

DR TIBERONDWA: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, could the Minister clarify whether he is making a ministerial statement, or whether he is contributing.  Because he was asked -(Interjection)- yesterday the House requested that the Minister responsible for foreign affairs should give a statement to this House.

MR DIDI AGARD:  Mr Chairman, I did start by saying, by thanking you for allowing me to make comments based on allegations.  Therefore, you can consider it a ministerial statement.  Even if it is, it must be Cabinet ministers who must make it.  I was telling you about the recent events, which it seems create the vacuum, do not forget that the events of 6th April was followed by the withdrawer of UNOMUL; and by the French forces from Rwanda, and we all know that there was escalation in murders and massacres what we called genocide, and it is conceivable that some of the forces to the conflicts had to come and occupy this vacuum, but as the Rwandese affairs.  What I am saying here is that link with Uganda, which is unfortunate.  You will have to know also, 

Mr Chairman, Members would like to know that since the even of 6th April, the UN has convened a meeting in Geneva which was attended by all the interested parties, and decision arrived at that meeting, clearly spelt out the need to focus on the reasons for genocide and recommended that would it be appropriate to have an International tribunal to try the culprits and punish the culprits of the present perpetuities of this genocide.  As a prelude to meaningful process, which you see a reconciliation, national reconciliation and even revisit the Arusha Accord which was the framework by which all Rwandese forces had agreed to a kind of interim government following the agreement that will be present war, unfortunately we all know that the agreement had stopped.  

So, the International Committee has now made recommendations as to how best revise the Arusha Accord.  And it is on this basis that, I would like to turn to the French troops.  You know very well that as I said immediately after the events of 6th April the French withdrew. The UN Army also withdrew.  I remember the OAU Secretary General made frantic attempts to appeal to the UN Secretary General for UN Army not to withdraw if only because they were a force on the ground.  Because of the difficulty of assembly some people have tended to give the impression that the African countries were either fearing to go and be involved but the OAU Secretary General’s argument was that even before you convene the OAU to approach this issue, a force which was on the ground if properly supported and boosted could solve the immediate problems of may be (1) saving populations which are under threat of massacres or even going out to rescue populations who are in eminent danger of being killed and also facilitating with relief.  

So, the French apparently approached the UN Security Council that since they know the area, if they were allowed they would immediately be able to put in the presence, and the UN accepted the French intervention.  What I hear in the radio of jet fighters, I do not know whether these jet fighters are necessary for relief or for distribution of medicine and so on but that is something I also hear on the radios and papers.  When our President came, President Museveni in a press conference did explain that the involvement of the French was accepted by the Security Council. So I hope Members, if there are any developments like what you hear in the press about giving orders that is outside what I wanted to explain to you here.

With regard to Sudan, you know very well that another initiative through the EGAD is still and this process is still on going and in the last meeting there was some agreement on what the agenda items are.  But may be Members should like to know, that even with Sudan like in the case of Rwanda we have very good bilateral relations.  We have permanent joint commissions through which we cover many areas.  

Like in the case of Sudan I will give you two examples.  There is operation lifeline to Sudan.  Since it is the interest of the international community that no force should be allowed to use food as a weapon of war, it is agreed that the parties to the conflict must identify people who are competent to supply food or other relief and this operation in the case of Sudan is called Operation Lifeline Sudan.  This seems to be an operation which many people have not understood because may be they did not know.  So, when you see convoys of lorries going to the Sudan, it is under this operation lifeline to Sudan; to stem accusations that there might be some corroborations between certain forces.  

In our bilateral arrangement - through our bilateral arrangement, Uganda has allowed for the Sudan Government to station members of their armed forces inside Uganda and inspect all these lorries who undertake this relief operation under Operation Lifeline in Sudan.  This exercise is going on.  May be to explain in part why we have had a relief from bombings in Uganda because I remember one time a bomb exploded in Moyo not one hundred yards from where I was.  I was saved because it had rained very heavily that day and a bomb only made a very big crater about 100 yards from where I was sitting.  So, both in the case of Sudan and in the case of Rwanda, likewise all our neighbourhoods, the issue to me has been more -(Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, before the hon. Minister leaves our connection with countries which are in problems, I think it would also be a good thing if the Minister could brief this House and, therefore, brief the nation about the lead story which appeared in today’s Daily Topic suggesting that the government is withdrawing NRA soldiers from Liberia.  That statement was attributed to the hon. Minister of State for Defence he made here yesterday and as far as I can remember, I do not think that the Minister made that statement.  I think we would like some clarification on this very important matter.

MR AGARD DIDI: I intend to come to that when I come to the OAU and since my Colleague, the hon. Minister of State for Defence is here, I am sure he will be too happy to make the clarification. 

Now, what I want to state here, is that the problem with allowing too much sensation has been the denial to encourage the parties to a conflict to reconcile themselves.  Because you invest now in image building in making friends, so you find, if it is noble to say the problem in my house is cause by my neighbour, they tend to invest too much in blaming that neighbour and if you as our leaders realise that you are not helping your neighbour, if you do not say in the end but you still allow your children to stay in the neighbourhood; these are details which I feel it is not really a part of my position but part of the sensation which I think is unfair.  Because we have noticed that like in the case of Rwanda, earlier on there was too much investment extended to Rwandan Government -(interruption)

MR CHAIGA BORODI: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, the hon. Minister said that we are now having good relations with Sudan and some time Sudan bombed Arua and Moyo. I want to know whether Sudan has already compensated those people.  Thank you.

MR AGARD DIDI: Well, Mr Chairman, maybe if I gave the Sudan as an example.  We know very well that very often the Sudan Government officials have made statements to the effect that Uganda was supporting the SPLA.  I think it is safe to tell you here that you cannot be involved in reconciliation when you are biased and the fact that we have been involved in all these processes, because parties to a conflict can always demand that we do not accept so and so and so far I am happy to report that the parties to the conflict both in the Mobutu initiative and EGARD initiative have Uganda being appreciative as a very effective member. 

So, therefore, even if somebody believe that so and so was supporting my enemy, the fact that we have been able to show them that we are interested in greater peace has encouraged them to the peace process and I would like you, Mr Chairman and Colleagues, to do the same whether with regard to national reconciliation or even projecting issues which rather if you left to sensational people to project will give the impression as if nothing is happening here.  I take this that Foreign Affairs has been used in the name of this because I can imagine when you do boxing, you do shadow boxing, there is a bag which is filled with full of feathers then they put gloves in your hand, so when you practising you keep on jabbing that bad, it is called a punching bag.  I take it because Foreign Affairs might have been used by those detractors whose aim was really to kick at the government.  

I think, therefore, it is better to understand that we are prepared to carry our foreign affairs in projecting you image abroad, we have been very happy that in the various trips of the President abroad where some of these issues have been put squarely to him, he has done justice and supported, he was ably explained the position of Uganda and that has in turn made the work of Foreign Affairs much easier.

Let me turn now to the OAU; as I explained to this House, about two weeks ago stories of a walk out during the OAU were not true and were unfounded.  The House may like to know that during the OAU there was a committee, which deliberated on the Rwandan situation.  At the Committee deliberations naturally issues were raised like those who represented the Rwandan Government who had wanted Uganda’s condemnation to be linked as part of the resolution.  Everybody rejected this and Uganda’s report was adopted there was no question that there was any walk out by Uganda.  In any case the OAU Secretary General’s report on troubled post touched on all the areas where there has been trouble, Somalia, Sudan, Rwanda, Angola, Mozambique.  All this was explained in the Secretary General’s report but the report went further because it covered many other areas, you will remember, for example, the activities of OAU Liberation Committee have now expired because it was backed by our founding fathers of OAU to liberate the continent.  

One of the highlights of the recent Tunis OAU was the admission of South Africa and the winding up of the Liberation Committee and with that in fact the Council of Ministers and the Summit deliberated on ways of how to focus in the future because after you have now liberated the country the next problem affecting the country are things like conflict avoidance, national reconciliation.  Unless thee are put in place things like peacekeeping, peace making or conflict management are reversed.  

So, the Summit has been invited to reconstitute the OAU Liberation Committee or the next thing now, as a logical successor to the Liberation Committee is that kind of mechanism which will enable Africa not only to wait for outsiders to come and solve our problems so that we being addressing these issues which will mean, as the present case in our neighbour will have proved that regional peace is important to every component member and therefore it is a logical development from the end of the Liberation Committee for the OAU to go into this area.  The Summit also deliberated on issues like economic co-operation in Africa and with the other trading blocs. So, these were very many heavy subjects which were all attended by the Uganda Delegation led by H.E. the President.  

During the Tunis meeting the President in fact had a lot of bilateral meetings with heads of states and the Secretary General of United Nations.  There were also side meetings.  There was a meeting held under the auspice of President Mobutu on the question of Rwanda and it was well attended, the confidence in Mobutu was confirmed as the mediator and he had wanted to achieve a ceasefire and the parties to the conflict even agreed to that although what reverberated during the discussion was that unless you link ceasefire with massacres you may not be solving the problem because given a scenario whereby one of the parties like in this case the rebels, the rebels are a party to the Arusha Peace Accord and they are party to the cease-fire if tomorrow one was available but they may not be a party to what was ordained earlier as it reflects all these killings of opposition parties.  So, if by one way you insist only on a cease-fire and you do not address the question of the massacres, this issue was mooted and you can understand now although President Mobutu as a mediator did announce a cease-fire you can now see how difficult it is to have a cease-fire in a vacuum.  (Interruption)  

MR KARUHANGA: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, having provoked this debate at that level I feel very grateful and I think the House is benefiting a lot of contribution from the hon. Minister of Foreign Affairs.  As a Member of the Committee of this House on foreign affairs, I think it is now clear that we as Parliament have a role to play in matters that affect our country, which are foreign.  

While we do not want to involve ourselves so much in details as we involve ourselves in local matters, I think our Committee should really be favoured more often by the Minister concerned to brief us so that we can also express some of the views of the Members which need not be made in public because some of those committees although they are open in public but there are matters which we would like very much to dialogue with you so that you can also know the opinion of the Members which can shape our foreign policy.  

For example, the question of arrest of a friend of Uganda in the name of Abiola who won elections and now he is in jail by the military junta there, we could address these matters and we could them help to shape your -(Interjection)- we do not know where he is, the court is looking for him, he is no where.  These are matters, which we would like to influence your foreign policy so that when you are dealing with these foreign countries you can say that our Parliament is behind this type of thing and we were, for example, very grateful as a committee when we realised that South African troops - the ANC had been assisted by our government and we are very proud that you are opening an embassy in that place but these are the types of exchanges that we as a Backbencher are asking to get from the government.  Thank you.

MR AGARD DIDI:  Thank you for those comments.  I believe that a Committee on Foreign Affairs can invite us and I personally I am ready any time.

Also during the Tunis meeting other meetings were held like the one under the Chairperson of Benin.  As ably explained here yesterday by the Minister of State for Defence, the involvement of Uganda in Liberia was requested because of reasons of patronage within the ECOWAS some of the fighting forces consider that the major powers in that region want to make satellites out of some of them.  

So, for issues like disarmament and so many other considerations they requested that forces from outside should come and I am sure I can tell this House that some of the initial contacts with Uganda started with these elements themselves, that is, if anybody was to operate in our area like you then we would feel that you are truly neutral because as I told you to be accepted in mediation the first rule is that you must be neutral.  You may not be neutral on issues but you must be neutral to the parties because if somebody has an agenda which is abhorrent like as in places, even if you are a mediator, you can say that, that is not acceptable but as a principle so in this case may be the Minister of State may like to elaborate because he is the one being misquoted but I did not hear him say anything which was attributed to what the papers have said.  May be after this brief comments he may like to make a statement on that one.  But I can say that the involvement of the Ugandans in Liberia has done great honour to us.  Consider the Uganda Army we know during Amin -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, some time back the press reported that some of our soldiers were abducted by Taylor’s soldiers.  May I know whether those soldiers of Uganda have been released? 

MR AGARD DIDI:  I think when my Colleague comes later on he will give an answer.

I wanted to say that generally if we do not appreciate, in the past all the kind words to us was that compared to where we have been, we have done well but I think we have risen to higher levels now because this at a continental level you can be targeted as a disciplined force enough to be invited, you can see how far really we have gone when our army especially during Amin was the one which gave us the only image, however it was taken in the world, you go anywhere they say this.  

So, these sons of ours I think they have done us proud and I am sure, unlike the situation in Somalia, why we did not send our forces to Somalia because of no clear identification of what their programmes are like the Minister of State for Defence explained to you yesterday, these people have a clear mandate and a clear mission and may be later on the Minister will tell you but I believe we must really commend these sons of ours for a job well done, they continue to do.

Coming to the East African Community and COMSAR, since the Minister of Trade and Industry is here I will allow him to go into the details later on except to tell you that we now can see a definitely clearer political climate of co-operation in this region and I think time is ripe for us to encourage as governments revisiting those rules which were too stringent or which made the co-operation difficulty but also to learn from the mistakes of the past. You know the Community used to own assets so consistent with our liberalisation programme let us encourage co-operation to grow from down.  If a party here is collaborating with a party there, encourage them to move forward and also what the government can do is to removing to what we call non tariff barriers, road blocks and so on and also harmonising policies.  

Recently, we heard that the budget was read simultaneously between the three East African countries.  These are the kind of policy measures, which the government can do in a limited manner, but I think the main drive, the economic co-operation and integration must be left more to the forces from down.  Once you create a political atmosphere of confidence building and assurance is that the government is there to protect you I think that is really the major thing both in terms of the East African Community and even in the greater Commissar area.  For me although this should be the Department of Trade and Industry, I think what we say will be consistency with those. 

So, with Foreign Affairs, we all know very well that we have a lot of difficulties financially, financial constraints might have hit Foreign Affairs hardest, because for us budgetary allocations had currency.  So, if their shortages there were any slight cut affects us, so this has had an impact in our operations and we have had to close Japan.  So, once we have gone through these it is not enough to say, this was because of the last performance of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  I think we should put it in perspective and realise that to promote your image, to promote markets, you need relations you must go further I am a traditional Foreign Service officer so I hope the Foreign Service officer will spare me this.  But the new foreign offensive should not always make a clear distinction this is Foreign Service, this is trade, this is that.  Because I think the man out there should be a package so that whether it is promoting tourism there is enough insight who investors or even security guard because all this are related matters.  So, I think in that case Members should now realise that the was forward is to appreciate that constraints which have made our Ministry staff especially outside, some times live miserable life could have been avoided.  

To this end I am happy, like the Committee of the House, Elly Karuhanga who have often drawn attention to the need for a clear conscience foreign programme and so on.  So, with that I think it is revolutionary to accept mistakes where mistakes are blamable on the part of the exist staff, i think the important thing is that as an organic way out the unit should be allowed to expand and all of us should help it so that when it grows in the right direction.  Mr Chairman, I will give chance to my other Colleagues to make other statements, I thank you.  

MR RUTAROH (Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for the opportunity you have given me to contribute on the Motion on the Floor.  I will make a few observations with respect to the speech made the President on the 16th of last month.  The first point I would like to talk about is to do with poverty or richness for that matter.  It is true like the President stated that the economy is growing and very first, there pieces of evidence to show that the economy is growing.  But there also pieces of evidence that people are actually poorer and poorer as we go there by day -(Applause)- and we have been given figures for the rate of growth of the economy, we have been given figures for the rate of growth of the population and I am sure these are supposed to be related in economic terms, there should be a position stated by Government to give life and hope to the people as to when the rate of growth of the economy will catch up with the rate of grow of the riches of the people so that liquidity can be experienced, so that people can afford to sent their children to school, so that they can afford to live a decent life.  The point I am trying to make is that the people are saying yes, if the economy is growing, why are we poor, can the Government say when they expect people to be better off than what they are today. This is the point I would like to make in those few words.

The second observation is to do with sell of public enterprises and public property. This House passed the Law to allow Government to sell public enterprises; most of the public enterprises were initially political by the taxpayer, when selling consideration is normally given to a market price in respective of a level of investment of investment.  

Different methods of sell have been adopted and there is a joint venture, outright sell, there is even liquidation, hon. Members we have heard of companies which have been put they do not work for a fraction of a close seeds of the sell, can you imagine a time when a receiver gets beads from various people or various leaders and the beads is not much the pay his demanding from a company it may mean that the tax payer will be asked to top up what the receiver is working for.  I imagine we had to revisit some of the processes of sell that we have put in place.  

Recently, there has been announcement talking about a team going around surveying houses or pool houses, there is a policy by the Ministry of Land to sell pool houses to benefit mainly the civil servants, in the budget as read by the Minister a 40 per cent salary increase on average levied.  What I imagined the highest paid civil servant today is about 120,000 shilling per month, after getting that bit of information I visited Housing Finance Company and asked them suppose as they are proposing these were to be mortgaged how much would one be required to pay on a monthly basis and I gave them a imaginary valuation and they told me that say a house which is valued at 30 million a civil servant would be required to pay four hundred and seven thousand shillings per month for a total of 16 years at the rate of 14 per cent interest.  A 40 million shilling house if the valuation is at that level will be required to pay five hundred and forty two thousand seven hundred shillings per month.  One of 60 - one would be required to pay a monthly installment of Shs 814, 045 per month.  Now, I have been asking a question there are many other values but I will not read all of them.  Given the first fact that the highest civil servant gets about Shs.120, 000 per month will this scheme benefit any civil servant?  Will it not encourage certain practices for people to be able to acquire these houses.  (Interruption)

MR BAGEINE:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to give an information to the hon. Member holding the Floor, that the scheme presupposes that the civil servant will be given housing allowance which they can use pay the loan.  Thank you.

MR RUTAROH:  Thank you very much for that information, Mr Chairman that is a very, very encouraging piece of information.  But, I have said earlier on that our budget said the increase in salaries was about 40 per cent which raised it to 120 this is not because Government is refusing to give these allowances, these allowances are not in place because Government is unable to give the money this is my understanding, unless of course I can be advised since the Minister for Finance is here is that the money is there and people will be given these allowances I have no query as far as this goes.  

But we have heard that the Government is not yet able to give a living wage. That living wage would include adequate housing allowances, now this housing allowance of five hundred forty and two for a forty million house, many of the houses occupied by Ministers will be valued in the range of 90 million plus.  If I can tell you that a house of 90 million at the rate I had stated earlier on one would be required to pay one million two hundred and twenty one thousand monthly installment, can you hon. Members see the time when Government will be able to pay that type of allowance.  

My point is that the scheme they are talking about may never benefit the intended parties.  On the same point I would like to say that priority was meant to go to the sitting tenants. We know a very, very small fraction of the civil servants houses, now this is to encourage them to motivate them to work hard and harder for Government.  What we will motivate the non-Government tenants who are civil servants will they get if these are given this other allowance, will they get? So, I am asking where they can also buy and to get motivated and work very hard for Government it is what to consider I think. 

I wish also to comment on development projects in different ministries, you will have read in papers that officers who man projects in different ministries do get some motivation over and above other civil servants in the same offices and I am going to ask when all these projects come to an end, when they have been motivated when they are the ones who are working extremely hard will they not go back sitting on the - and therefore, Government starts losing.  What I am seeing today is that, where there is a project officers are fighting to go and occupy those positions this is true, if you man a Ministry, in fact, I would say Ministers who head Ministries where there are projects you will find new vehicles.  

So, I think you must think about these projects and how they operate and think about spreading over whatever allowances to all civil servant not merely to people who are on project, because I think every civil servant is cog in the wheel of Government if all civil servants who are not on project sat and kept quiet these projects probably would never give us the results that we expect.  So, I would like to ask Government to reconsider the way allowances are paid out to project manning officers against those who do not have any projects.

The other point I would like to touch very briefly is retrenchment, there is as I said earlier evidence that there is lack of liquidity, there is obvious unemployment even if you do not retrench, there is lack of a living wage and there are pieces of evidence that show that the crime rate is coming up, and yet we continue to retrench at the rate they are retrenching.  My worry is not about retrenchment per se; my worry is to do with the rate of retrenching when there is very, very, little liquidity in the population, when retrenchment is us available even if you do not retrench because the economy has not grown first enough there aren’t many avenues of employing our own children who leave school of employing our ordinarily population and now we are reducing like you would add an insult to an injury we are reducing the opportunities of employment and I think the other observation I made about the increased primary rate or at least this is my opinion from what I see or what I read in papers must also be contributed to by the way you throw people out of their jobs.  I would like to beg the Government to move at it’s pace as the economy grows we retrench at the rate which would match the way the economy is growing but if we throw everybody on the street I can see a time when we shall suffer we the people who are doing the retrenchment. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the Member should be informed that, the system of retrenchment itself is what is worse, many, many people have been retrenched without any notice as although these people do not have families, you will find somebody coming on duty he just handle your work and here you are you get your letter and you go, you knowing what is happening to this person.  Not knowing that this is a person who has got a family, who has got children who are schooling, this is really an issue about retrenchment.  We do not refuse retrenchment it is part of life, the economy is changing but the way to approach this issue should be looked into seriously. Because it does not address Ugandan workers as people we are treated as slaves in this retrenchment exercise and we are in our country and we claim to be independent and we are treated as although we are slaves. This thing of retrenchment, Mr Chairman, should be looked into.

THE CHAIRMAN: The point is take, Mr Chairman.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. Why, but as a point of information to the Member holding the Floor reading excerpts from the NRC Sectoral Committee on Public Service page 87 Article 7.3 part 2 sub-part 3 even in the retrenchment exercise, there have been notable multi-parties and here there were observation by the Committee and the team from Public Service where the Minister was present and the committee observed that either due to lack of records or poor keeping of records or due to out right malice by some senior officers, some good officers had  been retrenched and one might add those who should have gone are retained.  

Behind that page, on page 88 under living wage the - element that with retrenchment the retained officers will get a living wage under a living wage observations A(1) Government committed to pay a minimum living  wage subject to availability of funds which hon. Kafumbe Mukasa never has enough of there is in sentence but available facts revels that savings as a result of retrenchment and increases in revenue collection are being applied to other Government expenses e.g. a total of 20,000 employees were retrenched, 13,000 officers were retrenched collection from revenue collection 1991/92 increased by 70 per cent but saving and increased revenue collections were not visibly applied to increasing wages so, there is still a wide gap between the purported commitment of Government and actual party.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS KULANY: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I want clarification.  I am actually perturbed this is civil service which they claim in the 60s was the best in the sub Sahara Africa, and the same civil service is now inefficient.  Isn’t the Government being really irresponsible towards its citizen by dumping them to nowhere and not giving them an alternative to there living isn’t part of encouraging poverty and stagger.  I want that clarification, Mr Chairman and creating unemployment at the same time thank you.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that he stated that he is worried about the retrenchment and some Members may be found on the streets.  I would like to inform him that already in the Marketing Board our sisters and brothers were already laid off play around with a word retrenchment by calling it temporary off and majority of them since yesterday have been given letters without a single coin to transport them back home.  Another example is UTC of where they just mocked them with about 80,000 shillings and the majority of them have already used that money and they cannot go anywhere. I am wondering are investors coming here to create an out door for our brothers and sisters to leave the country or improve on the economy.

MR RUTAROH: Mr Chairman, I wish to thank the hon. Members for the information given to me.  I want to clarify that I am not opposed -(Interruption)

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I want to inform my dear Friend hon. Rutaroh holding the Floor that Government has never said, it is paying sufficiently.  But we should recall, in terms of payment, in terms of real purchasing power, the government workers each year, are getting better.  In 1986, at a certain level; the civil servants were getting 260 per cent inflation that was almost no army.  Over the period of time and as it was said in the Budget Speech.  Government has targeted 1997, to arrive at a living wage.  It is also not true that government is not honest - its words, because, in the last Financial Year, after paying a 40 per cent increase; as a result of retrenchment, and as a result of better performance in revenue collection, there was a mid increase of salaries - by 50 per cent.  And now it is on top of that, that government is again committed to another 40 per cent.  

I want to say lastly, Sir, that, we should also speak about this problem bearing resources in mind.  Nobody is seated on resources and refused to facilitate our workers.  And I want to inform you that, today government workers are happier than before.  And they are less disappointed, if they are to be let out of the service.  So, I pray that we help to understand these difficult facts.  I thank you.

MR RUTAROH:  I wish to thank the Deputy Minister of Finance for that information.  I did not think in my contribution, I have indicated that government is unfaithful and uncommitted, or anything of that kind.  If other Member has said so, surely, that is not my contribution.  I am saying however, that there are certain things - plans were trying to put in place in a hurry.  If we know that the rate of collection of revenue is this, let us plan according to that related collection.  This is the point I am trying to bring about.  I am also adding, that because of liquidity problems, because of our inability to meet that other living wage, let us also go slow in retrenching people, because they are going back to nothing. Let us go slow.  And what question is whether retrenchment is good or not.  

Now, I am saying the rate at which it is being carried out is too fast to give us time; that is the point I am trying to make.  And as the information given by the hon. member from the Union, you may also wish to know that we had a package to give retrenchees.  This is not a package that comes directly from the revenue collection, but we have been getting directly. So, maybe, Coffee Marketing Board may not be benefiting from that package that was being given to civil servants.

Lastly, this business is to day with incomplete projects.  There are projects that are taking place and I feel most of them are badly planned or ill conceived, we go out and borrow money, and quite often when you read through a number of Budget, you notice, that the person designing this project is not actually on ground.  The number of projects, I believe personally, I want to emphasize this, that I believe.  Planned by World Bank experts, arriving from a few comments that we make for a need to have certain things in place. 

So, they plan the project, and come and bring it here, and we go ahead.  We take up the money, the number of times, before we have actually implemented the project, we are required to pay interest on loans that we have got, before we even receive a cent.  I hope this is not strange.  Because last year, when we were in the Sectoral Committee of Trade and Industry, we talked about Kinyara.  A project that was, I think, very well conceived; but because of the conditions under which it was conceived mainly that government did not have enough money to give counter funding.  He took up certain roles.  

I am reliably told that, for example, the Kuwait funds - money, which the component is supposed to go to Kinyara off the ground.  So, I think before we start on any project, let us get ready.  We must get ready, to be able to take up any project.  And I think, I should not sit down without talking about hiring of office accommodating various government ministries.  I ma on the belief that the rates that we pay, could help us to put up buildings that government subsequently will be able to be accommodate.

MR SSEBAANA KIZITO: Mr Chairman, I was former Minister of Housing, I know for sure, that government is renting a lot of house, belonging to National Housing and Construction Corporation.  I also know, that a lot of rate is still outstanding, this is because of many landlords in town both this town and other towns throughout Uganda.

MR RUTAROH:  As the former of Housing, certainly, I am not grateful for that information. The point I am trying to make is, every year - some money is paid.  A number of people are paid, or when we do not pay, we kill the baby that we put in place, like National Housing and Construction Corporation.  I would like to suggest that in our budgeting, we should put money aside, besides when we have contracts.  Payments do come later.  I know somebody will say, we do not a pool where we can pick money to pay a contractor.  I believe if we took a loan, for construction of government accommodation - office accommodation, we would solve most of the problems that the landlords are suffering today.  It would help this government to progress.  Even the little money that is paid out to a few land lords, would be enough to construct at least one building, every two or three years.  I have one example that I learnt.  

There was a building, which was burnt near the headquarters of the Ministry of Finance.  A plot where I think Public Service and Cabinet Affairs used to be.  I beg your pardon.  It was Local Government, -(Interjection-) yes, thank you very much.  That plot I am told Government has said, we have no interest in.  We are not prepared to build, and it has been given to an individual.  Tomorrow, they will go to hire offices from the house that individual will construct.  And at least with out economy I believe we can afford this type of thing.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of information.  I have listened carefully to hon. Rutaroh.  I wish things were as easy as that.  As you know very well, government has resolved and you have supported government, borrowing some money - resources, because that is the only way, we can.  There is no creditor in the world, who is ready to give you a concessional loan in order to construct houses for government or offices. But also, I want to inform you further, that since honourable left the Ministry, we have paid our land lords since then. Secondly, I want to tell you that, for the time being, your ideas sound very nice, but they are not practical.  

Today, it is easier, for government to lay out rent than to have capital outlay. It can have up a building like I hear Social Security building is going to go up.  Those who have had to borrow commercial money.  At the moment it is difficult for government to go on the commercial market and borrow money for building houses.  However, in the long run, as government financial situation improves, your ideas should be implemented.  

MR RUTAROH: Mr Chairman, in conclusion, after thanking the hon. Minister for that good information, but after the information the hon. Deputy Minister of Finance should go and visit the headquarters of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development; and see the beginning of the construction of the house.  All of money, wasted, they had started in a building and totally abandoned it.  My ideas may not be workable, but I have strong belief, Mr Chairman, that a certain amount of money can be put aside to build slowly the -(Interruption)

MRS MUGARURA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. The information I am going to give may be useful to hon. Kafumbe Mukasa.  When I went to the bank as a director representing NRC in 1990, we found that, there was a lot of money being spent on maintaining staff houses, so much even required to put up new blocks, and we put aside Shs 1, 000,000/= as a revolving fund, and members of staff officers could borrow, and then pay monthly, from deduction from their salaries, and as I talk, over 200 people have acquired houses within 3 years.  And if that scheme was adopted, you find that even the retrenchment exercise would not be painful.  Thank you.

MR MWANDHA: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, hon. Rutaroh said that government appears to be giving way where there was a building of the Ministry of Local Government.  And when hon. Kafumbe Mukasa stood up to give some information, he avoided either confirming or denying but the government is actually giving away that plot.  Mr Chairman, can the hon. Deputy Minister of Finance confirms or denies? Thank you.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  I would like to advise hon. Members, Sir, that the regulations which govern land in Uganda, so - I think whoever acquires all disposed of land, if it is government land, it must be through those regulations; and I happen not be a custodian of those regulations. (Laughter) 

MR RUTAROH: I am concluding and saying that money was spent, in an attempt to increase office accommodation.  Next to the Headquarters of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.  But the project was abandoned, and there does not seem to be any intentions, on part of government to revive that type of project. We would have many more buildings in place if I think in the planning process, government was more serious.  Thank you, very much, Mr Chairman.

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now adjourn the House until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you.

(The Council rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned until. on Thursday, 7 July 1994 at 2.00 p.m.)




