Wednesday,  3 July 2002

Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Philip Byaruhanga): Mr Speaker and honourable Members, in March 2002, I laid before Parliament reports of the Local Government Public Accounts Committees from 27 Local Governments.  This was in conformity with requirements of Section 89, sub-section 8 of the Local Governments Act, 1997.  I also informed the House that more reports would be submitted as they come in.

Mr Speaker and honourable Members, I now wish to lay before Parliament, reports of the Public Accounts Committees of the following Local Governments as required by the legal provision referred to above.

Local Government: 

(1) Kampala City Council: Auditor General’s report, 1999/2000 Financial Year.

(2) Rakai District Local Government and Rakai Town Council - Auditor General’s report 1998/1999; Auditor General’s Reports 1996/1997, 1997/1998 and 1998/1999.

(3) Lira District Local Government: This was a special report on districts towards February 2002. Auditor General’s reports financial years 1998/1999 and 1999/2000.

(4) Nakasongola District Local Government: Auditor General’s reports 1997/1998 financial year; 1998/1999 financial year; 1999/2000 financial year, and a special report on loss of cash - October 1999.  It is part of the reports that were examined.

(5) Soroti District Local Government: Auditor General’s report 1996/1997, Auditor General’s report on Padyer Primary School 1997/2002.

(6) Apac District Local Government: Auditor General’s report 1995/1996 and 1996/1997 financial years, and Internal Auditors’ report for 3rd and 4th quarters of 1997/1998, 1998/1999 and 2000/2001.

(7) Kisoro District Local Government: Internal Auditors’ quarterly report 2001.

(8) Luwero District Local Government: Internal Auditors’ quarterly reports 2000.

(9) Mukono District, Lugazi Town Council: Auditor General’s report 1997/1998, 1998/1999 financial year.

(10)Nkokonjeru Town Council: Auditor General’s report 1998/1999.

(11) Njeru Town Council: Auditor General’s report 1998/1999.  That completes Mukono District Local Government.

(12) Mbale District Local Government: Auditor General’s report 1997/1998 financial year.  

Mbale Municipal Council: Auditor General’s report 1997/1998 financial year.

(13) Katakwi District Local Government: Internal Auditors’ report 1997/1998 financial year.

(14) Kabarole District Local Government: The report examined the Internal Auditors’ report of 2001 financial year.

(15) Kitgum/Pader District Local Governments- Sir, at that time, Pader had not yet operationalised a District Local Government- Auditor General’s report 1996/1997 and Internal Auditors’ quarterly report March 2001.

(16) Iganga District Local Government: Chief Internal Auditor’s report January to March 1999 quarter, and April to June 1999 financial year; Auditor General’s report 1996/1997.

(17) Iganga Town Council: Internal Auditors’ report July 1999 to September 1999.

(18) Ntungamo Town Council-Auditor General’s reports for 1997/1998 and 1999 /2000 financial year.

(19) Pallisa Local Government: Auditor General’s report 2001/2002.

(20) Kibaale District Local Government: Auditor General’s report 1998/1999 financial year.

(21) Nebbi District Local Government: Auditor General’s report 1999 and 2000 financial year.

(22) Mubende District Local Government: Auditor General’s report 1999/2000 financial year.

Sir, I beg to lay these reports on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  The Appropriate Committee on local governments will handle the report.

DR PHILLIP BYARUHANGA: I have tabled this statement and an appendix to this statement is attached to the reports, which are already with Parliament.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You mean the reports are with us already?

DR P. BYARUHANGA:  Yes, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: When was this done?

DR. P. BYARUHANGA: I brought these reports today and the Parliamentary Assistant has them here.

THE SPEAKER:  Oh, well, I think somebody assisted you to bring them here, but you must lay them here.   I can give you some few minutes to - is this a member of your staff or a staff of Parliament?

MR MWANDHA:  I think there is still a problem.  The honourable Minister should have read report by report. But if reports are laid in a bunch like that, how can the House be sure that all the reports that he read out are actually in that bunch; that probably his technical officers made a mistake and some reports were not included?  

THE SPEAKER: In view of what has happened before, I ask the Minister to count to the satisfaction of Members that we have – is it 27?  Maybe they will be satisfied.

DR BYARUHANGA: Rakai Town Council Accounts 1996/97.

THE SPEAKER: No, no.

DR BYARUHANGA: Actually Sir, it is the same as I had read in the list.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Please continue.

DR BYARUHANGA: Rakai, Lira, Rakai, Lira District Local Government. As I indicated in the report, district councils and lower local governments are indicated separately. Nakasongola, Nakasongola district, Nakasongola district, Nakasongola district, Soroti, Apac district, Apac district, Apac district, Kisoro district, Luwero district, Mukono, Mbale, Mbale, Katakwi, Kabarole, Kitgum, Pader, Iganga district, Iganga district, Iganga district, Ntungamo Town Council, Pallisa, Kibaale district, Nebbi district, Mubende district. These are the reports that I read out, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am standing on a point of procedure. The official procedure in this House is directed by our Rules of Procedure, which were recently revised and passed. Noting that the Rules of Procedure are a very important component of Parliament, would it be prudent for us to continue deliberating when we depend on speculative laws, which we do not have access to? Because up to now, as a Member of Parliament representing Lubaga South, I do not have access to the new version of the procedure.

THE SPEAKER: I have the Rules of Procedure. I will direct because I have got a copy.

MR LUKYAMUZI: But when shall we access those Rules of Procedure?

THE SPEAKER: You will access them. What you can do is to use your old one. If you have a doubt, then I will be able to assist you -(Laughter). 

MS MUGERWA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am seeking clarification. I am sorry I came here a little bit late but I do not know whether Masaka was excused because I did not hear it on the list of local governments that have submitted their report. I would like to be advised. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now, this is a continuing process. I think Masaka was dealt with last time. These are areas that were not covered last time when the Minister presented his budget.

MS MUGERWA: Thank you, very much.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY 11TH JUNE 2002

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, this is going to be a general debate on the presidential address on the state of the nation. It will take three to four days and shall be followed by the general debate on the Budget. So, if you do not get an opportunity now, you will be given an opportunity when we are dealing with the Budget, which is also a policy matter to debate. But for as many Members as possible to make their contributions I think we should limit the time each Member should have. I think seven minutes is enough for a Member to put his case on a few important points.

MR AUGUSTINE RUZINDANA (Ruhama County, Ntungamo): Mr Speaker, the Members next to me have not come and I thought if I spoke from there I would be interrupted every now and then so that they pass. So I would like to take this opportunity to come down here - (Laughter).  

Mr Speaker and honourable Members, I move that thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of Government Policy contained in the Address on the State of the Nation by His Excellency, the President, to this Parliament on Tuesday 11th June 2002.  

I would like to thank and congratulate the President for delegating to the Vice President the very heavy responsibility of delivering the constitutional State of the Nation Address for the first time. I would also like to congratulate Her Excellency, the Vice President, for acquitting herself honourably in the way she handled  this very heavy responsibility -(Applause). However, this is one of the most important duties of Heads of State, not only in Uganda but also all over the world; and usually it is never delegated.  I wonder to whom the Queen  would delegate, for example for  other Heads of State – normally this is known in advance in the annual calendar and the Head of State makes sure that he is available. And knowing that the Vice President had been Minister of Agriculture, most likely she could have been delegated to attend the World Food Summit in Rome rather than this one.  But, nevertheless, I would like to proceed according to the motion.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the President for a speech that reports on many issues that affect the lives of the people of Uganda.  However, it also leaves out many areas, and I will point them out later, so that they  should be covered at a later time although some of them were covered later when the President spoke after the Minister of Finance’s Speech.

Mr Speaker, in the introduction, the President informed the nation that the economy grew at 5.6 per cent.  Indeed we appreciate the sound economic policies that have led to economic recovery and growth over the years.  However, Mr Speaker, five per cent or even the target of seven per cent is not enough to move this country fast enough on the road to development when our population is increasing at about three per cent.  This reminds me, Mr Speaker, of Lee Kuan Yew’s comment in his autobiography on the target growth rate of 8 to 9 per cent for China.  

In 1992, Lee Kuan Yew had a discussion with Jiang Zemin, now President of China.  Jiang asked him what would be the most satisfactory growth rate for China. Jiang informed him that the target for China was eight to nine per cent, but that the growth rate at that time was six per cent like the one of Uganda.  Lee replied that the four little dragons and Japan – the four little dragons are Singapore, Taiwan, Hong Kong and S. Korea - had achieved double-digit growth rates with little inflation for sustained periods during the early phases of industrialisation, and that Singapore itself was achieving 12 to 14 per cent with very little inflation.  

If Uganda, and indeed if Africa, has to catch up with the rest of the world, it has to achieve double-digit growth rates with very little inflation for extended periods.  We must, therefore, seriously review our growth rate targets.  Six per cent, seven per cent and eight per cent is not adequate to lift this country from poverty.  

Also in the introduction, the President gives an undertaking that from now on, where there are mistakes on policy matters, steps will be taken to correct them.  I wish to thank the President for this undertaking, as it is indeed a major shift in work methods because the practice has been not to correct mistakes but just to move on as if nothing had happened.  Examples are many Mr Speaker, and I will just mention a few.  

The shift from barter trade was not followed by correction of mistakes, and by discussions within Parliament and other fora.  Mistakes in the privatisation of public enterprises, for example, NYTIL, UCBL, Uganda Airlines, Coffee Marketing Board, Nile Hotel and so on, have not been for discussion here.  

The closure and the opening of embassies – the road tolls:  there is a time we had road tolls all over the place and then they disappeared.  These were not followed by correction of mistakes.  I would like to recommend to Parliament, especially the Committee on Assurances, to take note of this major shift in governance and monitor the implementation of this undertaking.

Mr Speaker, the President also informed us of an important Cabinet retreat that had just ended.  We are informed that Cabinet - or rather in its new title, the Council of Ministers - emerged with a clearer strategic vision on economic management.  However, we are not told what this vision is. I hope at a later stage we shall be told the new version of the Vision 2025 that has been worked out. And it is important that we are told what the new strategic vision is.

Also, the Council of Ministers put in place the pillars of a more systematic approach to issues of development as a whole. Mr Speaker, I would like to congratulate and thank the President and the Council of Ministers for the new pillars, which have been put in place. But, also, I hope we shall be informed what they are at an appropriate time.  

On a lighter note, Mr Speaker – on this issue the newspapers informed us that some of the Ministers received senior non-commissioned ranks. And I would like to congratulate them although I do not know which disciplined force they now belong to.  But, I would like to say that the LDU commanders of the areas in which they live should take note that they have added trained manpower and womanpower - (Laughter).  This is on a lighter note, Mr Speaker.  

Mr Speaker, we are also informed about the revival of the Presidential Economic Council. And also in the Press, we have been informed that it had already started working, and I think they decided that there should be formed a new Social Security Fund or something like that.  I do not know what happens to the old one, but I congratulate Government for the revival of this important advisory council to the President. 

Mr Speaker, the President also re-affirmed a return to the original vision of the Movement to build an independent, integrated and self-sustaining national economy. The Ministers were reminded of this in their retreat, and it is very refreshing to learn that we are returning to our roots. This is one of the points in the original Ten-Point Programme, which seemed to have been forgotten of late. Indeed, I am grateful that we are now being reminded of it.

The President also mentioned the reforms and policy initiatives that have been taken to improve service delivery to the people. To this end, the President reminded us that we must streamline and properly define roles of the different arms of government. Indeed, it is quite important that each arm of government; the Executive, Parliament and Judiciary should know its role, and should respect each other’s roles.  

The President also thanked Parliament for passing the Political Organisations and Party’s Bill, now Statute, which has been assented to by the President. But at the same time, the President asked us to be patient and halt any further debate on matters covered by the bill until the year 2004 as provided for by the Constitution - (Interjections). I am thanking the President, so the shame should not be on me.  

However, I was in the Constituent Assembly and I read and re-read the Constitution, particularly Article 69 to 76 and Articles 269 to 271 and I did not find the avenues referred to in the Constitution. I hope to be elucidated, perhaps by the Leader of Government Business, as to what we expect or what these avenues may be, because I could not find them.

I would like to call Parliament to support the call of the President for each of the arms of government and civil society to understand and respect each other’s role, and to endeavour to harmonise and make their roles complementary to each other.  

The President should be commended for the successful holding of parliamentary and local government elections. That is how we got here. However, there seems to have been more dissatisfaction with the results this time than during previous elections. In fact, Parliament has deemed it necessary to institute inquiries into the conduct of these elections though some people were alarmed by the action of Parliament. They were so alarmed that they have not ceased to try to prevent Parliament from carrying out its oversight role. In addition, the Electoral Commission lives under a cloud of frequent allegations of improprieties of all sorts. This is a matter that needs to be handled if future elections are to be considered valid and legitimate by the population.

In the address, the President assured the country that security is adequately handled with regard to the ADF and the Lords Resistance Army, commonly called Kony, and other subversive elements. This is a comforting assurance to the country as security and peace is a precondition for stability, economic growth and good governance. However, there is still a problem of large numbers of internally displaced people in the North. There is also a problem of law and order elsewhere. Many people have been killed and robbed in the areas deemed to be secure. Even Kampala has experienced a spate of murders of prominent business people and also other prominent people. However, the President did not mention this aspect of insecurity in the areas deemed to be secure.

On the issue of disarmament in Karamoja, we should support the President. However; military means alone may not be able to resolve the social, political and economic aspects of the Karamoja question. Even insurgency is not just a military question. Indeed, the President said that Government continues to opt for peaceful means of conflict resolution. This aspect needs to be given more emphasis.  

Traditionally, the most powerful instrument of the state is its military force, and in our situation it still has an important part to play. But it needs to be wielded with caution and restraint, as it tends to develop a momentum of its own. The use of military force is basically destructive, so, in order to turn it into an element of order and peace, it needs to be wedded to political institutions to enforce authoritative, non-violent management of conflict. This is truer when the use of military force resembles police enforcement action, like in Karamoja. Thus it needs a broad-shared sense of legitimacy.  The use of the military generally has lacked this broad sense of legitimacy because other organs of state are never involved in policy decisions that require the use of the military. This omission needs to be addressed.  

I would like to thank the President for reiterating our commitment to good relations with our neighbours and also to the East African Co-operation. However, it is rather surprising that the President said nothing about the NEPAD initiative, and yet Uganda is an active participating country. Indeed, Members have received a long questionnaire from the Centre for Basic Research on various governance issues. That questionnaire is part of the NEPAD democracy and political governance initiative. The review is part of the process of assessing a country’s compliance to NEPAD standards. 

The implementing agency in Africa is the Economic Commission for Africa, and it has identified the Centre for Basic Research as its counterpart agency in Uganda. And Uganda is one of the first 15 countries that are being reviewed in order to become a participating beneficiary country. 

Members are aware that NEPAD was a major issue in the G8 meeting just concluded in Canada.  The complaints you may have heard about the US $1 billion promised by the G8 being too little are because for NEPAD to succeed, it has to be underwritten by an injection of US $64 billion annually into Africa for an extended period. It is therefore a bit of a surprise that NEPAD was not reported on. 

I would like to thank the President, Mr. Speaker, for the continued stability that is enabling the country to register substantial economic growth. However, as the President noted, our export performance is not good. Exports rose by about US $15 million over the previous year, that is 0.034 percent. We should be grateful to our brothers and sisters living abroad, whose remittances amounted to over US $550 million. This despite the fact that they are not as valued as the investors who, according to the Uganda Investment Authority, registered projects worth only US $215 million dollars. And of this we are not even sure how much of them will be realized. 

I also wish to register thanks for what the President said in his address about infrastructure, energy, the minerals sector, education, health care, agriculture and also taking advantage of export opportunities. These are all covered extensively in the budget speech, and I will not go into that now.

I would however like to take advantage of this opportunity of moving a vote of thanks, to bring out areas that may need to be covered a little more extensively in the next presidential address.  

Mr. Speaker, in the 6th Parliament there was a general practice evolved that in the State of the Nation Address, the President should outline the legislative programme of government for the coming year. In this address it does not appear, except for the Micro Deposit Taking Institutions Bill, which is already before Parliament.There is no other Bill mentioned in the address of the President. Also, other than the Political Organizations Act, which we passed, there are no other significant resolutions that the President mentions. 

I think the President needs to appreciate what other organs of state do. We did a lot in the last session and this is not reported on in the address. I am just taking advantage of my privileged position as an elder, both in age and also in the Movement, to point out a few of these omissions and nobody should think of it as a bit unusual. 

The new Inspector General of Police has infused morale into the Police, the Public Service has improved service delivery, the Judiciary has reduced the case load and so on, and we need to appreciate what the other organs of state do. We must also appreciate the efforts put in by citizens and public officials so as to spur them to greater achievements.  

The other element I had mentioned was the serious crime rate. There was also the Ruremera issue in Kibaale, and I think this merited some mention because the Rwemereire issue raises the unsettled citizenship question, and the validity of elections. In Kibaale, Ruremera is a civic citizen with rights and qualifications enshrined in the Constitution, but Ruremera is not an ethnic citizen in Kibaale. Therefore, his social and economic rights are deemed by the ethnic citizens to be secondary. 

The President has accepted that this conceptual difference in citizenship is okay, and can be extended even to political rights! This is an untenable position as the interpretation by our brothers in Teso of the President’s position indicates. In Uganda, everybody is a minority in an ethnic sense. There is no majority ethnic group. 

Secondly, all ethnic groups have some members of their group in other areas. The divisions of ethnically indigenous and ethnic strangers in the same country will lead to unnecessary strife. This issue needs national consensus. Winston Churchill, in another setting, advised someone that anti Semitism may be a good starter in politics but it is a bad sticker; so is tribalism.  

One of the major tasks of the present era is institution building, yet we have not done extremely well on this. One is reminded of a Prime Minister, a recent one in England, who it is said that wherever she saw an institution, she would hit it with her handbag.  Here we have created the Uganda Investment Authority, the Export Promotion Board, the Uganda Tourist Board and now government wants to abolish them! 

Every now and then, institutions come and go or change name to authority this or that. Even Cabinet seems to have changed to the Council of Ministers, or at least it is called so three times in the President’s address! Maybe it is because of its large size; I don’t know.  But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, the President informs us in his address that a new department has indeed been created. And indeed under Article 171, the President has such powers, after making appropriate consultations. The President informed us that a new export promotion office, which can receive complaints from aggrieved investors, has been formed. 

We had, however, just been asked to give added powers to the IGG, and we did so, and the Police is being invigorated under its new Inspector General. Since the IGG reports to Parliament, I think the President deemed it necessary to create the office of Ethics and Integrity, and this is as it should be. Now that another office seems to have been created virtually to do the same thing, there is a bit of a problem. And since this is in the area of corruption, and corruption needs to be handled systematically and seriously, I think this element of tinkering with institutions needs to be seriously reviewed.

The other area that deserved mention was the Bujagali Power Project, which seems to hang in the balance for various reasons. These include the financial health of AES, which is so bad that its founder and chief officers have resigned. Might it not be time to find out the address of NORPAK and renew contacts with them, since we are not informed that it is in trouble too?

Let me say a few things about international events that have a bearing on the country. There are events that are milestones that mark turning points in history. We remember Macmillan’s Wind of Change speech; the fall of the Berlin Wall, and now recently the September 11 events in New York. The last one is a milestone that has repercussions on diverse issues such as bank secrecy rules, the democratisation process and the respect of human rights in the world. 

Societies and states have become dependent on and vulnerable to developments elsewhere. The events of September 11 have clarified the global political situation. 

Firstly, it has focused attention on the declining ability of societies and states to retain control over events and developments that determine their fate. If what happened on September 11 happened in the U.S.A, what can happen to any other country? 

Secondly, it has focused on the role of the U.S.A as the sole power imposing order on the world. It has imposed it in Afghanistan and it is indeed preparing the next strike in the same region. It has also given the order for Arafat to be replaced. The signal is clear; no one should provoke America and go unpunished. 

This is the challenge for the international politics of this era. It defines the handling of the Israel/ Palestinian question, the Pakistan/India/Kashmir crisis, the fate of the POLISARID struggle in Western Sahara and so on.

Recently a venerable British publication called "The Economist" carried a cover page entitled, “Why the World needs Pakistan’s dictator to survive.” Would this title have been carried before September 11? No! This endangered species that must survive led to the expulsion or suspension of Pakistan from the Commonwealth when he took power by military means! This shows how the equation of the international order has changed.

Let me also raise some matters related to that. In Mozambique, the successor of President Chisano has been named by FRELIMO - he is Armando Guebuza, the National Political Commissar during FRELIMO’s struggle. He used to be called Commissario Politica Nacional when I went there in 1972. And this is where the title of our own NPC was derived from.

Armando Guebuza has been a backbencher, leading FRELIMO in Parliament after being a minister for a long time. He also negotiated peace with RENAMO. But FRELIMO has now named him the next candidate for the presidency, although President Chisano is still eligible for standing in the next elections.  

In our neighbourhood, Kenya, the succession issue is being debated publicly and President Moi has stated categorically that he will relinquish power at the next elections. 

In Tanzania, President Mkapa is serving his last term. Mr. Speaker, I leave it to Members to make their conclusion –(Laughter). I however would like to remind Members that all great truths start as blasphemies.

I also wish to clarify on a headline in the Sunday Monitor last Sunday, which said that I had led some people to see the President on their community concerns. Mr. Speaker, I first learnt of the meeting through that publication. I have however since seen a list of people who met the President and my name was on that list, so was hon. Nshimye’s. But I learnt from him also that he was not there. Anyway, that is our press. I thought I should clarify that small thing though.  

With those few remarks, Mr. Speaker –(Laughter)- I would like to move that this House record its appreciation for the precise and clear exposition of Government Policy contained in the Address of the State of the Nation by His Excellency the President. I beg to move –(Applause).

DR STEPHEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I regard it as a privilege to have been allowed to second this motion to thank the President on his speech, which was delivered on June 11, 2002, on the state of the nation. 




The President’s speech was generally broad and brief. I am glad that it covered most of the concerns of the citizens of this nation. Most of all, what struck me in the speech is a sentence on page five. For those of us who have got a copy of this speech, the last paragraph reads, “Government continues to opt for peaceful means of conflict resolution.”  That is the key to development in this country. 

I am glad that the President has said it, I am glad that the President has promised it and it is up to us, the Members of Parliament and citizens of the country, to support the President on this resolution. And maybe to remind him from time to time of this resolution, and perhaps to hold him up to it. 

It is sad to see that in the African continent, we have lost international respect because we have not opted for peaceful means of conflict resolution. It is a shame! When you go to Sierra Leone, when you go all along the western border of Africa; Liberia, Congo Brazzaville, Zaire - now called the Democratic Republic of Congo, Come to Somalia, to Ethiopia, you come to Eritrea, and one can go on enumerating them, including the Sudan. The most important thing is that we have lost our ability to resolve our problems by peaceful means. I congratulate the President for having resolved on this and committed this nation to seeking peaceful means to resolve our conflicts.

On page six, the President has allayed our fears on election violence. He details how the Army and Police have played a role in fighting violence during elections. It is a fear reflected in discussions with many Members that elections in this country are going to become more and more violent. But here, the President has promised that he will see to it that there will be no violence. The Police and the Army, which are the official armed forces of this country, will play a major role in reducing violence during elections, and perhaps eliminate it. Any other forces to combat the above are out of order. I have talked to some of the Members and they have said, “If KAP steps into my constituency during the next elections, we will be ready for them -(Hear, hear!). 

I would also like to thank the President for his concern over Karamoja. Karamoja is a major regional problem of this nation. The instability in Karamoja has affected the neighbouring districts. I am glad that the President has underscored Karamoja and even went there during the disarmament exercise. It is true that mistakes have been made during this disarmament exercise, but what is important is that the process has started. 

As the hon. Member who moved this motion said, we hope that just removing guns from the Karimojong will not be the end of the President’s concern for the area. The national focus should be on Karamoja. I remember that during the 1970s, the late Minister of Education, Dr Luyimbazi Zaake, started a special educational program in Karamoja. The program was started but was interrupted by the change of government in 1971. 

In that program I think one or two boarding schools were set up in Karamoja. It was, if I remember, in unison with the United Nations. Students in Karamoja were placed in schools in other areas so that they could equally have access to good schools and some of the people who benefited from that program are now in this House. So, I would beg that the same program in education is re-introduced in Karamoja. 

Being essentially a nomadic area, an exception should be made in primary education, and boarding schools be introduced in Karamoja so that the children are not kept away from school by their parents who want them to help in looking after stock. 

I would also like to see that special nutritional programmes are introduced in Karamoja.  We would like to see special agricultural programmes introduced in Karamoja so that Karamoja can catch up with the rest of the country because they were deliberately left behind - (Applause).

I would like to thank the President and support the President in his effort to encourage investment in this country. There are so many bottlenecks, which have tended to keep away investors from our country.  I am glad that the President is concerned about these bottlenecks, and has vowed to remove some of them.  

Just about three days ago, in the press there was a direct - I would not say confrontation - with one of the fairly powerful civil servants in the country. We do not know whether it is true or not, but he was accused of having demanded for a bribe in order to allow investors to come in this country. These people are hurting this nation. It is -(Interruption)- I am not going to mention his name, everybody knows; but you also realise that a very prominent minister in the past lost his position because he demanded for a bribe from an investor! 

I hope that this spirit spreads and those who are responsible for introducing or handling investors who come to this country should be made accountable if they try to demand for bribes.  I hope the same yardstick will spread up to the President’s office as he is concerned about investors and hates bribery. If we are going to develop, we need money to come into this country from outside; there is no other way! We do not have enough money in the country to cause development and we should back the President in his effort to eliminate bribery. 

Perhaps in his speech there was not enough emphasis on corruption. Corruption is eating away this nation from every side! I would appeal to the honourable members, Mr Speaker, that all of us should focus on eliminating corruption in this nation.

Mr Speaker, without energy, especially in the rural areas, this country is not going to develop. I have really never been convinced by the argument of those who oppose development of generation of electricity at Bujagali; there is no reason!  You say Karuma will come later.  We are going to require more and more energy, especially if we are going to develop rural areas, only energy will keep people in the rural areas. If we are going to develop small industries in the rural areas, we are just beginning.  The demand for energy in this country is even going to increase.  

You mention Karuma, Kalagala, all these will be developed, but for the moment, let us start with Bujagali.  There is really no reason - you tell me the reason. All of you will have a chance - there are environmentalists who are coming from all over the world -(Mr Lukyamuzi rose_)

THE SPEAKER:  No, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, you will have your time, please let him wind up.  You will be given an opportunity to make your contribution - (Interruption).

MR LUKYAMUZI:  I am -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  No, no, you will inform him.

DR MALLINGA:  He wanted to give information, but I think at this stage -(Interruption) 

MR LUKYAMUZI: It is a technical matter, which requires some information.

DR MALLINGA: Honourable Member, I am winding up. There are environmentalists, pseudo environmentalists -(Laughter)- who are coming from all over the world.  There are those who are likely to see environmentalists from other countries and they come here to stop development.  There is no way we can develop this nation without energy. Therefore -(Interruption)- honourable Members of Parliament, let us not sing the songs of other countries.  There is money funding what they call environmentalists. Sometimes some of us want to have access to this money, some of us want to go to meetings and we shout in this country in order to keep the country behind - (Laughter). Hydro electricity -(Mr Lukyamuzi rose_)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of order. Is it in order for the honourable Member holding the Floor to openly state that there are people who attend meetings for matters of raising money because they are bribed? As I stand now, I happen to be holding an international office -(Laughter)- which has never been disputed anywhere in the world, and for which Uganda should be proud because I am the only one who has held this position. Is it in order for the honourable Member to impute bad motives that participants to the international forum of an environmental formation are paid to sustain their living dubiously? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable Member, I see no problem in his statement, especially because he said “some”. He did not say all of them. Therefore, you may not be some of those - (Laughter).

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker for your wise judgement. This business of environment and environmentalists is taking a wave in the world like an epidemic!  Some of us in the developing countries are likely to swallow it without understanding and advocate for keeping us backward.  
Hydro electricity is the cleanest: We are not going to say we are going to generate electricity by nuclear plant in this country; we are not going to burn coal so that sulphur dioxide is introduced into the atmosphere. We are not responsible in any significant way for pollution and depletion of the horizon layer in the world.  The big nations, which are responsible for that - the polluters - have refused to sign the international treaty, the Kyoto Treaty. But our contribution to pollution is less than five percent, even one percent and yet some of us are calling ourselves international environmentalists -(Laughter) - going to fight pollution in this country!  Where are we leading this country?
Mr Speaker, I would just like to end by a few suggestions. The major suggestion I would like to make and to make a comment on is agriculture.  I would like to thank the Government for introducing new seeds in coffee and maize, and also introducing new cassava in the Eastern Region.  
The major problem now is marketing, which even affects the production of milk.  We have children who are malnourished in this country.  I would like to appeal to the Government that in order to make marketing of maize, milk easier, two things should be done: We should introduce a lunch programme in primary schools to combat malnutrition, and milk and maize should be purchased by the Government to feed these children. We should provide school lunch.
Secondly, we should revive the Co-operative Movement in order to help the farmers in the countryside to market their products. The Government should think of storing food, especially cereals like beans and maize.  I think in Jinja we had introduced silos.  I do not know where they went.  I hope that in response, the Minister of Agriculture will tell us the future of silos in this country. 
In summary, Mr Speaker, while winding up, I would like to appeal to the Government that along the cattle corridor, dips should be repaired; dips should be built.  We have dips that were built in the days of John Babiiha; a lot of them are not functional now.  Dips should not have been decentralised. I think the Central Government should take the responsibility of rehabilitating and building dips in order to eradicate a formidable disease called East-Coast Fever and plasmolysis in this country, which is responsible for the death of many cattle and also for the reduction in milk production.

It is difficult to inseminate so many cattle and to have enough sources for sperm to inseminate the cows all along the cattle corridor. I would appeal to the Government that in Mukono, for example, nowadays the dairy farmers deliberately kill male calves.  If the Government can purchase these calves and maybe supply a calf per parish, it would help to change our cows from the native cow which produces about two litres of milk a day to a mixed cow which produces anything between four to six litres of milk a day.  That is my appeal to the Government. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to end by saying that I think the President’s Speech was satisfactory, and I think the President’s speech is a beginning to all of us as Members of Parliament to commit ourselves to perform our duties in conjunction with the Judiciary and the Executive. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe North, Busia):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity of making comments on the national address by the President.  
I would like to start first of all by registering my concern that His Excellency the President is beginning to take some of his duties very lightly. This is a constitutional function clearly defined in the Constitution, Article 101; instead the Head of State, Commander in Chief, decided to attend an international conference which was generally boycotted by his colleagues from the donor community.  
As a matter of fact, Mr Speaker, as you are aware, really nobody from the donor community attended that conference except the host!  The people who showed up are generally beggars - (Laughter). The Minister of Agriculture or somebody of that rank could have carried out that function. But to give up a constitutional function to go to a conference, which was going to be boycotted, as if you have not done your intelligence is a bit regrettable.  
Mr Speaker, I am also expressing concern about the frequent travels of His Excellency the President.  He has been travelling a lot since January.  I noted with great concern that when he went to the US, he stayed for 12 days for a function of two days - (Laughter). It is not often that we tell the President what is the problem, but I am glad this particular debate gives us a chance also to tell him things in the open. 
Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Vice President for the way she delivered the President’s message.  She was to the point; we did not have any Ankole proverbs -(Laughter)- not even Lusoga, nor Samia proverb.

MS BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I am seeking clarification from hon. Aggrey Awori. Could we not have benefited from Lusoga proverbs?  Thank you, Mr Speaker - (Laughter).

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, since this is the last term of office of the President – (Laughter)- is it not reasonable that the President should be handing over some of these internal affairs to somebody who may probably take over from him? (Laughter and Applause)  

MR AWORI:  Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my honourable colleagues for the interjection and fair comments.  First and foremost, I do not think she could have used any Lusoga proverbs because it was not her speech.

Secondly, I do not think this is a kingdom where we have to groom our successors by training them, giving them a function of that nature.  Here, we are a democracy where we chase votes regardless of your status - (Laughter). Mr Speaker, as a matter of fact, if it was a matter of succession, I am number three in line! (Laughter)   

DR PHILIP BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, is the honourable Member who has just clearly stated one of the principal chapters of our Constitution of democratic governance where we chase votes, in order to now say he is number three in a queue, which is now going back to indicate some kind of monarchy? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Is it a point of order or what?  Well I do not know – it was a question of rating.  He participated in the last presidential elections. He might have been number three – (Laughter).

MR AWORI:  Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for your fair ruling, and also continue to advise my honourable colleague sitting on the other side on the frontbench that indeed I have tested, and I came third and number two is not here – (Laughter and Applause).  

MS BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, number two in the presidential elections is well and truly represented in this House - (Laughter and Applause)- and will be ready come 2006 to take place No. 1 in the presidential elections.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR AWORI:  Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my honourable colleague for the assurance that No.2 is represented in this House by proxy.  I would like to thank her for that, and also, I would like to assure her that No. 2 is not here and No.1 is serving his last term, so definitely, I will move up, 2 and then 1! (Laughter)  

Mr Speaker, I will come to substantive points.  One; the President addressed himself to the economy and even gave us statistics. The question of 5 per cent growth, we do not know how it is determined, but if it is indeed true, it means we had declined.

When we talk about growth, in this case I did Economics more than 25 years ago but I can still remember very well. But what he was talking about is what we call the inverted U.  In other words, at the growth we get you know – it is only a few people who get richer and richer and the majority of the people get poorer, and that is the case in this country.  If I were to ask the President how many people or what percentage of our population is employed, he could not tell me because nobody has that data.  We do not know the rate of employment in this country. How many people are employed and how many are un-employed?  The data has never been given to us and if so, I would like to challenge his basis.  

I would like to thank the President also for his vigorous pursuit of external markets, and especially the AGOA but, Mr Speaker, this country is governed by law, when did we pass a statute establishing AGOA? We have spent one billion shillings on AGOA.  I do not know whether that means vote of that money is coming from the Ministry of Trade and Commerce or coming from State House or coming from Finance or coming out of Investment Authority!  These are basic issues we want to know.  

Then, when the President goes on to appoint people – “I have appointed so and so” - without going through an advertisement, application and interview, these are issues where we wonder. If it is a presidential appointment, we need to know at what level –(Interruption). Mr Speaker, again I come back to focus on the production – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  No, honourable, we agreed that each Member will take seven minutes.

MR AWORI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker, but you recall I gave the Floor to the House also to express their concerns. So, I thought I would be compensated. Like the World Cup, there is what they call “stoppage time” - (Laughter). You are accorded that opportunity. 

Mr Speaker, I will go very quickly through the points.  Definitely, poverty is a serious concern and the way I see it, when you go in the villages, it is getting worse by the day.  I noted the other day when I went to the village to consult my people before the invaders of the Constitutional Commission of Inquiry, I noted with great concern that at a funeral function, when we were passing out the plate for collection, the women members had nothing to give, which means poverty has hit the women hardest. 

I am surprised that the President has not addressed this issue of poverty among women and the youth.  It is a serious matter. The majority of our women are getting poorer and poorer, and a few are only getting a bit higher.  The men, of course, are also getting poorer.  

Again, on the question of agriculture, I was hoping all along that on this occasion, the President would stand up and announce the formation or the creation of an agricultural development bank.  This country is primarily agricultural. There is no direct input into agriculture at all. Now we have got something called NAADS. Again, this is just paving way for consultants to come and suck money out of the rural area and back to the donor community. I am expressing serious concern about this. 

On governance, the President should adjust himself to the fact that this country belongs to all of us.  There are constitutional provisions. For him to stand up everyday and start demonising multi-party politics is unfair on his part. The Constitution guarantees all of us political space. All we are asking for is an operational base so that we can compete with everybody. We are not criminals, for the President to say in his speech that UPC did a, b, c, d. Let us compete! Why don’t you create space for all of us to compete?

I remember in athletics, each one has got a lane. You do not interfere with the other person, and you are given equal distance to run. You start at the same time and compete, and the best one gets there first. Why don’t we do that also in politics? Why do we always monopolize? Other people must train, run and practice, for you you are chained on the ground until the last day of competition! Even then, you always start 50 yards behind the line while the other people are 50 yards ahead of you!  This kind of unfair game is not acceptable. 

I will wind up on the question of defence. I call upon the President to look into Ministry of Defence once again for the following reasons:

1. Pull UPDF out of politics. Demilitarise our politics. They messed us up during elections; we do not want to see them any more.  

2. Pull them out of Parliament. In this House as I talk, can we count how many UPDF Members are here today? How many? Can even one stand up and say, “I represent UPDF”? They do not even come to this House –(Interruption).  

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I want to inform hon. Aggrey Awori that Members of the UPDF are in the House here. Today they are in an Army Council meeting. They are not present here because they are in a meeting.  

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, it may be only today, but I could challenge my honourable colleague sitting on the Front Bench and representing the Cabinet in this House. If we are to look at the Hansard and the contribution from UPDF members, I can prove the point that those pages will not exceed 20. And 15 of these contributions come from only two members of UPDF, that is Col Katirima and Field Marshal -(Laughter)- sorry, Lt Gen. Tumwine. Those are the only two who contribute! 

One is even a chairman of a committee but he never chairs at all! Mayombo never shows up until I mention his name. That is when he comes to reply, otherwise, he never shows up at all!  Why should we wait to waste that kind of money? That is why I am saying, constitutionally, it is time we pulled UPDF out of politics.

On the question of UPDF taking on functions that are not theirs, in my constituency right now we have half a battalion camped on the border chasing people who are called smugglers.  These are not thieves at all; these are informal international traders, not thieves! Why should they be shot at?  One was even killed the other day. My honourable colleague, Mayende, can prove that he was killed.  The man was not armed but was chased by a company of 25 soldiers. They shot him several times and he was unarmed. UPDF has no business collecting taxes!  

They have refused to bring us a law here defining the role of the UPDF, so they are just using them haphazardly! Whenever there is a fire in town, I do not see UPDF, but whenever there is somebody carrying a kilo of sugar in Busia, I see UPDF. This is kind of misuse of our taxpayers’ money. I hate to say, but it is terrible!

Lastly, you know very well, Mr Speaker, that I have filed a question on a matter of the mid-eastern crisis on foreign affairs. Palestinians were friends of Uganda for many years. I know the Israelites have been friends of Uganda for many years. What is going on in the Middle East is a terrible matter.  Why has the President kept quiet on the issue of the Middle East? All heads of state on the continent have taken a position one way or the other.  For us we have kept quiet, except at a small function when Col. Otafiire, in his private capacity, said something about the Palestinians! I still do not know where we stand on the issue. Is it because we are too scared about what the Americans will do to us?  

I would like to register my thanks to the Ministry of Finance for releasing the money that we owe to Iraq. We have owed these people money for a long time, and finally we have accepted that we owe them money. We have sorted them out. On this one, I give tribute to the Ministry of Finance. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR OMODI OKOT (Kole County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by thanking the presenter of the motion for the very critical analysis he made during the time when he was putting the motion before this House.  

In the past, we have had people who just go without giving an analysis of the contents of the President’s speech. I think we are improving very much. I want to thank him for that -(Applause).

This is the seventh motion of this nature beginning from the time our new constitution was promulgated. That is to say, from the Sixth Parliament and this is the Seventh Parliament. I am not encouraged because I find very little difference in these seven motions that have been placed before this House. They have always come to sing about improvement in the economy, improving the condition of life, and I think this is unfortunate. The people of Uganda are very easy to rule, you only have to tell them this and they keep quiet and you continue. This is unfortunate!

I want to base my speech on one or two areas: I want to talk about the issue of defence. I hear there is the Uganda Defence Review Programme going on. It is important that we take account of reporting clearly to this country the kind of defence we have and the kind of defence we would like to maintain, which will give this country glory.  

Talking from the experience of the last presidential elections in this country, we are still left with a lot to be desired in the way the defence and the army handle these elections. Many of them have been partitioned, and yet constitutionally we say the defence and the army should not be partitioned. 

There are cases on record where people have been beaten; there are cases on record where soldiers have even made it impossible for other candidates, like hon. Awori who was a candidate, in some places. I am sure if you were to ask hon. Awori to give an analysis on how things went on, he would have said so.  

It is high time we protected the image of the army.  There are indeed areas where we need to do more than what we have so far done. The issue of recruiting the army, the issue of training, the issue of promoting, the issue of disciplining - all these things are important.

Article 210 of the Constitution speaks of enacting a law that would have guided the defence. Indeed, Articles 210, 214 up to 222 talk about the forces: the Prisons, the Police, even the intelligence.  

Some of these articles of the Constitution have not yet been enacted into relevant laws that will guide these forces. Because of inability to enact these articles, we are realising forces that are not loyal to this country, and Parliament is failing to do its duty. It is high time we looked at this kind of law in the Constitution, and not only act but also even make sure that the laws that are being enacted are being obeyed. It is one thing to make a law and it is another to obey it. 

Having said that, I want to come to the matter of mivumba –(Interjections). I think you have got the message. I want to congratulate and thank Her Excellency the Vice President for having spearheaded the struggle of putting very decent dresses on the ladies; that is a trouser. Ugandan ladies now look very elegant in town in trousers. They look so nice! I give all these – (Interjections) – I give tribute to Her Excellency, the Vice President, for the strong ground she took in putting on that dress, and then encouraging others to do likewise. I am afraid, however, that the revolution is not likely to go down to the grassroots, because of the five percent imposition of tax. 

It is becoming increasingly difficult for such dresses to find their way into the society and down to the grassroots. Not only that, I am puzzled because when the President says that by imposing five percent on old clothes he is protecting the local industry – (Interruption)-

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, let me first of all thank the honourable Member for giving way, but is he implying that all trousers worn by our dear ladies are only obtainable from the mivumba? -(Laughter)

MR OMODI OKOT: Mr Speaker, I do not intend to imply that, I am only talking about the revolution of putting on trousers; the qualities and materials belong to whichever you can afford. 

I was on the point of mivumba. It is going to be very difficult for the revolution to penetrate down to the grassroots because people are not going to afford second-hand clothes in the market.  

Unfortunately, the industries that the President is talking about, which should be protected, are not there. I understand Picfare took over NYTIL, and they have changed into production of exercise books. I stand to be corrected – (Interruption).

MR MIGEREKO: I thank the honourable Member for giving way. I would like to state one thing; we have got cotton and textiles industry in this country.  Cotton is grown in northern Uganda; it is also grown in parts of Kasese and in eastern Uganda. And there are textile industries in existence: NYTIL in Njeru, ATM in Mbale and Phoenix in Kampala. All these textile industries depend on processing the lint that is received from our ginneries in the country.  

The explanation that has been given is that we must protect these industries so that we can be in a position to add value to whatever we are exporting.  But more importantly, to try to solve the problem of unemployment in the country, which we would not be able to solve by continuing to import mivumba and, therefore, denying people who would work in the textile industry in the country of the badly needed jobs.  I thank you.

MR OMODI OKOT: Mr Speaker, the Minister is right to give that answer, but I want to inform him that there is always a way you introduce a change right from a minimal position to the maximum. There is a need for us to know where these products are, because we do not see textiles on the Uganda market from the industries he is talking about. Producing cotton does not mean producing clothes. This is one thing, and you cannot argue for the other.  

It is even disheartening to realize that on the 5th of June, the Government paper, the New Vision, reported that the President said at a meeting somewhere that this is the right time to introduce such measures so that when elections come in future, the critics of Government will be tired of criticizing Government on this, or they will have given up on this. 

If it is true that the paper was reporting what the President said, why is the President so concerned about elections, forgetting the suffering of the people of this country? I think there is a lot for those who advise the President to do. They should do a little more so that he can turn round to look at the interests of the people. He is a father, and if a father has a home and children are walking naked, I think he would not be a proud father.  

Let me end now by remarking about disarmament in Karamoja. The idea of disarmament in Karamoja was for the disarming authority to co-operate with the people from whom it is going to get the guns. It is unfortunate for us to realize that instead of co-operating on disarmament, there are instances where this disarming authority went on to the dressing of the Karimojong.  You did not go there to dress the Karimojong, the Karimojong know how they dress!  

Mr Speaker, you are well aware of this because you were on the commission for violence in this country since Independence. I have read from the report that you produced that there was a trial during Amin’s Government to force the Karimojong to dress in the way the Government wanted.  What came out of it? They fought and they killed 30 Karimojong and many more were hurt.  Are you saying there is a way to do things and that way must always be devised? I would imagine that whoever went on forcing the Karimojong to dress in the way he liked was a saboteur to that exercise.  He was a saboteur in the sense that he wanted the exercise to fail.

I would like to end by thanking the presenter of the motion.  Thank you.

MR JOHN AACHILLA (Jie County, Kotido):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the same words my friends have used, I would like to take this chance to thank the President for his concise and visionary State of the Nation Address. 

In this State of the Nation Address, there are few areas that I feel we should really attend to. I am impressed that the President, at the forefront, told the nation that the economy was the most important thing that was on his mind, and he was calling upon everybody to address the issue of the economy of this country.  

I do think that what was on the mind of the President, well knowing that this is his last term in office, was that marginalized societies like Karamoja be brought to a better footing than what it was before. I would like to thank the President for thinking about that. 

On the issue of good governance, I would also like to thank the President for reminding Ugandans that security and good governance are the key factors that can help this country. We can all recall, I am sure, together with the President, incidents that used to occur in the 1960s and 1970s. 

My honourable friend, the Member of Parliament who has just sat down, reminded us of one moment, and I think that was the incident of 1972 when the Karimojong were killed at a place called Naweikorot in Bokora, that is in Moroto District.  There is a mass grave there, where about 400 or 500 people were killed by Amin’s regime, and all that was because there was lack of good governance.  

I think the President wanted to inform the country, and also inform everybody here that it is only through practice of human rights, in accordance with good governance of the wanainchi and everybody that we will streamline this country and shape it for the better.  

On the same page, the President informed Ugandans, and it is what my people of Jie County echoed, that now we have an open chance for people to deliberate on issues of governance of this country. He said that he had already assented, on 2nd June, to the Political Organizations Bill. 

My people are saying, and I would like to inform the members, that through this document, Parliament and the people of Uganda should be able to now organize themselves to improve the status of governance and their ways of co-existence, so that we are able to consolidate what we have achieved.  We should not destroy what is there. We must be able to improve the livelihood of all the people of this country, including the people of Jie County.  

There are issues that the President talked about on security. There is this element of disarmament of the Karimojong. Before the House was prorogued, I had left this place because Jie was on fire. You know very well that the people of Jie had resisted one thing.  There were people who were misguided during the course of the operation, just like in other parts in Karamoja. People were mishandling the problem of disarmament. 

There were people who were harbouring hatred for the Karimojong, and these are the people who would go there and unveil the old wounds of hatred. They went under the cover of these operational forces, and this was not very fair. And definitely, for survival, some people had to resist.  This was very unfortunate because many people died.  

Since it was by resolution of Parliament that the Karimojong are to be disarmed, it is therefore of great importance that Parliament should take keen interest in studying issues pertaining to disarmament in Karamoja, so that the disarmament of the Karimojong is not politicised.  

I know for sure that there have been some persons who would like to politicise the disarmament exercise in Karamoja. After moving motions in the House and supporting them through, they now come back and say, “I think this is very bad, you Karimojong, rise up!” This is very unfortunate.  We should all be concerned and make sure that unless the issue of disarmament in Karamoja is overwhelmed by all Ugandans and supported by this great House, the exercise may take a different twist.  

I would not like to call upon such a situation so that we sterilize the whole country and we make it a war-mongering area. I would like to advise the members and Government that disarmament in Karamoja should be treated like the polio campaigns, the guinea worm campaigns, so that there are enough resources.  

Karamoja will continue biting the rest of Uganda just like a tick in a cow, just like the virus we have in bananas. Uganda cannot develop unless we all wake up and move to the front to see that Karamoja is part and parcel of this country.

Mr Speaker, there is an element of corruption. I would like to remind the State and this House that corruption is now so endemic in this country that marginalized societies like Karamoja have suffered just like Bundibugyo is suffering, just like Kapchorwa is suffering. What do we do with this? The proposed names were Mr Onegi Obel and Mrs Muhwezi to be people whom I think he trusts that can handle some of these issues. Is it enough for the two or should we open avenues in many regions so that such angels handle the issues of corruption countrywide? 

Mr Speaker, you will agree with me that there are certain statements that the President made on infrastructure. It is very dehumanising and very unfortunate to find that movement in Karamoja; movement to places like Kidepo is not possible! You know, most of our prominent journalists died some time back in 1999. The bridges are impassable and we cannot access any part of this country. But let me tell you, if my honourable friend the Minister of Works were here, I think I would hand over to him my anger. 

It is very unfortunate that other parts of the country are accessible but some of the areas like just crossing from Kotido - if the map was here - to the nearby constituency of Kaabong is not possible just because all our bridges are gone, and yet we are saying we can do much to improve this country.  Mr Speaker, I am just giving the last part.  

On the point of infrastructure, it is worse in Karamoja than being in hell.  We do not have telephone systems, nobody knows what is happening in this House as far as Karamoja is concerned, and it is one of the problems that give us a challenge in even disarmament. Karamoja is just operating under rumours and guesswork. 

Mr Speaker, we do not have enough water. There is a statement here, Mr Speaker, which says that there are three reservoirs and seven dams which are completed in Karamoja: this is a very misplaced and misguiding information. It is not true; there is nothing. Somebody can challenge me up and say which dam.  So, why do we really have to mislead the President and say that so much is being done in Karamoja! There are very good schools under UPE; there are very good dispensaries which have been put up, but if people cannot access them then it is just as useless as being there.  Mr Speaker, I cannot continue, but I will have time to bring more information.  Thank you.

REV BAKALUBA MUKASA (Mukono County North, Mukono): I thank you, Mr Speaker.  First of all, I would like to take this opportunity to welcome all the honourable Members of Parliament from their recess, and we want to continue praying to the Lord that he will continue guiding us and give us strength to be able to be mindful of the needs of our people, and be able to deliberate on them.

Secondly, the people of Mukono have also sent me to inquire from the honourable ministers why, when they were in Kyankwanzi, they suggested that the cost of mivumba (old clothes) had to be increased and even the taxes. They are wondering. Our people are poor; they are putting on mivumba. Even some Members of Parliament are putting on Mivumba – (Laughter)- but they proposed that the taxes had to be increased! And it is funny enough to find that the taxes on beer were reduced. (-Mr Mwandha rose_)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, not that putting on mivumba is a crime, but is it in order for the honourable Member to make a blanket statement that “including honourable Members here put on mivumba”? Because, ‘some’ could include anyone of you without actually being specific and naming honourable Members who are among those putting on mivumba.

THE SPEAKER: I think the honourable Member was tactful to work on your emotions to support his stand on mivumba so that you associate with those people of mivumba. And it is good that these are your voters.

REV. PETER BAKALUBA: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. In fact, even the vehicles we are using are mivumba vehicles, and some of us are even putting on old mivumba suits.  

Apart from that, Mr Speaker, I would like also to take this opportunity to thank His Excellency the President for His State of the Nation Address, most especially on page 5, where he talks about governance and conflict resolution.  

Mr Speaker, when we were listening to the Budget Speech, there is when His Excellency the President challenged hon. Nobert Mao about not talking peace with Kony, but again, I am encouraged when I read here that Government is committed to solve conflict through peaceful resolutions.  This is very important. I am a Christian and as a clergy, I think we need to learn how to be tolerant and to forgive where necessary.  

Our people in the North have suffered for a long time, and where necessary, we need to be tolerant, and if need be, to forgive Kony for the sake of peace. Why can’t we forgive him and other people who have been confused with Kony? Recently, our clergy in the North also advocated for that.  The Bible tells us to forgive 70 times 7, so we need really to encourage this kind of peaceful resolution by talking peace to those who are suffering, and to those who are fighting Government; it is very important.  We need to encourage it as Parliament to see to it that all those people who are fighting can come on the table and talk peace with Government.

MR FELIX OKOT: Mr Speaker, I want to inform the honourable Member on the floor that Government is committed to peaceful conflict resolution.  Even in Parliament here, there are Members of Parliament who have been fighting Government, but because we have talked peace with them, they are here seated in Parliament, and you can count them.  Even in the previous Government, there were other ministers who where former rebels. But because we want peace as a resolution, we are committed to talking peace with rebels. We have accommodated them even into the Cabinet. This is the extent to which Government is committed to peaceful resolution. (-Ms Byanyima rose _)

MS BYANYIMA:  Mr Speaker, I have a copy here of the State of the Nation Address. I am looking at page 5, which the honourable Member holding the floor was referring to. I now want to rise on a point of order to what the Minister is saying. Mr Speaker, the statement is clear that: “the army has dealt decisively with the ADF who were flushed out of the West. The war with Kony is still going on, he will definitely be dealt with, whatever the permutations of the situation in the region are”.  It goes on to say: “where the military must be involved, we do not hesitate to deploy them to deal with any threat”.  

Now, Mr Speaker, -(Interjections)- Yes, there is a statement. Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order because there are at least five sentences that show a commitment of the Government to deal decisively military with Kony!

Therefore is the Minister now in order to come before the House and tell us about peaceful resolution of conflict, peace making and peace building when the statement is full of sentences about a military approach to the problem of insurgency, Mr Speaker?  Is the Minister in order?

THE SPEAKER: No, my understanding of the Minister’s explanation is that it depends on the circumstances.  There have been circumstances when people have been persuaded to talk peace, but there are circumstances when this is not practical. He is not contradicting anything:  when it is possible they can talk peace but when it is not possible, there is no question of peace.

REV. BAKALUBA MUKASA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I think we agree with the Minister.  That is my argument.  For the last 17 or 18 years, we have applied the military might, and if it has really not yielded - that is why I was suggesting we should really go in for a peaceful resolution of conflicts. As Members of Parliament, we want to continue supporting that, and as the Church and all the institutions in that line, we would like to continue supporting that effort.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, on page 9 - again I would like to thank Government for its effort in trying to revive the co-operative and savings movements in Uganda.  I think it is not too late, even if our Co-operative Bank was sold. And really, co-operative movements have not been supported in our country, but I think it is high time, if Government is ready to come up again and revive them.  

We have all witnessed how the micro-finance institutions operating in our areas have not really served our people to the best, and if at all, we have all seen that they have ended up exploiting our people.  They get loans from Government at a lower interest rate, but when they come down to give loans to our local people, they tend to hike the rates, and in the end, our people have ended up becoming poorer and poorer.  So, we think that as Members of Parliament, we have to come in to support Government to see to it that co-operative movements can be revived, and even supported to teach our people to develop the culture of saving, and at the end of the day, they will be able to make some savings and improve on their lives.  

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, it is about education.  We all know that UPE is a positive development in our country, and as politicians and institutions, we have tried our level best to support UPE and all the programmes under it - the SMG programmes and the like.  But it pains at times to say, Mr Speaker that the Ministry of Finance at times has let us down.  

These finances delay to come, they are irregular and at times they do not give us a proper planning in our own localities, and at the end of the day we have found that education, somehow, somewhere has slackened because head teachers have no money to operate these schools if this money delays to come.  

We have also noted that some of the funds on UPE have also been reduced.  For example, in Mukono District, last month we received 150 million shillings, but now for the month of June, it had been reduced to only 37 million shillings.  So, we are wondering how we are going to operate if such monies continue to be reduced like that.  

We have also noted that private school funding from UPE has also been halted completely whereas we know that some of these private schools have been very helpful. They are co-partners with Government, and in some areas you even find a private school serving that locality without a Government School.  So, if UPE funds are completely cut from those private schools, then it means they are not going to operate.  I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

MR KASSIANO WADRI (Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr speaker, I would like to join the rest of my colleagues to thank His Excellency the President for having fulfilled his constitutional obligation of addressing the nation. However, there are four or five things that I would like to comment on in as far as the statement is concerned.  

I believe this State of the National Address was to give us an opportunity to take stock of what we have achieved in the last one year, and at the same time also to give us an opportunity to project what lies ahead of us in the coming year.  However, one very, very touchy issue that I observe is the issue of irresponsible statements being issued by Government and its Ministers.

We do know very well that more than 52 percent of our budget is supported with donor support.  Before we went on recess, there was yet another draconian law that we passed here, as Parliament, and this is a law that raised a lot of complaints from both within and without. And very unfairly, the responsible minister went ahead and uttered a statement to the effect that if the donor community is not satisfied with the position that we have taken, they should go to hell.  How do you at the same time want to bite the hand that feeds you?  

We know very well that the economy of Uganda is foreign driven.  We depend very heavily on donor support and these are the same people raising a hand that there is something wrong with us as a Government, and we are at the same time telling them that they should go to hell!  If they hanged and they died, who will give you the money tomorrow? (Laughter).  

Even to make it worse, we do very well know that as an indication of good governance, our Constitution has made it very clear that there shall be three arms of Government: the Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary, with clear separation of powers.  But last Saturday, His Excellency the President again made a very blunderous statement, blaming the judiciary that time that when robbers are arrested and taken to court, people should not complain to him but they should complain to the judiciary.  Surely, is that a very fair part of the blame?  

If somebody is brought to court and the prosecution has not adduced enough evidence, should the courts go out of their way to dance the tune of His Excellency the President, and therefore send these people to jail?  I think let each one of us play his or her part of the role so that we do not have to interfere with what is already instituted in the Constitution - (Applause).  

Today we are talking about insecurity; what is the cause of insecurity?  A society can never be insecure to the extent that guns are used for robbing people if the economy is really seen improving, and it is doing very well, not in papers but in people’s pockets.  The wave of insecurity is an indication of the high level of poverty in this country.  We should not hide our heads under the sand like an ostrich.  I think this is the time for us really to come and address the issues very squarely- (Mr Okumu Ringa rose)- I do not know if you have anything substantive to inform me on, I am well informed. I can give you -(Laughter)

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I want to be clarified by the Member on the Floor to relate the level of insecurity to poverty. I have seen incidences in many parts of the world, like in America and South Africa. They are highly developed but the rate of insecurity is more than ours here. So, I want clarification from him to relate poverty to the level of crimes.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable Member for having given me that information to which I would like to respond as follows: Much as the western society is developed, the criminals that are brought before court, say, charged with robbery, are not the poor. That, therefore, means there is a difference in the distribution of resources, and that is the root cause. 

Even here in Uganda, there are children as old as 10 who are directors of airlines. They are rich, but there are also other people who are very poor. That is the reason why I am saying, the wave of criminality; the wave of robberies is closely associated with lack of funds in people’s pockets! And even then, when we are talking about insecurity, I regret to note that the same institutions, which should have been charged with the responsibility of providing security for property and for people are the same people who, of late, have been reported to be behind these waves of robbery. The records are very clear. Army officers are on remand pending trial for offences of robbery. Surely, what do we expect from such kind of – it is Government that empowers them with the arms! Instead of executing their local duties, they use the same guns to turn against us! 

At the same time, when we look at page 5 of His Excellency’s statement, he is talking about modernisation of the Army. How can you modernise the Army when you have not even put in place laws to talk about their recruitment, emoluments, and their discharge; you have not talked about their welfare? The more reason why they are now using the weapons at their disposal against the people because there is no legal framework through which they can see some ray of hope! (Interruption) Mr Speaker, I have very little time, I do not wish to take any point of information. I am well informed on what I am talking -(Laughter). 

Article 210 of our Constitution is very clear and we need to invoke it. We need to come up with this legal framework so that it can give peace of mind to our UPDF officers so that they can know that at the end of the month, they are sure of a living. That will give them confidence so as not to turn the guns against us.

I now turn to the issue of infrastructure. This is the month of July, the month when my farmers from Terego begin transporting their tobacco down to Kampala.  Government risks losing revenue from BAT if it does not clear the road between Purongo and Pakwach, which right now is quite impassable. Lorries cannot travel on that road. 

I wish the ministers responsible for this Ministry were in this House so that they can appreciate what I am talking about. Even when we were talking about infrastructure development, much as we were grateful to Government that it had contracted two firms to begin tarmacking the road from Pakwach to Arua, a lot is yet demanded from the second firm, which has its origin from China. I think this firm needs very close – year in, year out, they are doing nothing. 

But I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Israeli firm, which is doing the part of the road from Arua to Nebbi; they are doing a commendable job. If Government was serious, it could actually go ahead and even cancel the contract that it awarded to the Chinese firm and give it to the Israeli firm. We want something tangible on the ground; it is no point for us to say A,B,C,D when people are in want of service. 

On top of that, when I was working here in Buganda, there was a Kiganda saying -(Laughter)- which I want to put in English for ease of understanding that when you are given a small piece of meat, do not reject it outright. First receive it, put it under the armpit and say, ‘no, can you add something for me’ -(Laughter). Therefore, while we are grateful that at last Government is beginning to think about West Nile region, we are saying that before we reach Pakwach, we still have that ambulant range from Karuma to Pakwach. It is my hope and my appeal that this financial year, something tangible will be done to that part of the land.

I would also like to add my voice to the concerns that have been raised about the need for energy. Energy, we do appreciate and note, is very important and one of the factors of production and, therefore, development. You will appreciate that a lot of blame has been put on people who have been discouraging the idea of construction of a hydroelectric power station in Bujagali. What is good for the goose is also good for the gander. 

We people in West Nile have time and again demanded from Government services of electricity. Some time back, this was around the beginning of November, we were given the assurance that come March 2002, there will be a thermal power station in Nebbi, which would supply the whole of West Nile. I do not know which months they were talking about? That time they were talking about March 2002, and we are in July. I beg to know what has happened. Is March 2002 yet to be expected or it has passed? What is happening?  

So, while we are demanding that, as an engine of growth and development, electricity services are very important.  We also feel that we from that end of the country also need it. Even the work on Nyagak - we were told by April- May the bids would be out and they would have awarded tenders. We are now in July, nothing has happened. What is it that is lacking?

Lastly but not least, Mr Speaker, I would like to make a few comments about the disarmament of Karamoja, and what is happening in Teso region. If we are saying we do not want to bring insecurity to our communities, and that armament of the Karimojong was one of the reasons why the neighbouring districts were complaining, I think as Government, we should also be very careful with the decisions and support we give to settlers who go to settle arbitrarily without the consent of the natives. 

Right now there is no peace of mind in the Teso region. The Banyarwanda herdsmen are there; they have even been given escorts. Even if you read today’s papers, there is a detach at Agu to ensure that these illegal settlers herd their cows without disturbance from the local people, and yet on the other side, a few months back there was a similar problem in Kibaale. A whole Head of State had to go and tell the Chairman LC V to stand aside because his being in the chair was causing disturbance in the place.  Surely, where is justice? Where is fair game? 

On one side you are saying, ‘because your presence here is causing insecurity and disunity among the people, step aside’. On the other side you are saying, “genda mu maaso,” go ahead -(Laughter).  What are we doing? I think we need to take a serious look at some of these things.

Lastly but not least, exactly one year back, I was on the Floor of this House lamenting about the poor state of Arua airfield, but on the 19th of last month, I was very happy that cabinet ministers participated in pushing a plane. It was on TV, we all saw it. I wish hon. Aporu, the Minister of State for Disaster were here, because she was one of those who helped to push -(Laughter). At that time when I talked about it, people could not believe me. They thought I was making up a story; they thought I was telling a lie. But I was very happy that this time, cabinet ministers did not only witness but participated in pushing the plane. That shows how serious the situation is. 

I hope that is an eye opener to government that when we come to this House and we make this cry on behalf of our people, we are not creating stories. We are telling government what is paining us, on which part of our body. I hope that since the Front Bench took part, government will be able to take it seriously and make that airfield, which is the largest revenue earning airfield in this country on internal freight, achieve its status and be able to get what it generates. 

I think it is one thing for us to come to this House and make these representations, but it is another when people begin pointing fingers that so and so is talking this because he is a DP; so and so is talking this because he is a Member of the Reform Agenda; so and so is talking this because he is one of us, he is in the Movement! 

I think we need to appreciate the statements that we make in the best interest of this country. We all have a stake in this country. This country is ours; we are not foreigners. When we stand up to say we demand for space, we really demand for it. Otherwise, if we do not get it, where else can we get space? This is our country and we must accommodate one another the way we are here in this Parliament -(Laughter). Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the President for his moderate and liberal State of the Nation Address, unlike in the past where most of these statements attacked certain areas.  I found this address very moderate, very liberal.  I therefore thank him for having improved as he continues to address this nation.

I also thank him for his concern on the issues of good governance and insecurity. These are two areas I hope to make some observations on. I fully agree with the President that those centres that can bring about insecurity should be handled, but what I find lacking in the statement is the analysis of the causes of insecurity in this country. 

The statement seems to have taken things for granted; that now that we have a government, insecurity will stop. I therefore wish to say that unless we clearly identify what the root cause of this insecurity in this country is - we saw insecurity during the Obote days here in Buganda; we saw insecurity during Amin’s days, particularly in Lango and other parts of Uganda; we saw insecurity in Kampala and other areas and we are continuing for the last 16 years to see insecurity in northern Uganda, western Uganda and now insecurity is coming to the central part of Kampala. Why is this insecurity persisting?  

The Movement for five years fought and won many battles.  They took over power but the war on insecurity persists. That means the war was not won. If the war had been won, I am sure we would not be experiencing this insecurity.  I, therefore, would like to say that the philosophy of the Movement came nearer to touching on the causes of insecurity, but the interpretation and the implementation of this philosophy has been wrong. Unless the interpretation of the Movement philosophy and its implementation is focused, we shall continue having insecurity in this country.

The maximisation of national unity was the target of the Movement; it was our goal. To achieve this, we identified two fundamental principles and these are the broad-based politics. By ‘broad’ we did not mean tribal representation or religious representation or friends being represented in the organs of state. What we meant was broad-based politics. That is, divergent views of different people, different groups coming together to work together -(Applause).  

If I remember very well, when we started mobilising the masses, we talked about representation.  Representing the views of people of different groups in government, in cabinet, in the civil service and other areas of state.  We did not preach putting people from different religion, tribe and whatever. That was a deviation and this deviation is going to continue causing problems! The only deviation we would have accepted is on merit basis. Even on that, we have deviated. That means that unless this principle of being broad-based is redressed, I cannot see this country continuing as a one system, moving to a one party state. We are caged; we are fed on the food we do not want when I can also provide the same, if not better food! 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I am requesting that the top leadership in this country should now address themselves, particularly the top Executive, to reviewing –(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, I stand on a point of clarification.  The honourable Member, since he started his speech, has been referring to “we”, “we” and “we”. I want to be clarified because so many people talk about “we” and “they”. I get confused. 

Towards the end - I do not know whether he is about to end up - he was saying, ‘I want now the top leadership of this country…’ now he is no longer in “we”. So, I want to be clarified. Who is “we”, and why has he now all of a sudden got out of the “we” and started addressing the top leadership?  I beg to be clarified, Mr Speaker.

DR BYARUHANGA: I thank you, Mr Speaker and the honourable Member for giving way. I am also seeking further clarification. In his remarks, the honourable Member was not referring to the population of Uganda and yet we have been through a series of elections right from the local council elections, parliamentary elections since we promulgated the new Constitution. But he is not referring to the wishes and the electoral process that has given the mandate to the various elected leaders, including this Parliament. He was referring to “we” and now he is saying, “top leadership”. But he is not referring to the people who are the supreme authority in this country. I thank you.

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, I use the word “we” because initially we were very few when we started the struggle, and, therefore, when we are few, we are “we”. As we progressed, we became many and as we continued, there was a downtrend. We are again becoming fewer and fewer.

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank hon. Sabiiti for giving way. I would like to give this information that the Movement started with a small group.  We are often reminded of the 27 fighters. It grew and at various stages, each of us came on board. And I wish to remind the speaker who was holding the Floor that when we were articulating the Movement and we said, ‘it is all inclusive, broad-based and non-partisan’, all-inclusive referred to identities, that is, religion, ethnicity and so on, while broad-based referred to divergent political ideas. So, in fact, the all-inclusive, broad-based Movement was intended to capture the diversity in terms of thought and identity.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR SABIITI: Thank you for that elaborate clarification. When I talk of the top executive of the Movement, I mean, as you acquire power –(Interruption)-

THE SPEAKER: No, I suppose you have been using ‘we’ and the honourable Member for Mbarara has also given information. I suppose the Movement is no longer ‘we’ from what you are saying.  The Movement is properly put in a document and this is what is the Movement. I think what is in the Constitution should be followed rather than saying ‘we’ or ‘you’. It is no longer ‘we’ or ‘you,’ it is a constitutional provision.  

MR SABIITI: Thank you for your guidance, Mr Speaker. What I meant was that originally we were few, we became many, we wrote this Constitution and I was part of the delegates’ conference that worked on this Constitution. We agreed in principle, but we continued moving as a Movement. But the style of leadership in this country has at a certain extent derailed the path that we wanted to take. Therefore, a number of people are beginning to say ‘no’ because the principles on which we framed this Constitution are being undermined.

I want also to touch on the issue of state organs. In the Constitution we talk about separation of powers, but there has been a tendency for the Executive to want to be the Parliament, the Judiciary, the Army, the public interest and even to want to think that it is Uganda. Uganda is for all of us; we are partners in this Movement and there should be clear consultations. 

Parliament comes here and makes certain fundamental decisions. If the Executive is not in agreement with the Parliament, we expect the harmonious relationship to work together and come out with a good decision. You come and say, ‘do not sell the Uganda Commercial Bank’ as Parliament; as representatives of this country, and then the head of state says, ‘you sell’. Surely, if Parliament said, ‘You investors, you will not own this bank because this bank belongs to the people of Uganda’, we can make that statement, and then the investors will not come! I think we should work together. Let not the Executive think it is the only organ in this country.

One organ abuses another organ, talking about thieving or stealing in the Judiciary? If this case has been discussed properly in the Judiciary and you lose, why do you not accept?  There are so many areas where the Executive has taken wrong decisions and at times we have said ‘okay’ for the sake of unity of this country. So, I feel that the Executive should respect other organs of state if we are to move properly.

Lastly, I want to advise; advice is seldom welcome and those who really need it most always lack it least. I would like to advise the executive that this country belongs to all Ugandans. If you cannot accommodate me in the Movement, let me loose. I should not be confined to you when you do not want me to be a partner. Therefore, it is time that you cannot block change. When change is evident, change is going to come. You may block and block and block - I request the Executive to be reasonable, to have a look at national issues properly in order to think that they can think for everybody. 

Ugandans have heads, and many groups of people have heads too. If all of us have to be in this Movement, all of us must be partners. You cannot think for me and if I have to think for you, then we cannot be together. All of us must think together and chart a way forward for this country. That is the only way Uganda can move ahead. With this, Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much. 

MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the rest of the Members who have thanked the President for the presentation he made on the state of the nation. 

I will first address myself to the issues of good governance and security, which I do believe were handled well. But like is common knowledge, we are now experiencing a wave of armed robberies and cold blooded murders, something that is sending shivers down the spines of members of the society. So I call upon government to do all it can to ensure that people and their property are properly protected. 

This is an issue that has reached crisis level, especially around Kampala and in peri-urban Kampala. In Wakiso district and in Busiro East, the constituency I represent, we are experiencing quite a number of those activities. 

On the same note, I would like to also thank government for having restored diplomatic relations with Sudan. That is a development that puts us in very good context with our neighbours, in the spirit of good neighbourliness. I would like to call upon it to ensure that we enhance that amongst all our neighbours, for good neighbourliness all around. 

I would like, Mr. Speaker, to appreciate the role government is playing in ensuring that it calls upon investors to come and invest in Uganda, and the incentives that have always been given to the investors. Indeed, the contribution of the investors has gone a long way in creating employment and in creating wealth and savings for our people. Quite a number of our young people have been employed but there is one thing that we need to do in this direction. We have concentrated so much on the foreign investors at the expense of the local ones. You find that we have so many local people who have invested, for example in the hotel industry, and they have had problems here and there, but government has been reluctant in coming to their rescue. 

A case in point is the gentleman who has invested in the Ranch on the Lake. That is a very good investment in terms of attracting tourism, and he broke away from the traditional tourism investment of these normal hotels and went for cottages and the rural setting. But you find that government has not even come to his assistance in terms of helping him with infrastructure. The road that goes to that place is despicable. You find that a very good investment is out there in the rural area but government has not come in to assist this man with infrastructure. 

When the SMART Partnership meeting was taking place in Munyoyo, that road was graded and was made a first class road and the investor took advantage of that and he is doing so well. I believe that we should be fair to even other local investors. Government can come in and assist them in form of upgrading their investments. I believe that will go a long a way in encouraging our local people who have decided to put their savings into investments that add value to our economy and create employment for our people.

I would also like to appreciate the role government is playing in infrastructure development. On this one, I would like to thank government for the idea of the Road Agency Unit. I think that is a good idea, yet when it comes to the President’s speech where he referred to the road networks within the countryside to be maintained by the districts, I find it a problem. As a person who comes from a new district, which does not have a road network, you are telling us to also participate in rehabilitating and maintaining the roads and yet these are not there in our areas. 

Since roads are supposed to go a long way in helping our people in fighting poverty, I do call upon government to assist these new districts. When they are being created, such factors should be put in place. For a district to be created, it must be given capacity to survive with such items like road units otherwise, the idea of creating districts will be defeated when you create districts that cannot look after the road network and other such facilities. When we create districts, there should be ability and capacity to have them run on a sustainable basis. 

When I move on to the energy sub-sector, it is pleasing to find that the Rural Electrification Strategy 2001 to 2010 is in place, and money has already been secured for it. But what our people are asking in the rural areas is, “when is that plan swinging into action?” People do need power. We are not going to achieve much by putting these plans on paper without translating them into reality! For that matter, I do believe that this one should be worked upon, so that our people get power in the rural areas. 

It will add value to products, and it will also help those who have the local initiative to create their own employment. Once power has been spread all over the rural areas, many things will be possible. It is a good idea on paper, and it will even be better if it is translated into reality, and our people will appreciate it even more then.

On the Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP) on page 16, it says that government will continue to improve access to land. When talking about poverty, Mr. Speaker, we do have a problem. The problem is fundamentally that of making people translate this idea of PEAP into a reality. We also have problems of land tenure; we have problems of landlords who are chasing our people away from their land. 

Until we resolve the land question properly, many people will still be in trouble. The Land Act went a long way in handling land issues, but it is not safeguarding the bibanja holders. Where I come from in Busiro East, there are many such problems. During recess, this was my preoccupation. In almost every other village, people are being chased away! Government should come out and harmonise the Land law, to assist people own land the way it was aimed at being owned. Otherwise, in its present form it is not very helpful.

There is no way you are going to talk about eradicating poverty when all these programmes are supposed to be implemented on land, and there is no land. When you talk about PMA, at the end of the day, you have to use land in order to make it a reality. When you talk about Entandikwa schemes and this money that is being given to the local people, they are supposed to use it on land. But they do not have security of tenure! So the land law is in place but it is not sufficient in protecting the people in the rural areas. So many people are being chased away from their land, and they are calling on government to intervene and assist them.

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA: Thank you honourable Member for giving way. Mr. Speaker, I would like to add my voice to the issue of land, especially in respect to women’s ownership of land. When you talk about issues of agriculture, when you talk of production, we know that women create the bulk of Uganda’s production and yet most of them do not own land. Therefore this is an issue that must be addressed in order to sustain and increase production as well as protect the environment. Because, if they are not co-owners of land or if they do not own land, women will have no incentive to produce more as well as protect the environment. Thank you very much.

MR SEBALU: Thank you very much for that information. I do agree with you. Land is one of the key factors of production, and if we are going to engage the majority of our people in the production process, they must have access to land through ownership. So that issue needs to be handled accordingly. 

I would like, Mr. Speaker, to applaud government on the way it has handled education, especially UPE. I however think that it is high time we handled or addressed the issue of quality. We have done well in ensuring that quantity is brought on board in terms of enrolment, but I think it is time that we handled the issue of quality. This is especially so when it comes to the construction of classrooms. 

This idea was left to the local people to handle, but I think government also needs to revisit that policy so that we get more serious companies on board. We could get big companies to construct classes throughout the country so that we build lasting classrooms. That way there will be something to show for it 10 years down the line. Otherwise, many of those that are being constructed now are collapsing, even before they are officially launched. That is a problem and government needs to address that issue so that we get quality, both in enrolment and in structures that we are putting in place. The taxpayers should be proud of what is put in place on their account. I would like to thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker for availing me the opportunity to make a few remarks on His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni’s State of the Nation Address. I must start by regretting that when the Vice President was delivering this speech, it was a bit dry. I think it was restricted to the fact that she had only to read it, making it less friendly, as it were. It was a bit too hard. 

I believe that in making such a speech, I would have expected the Vice President to participate in authoring it so that when she was delivering it she would be doing it on behalf of the President, but also as a participant. But it appears that this one was handed to her and she had only to read it. That was not very pleasant. I think she could have role manoeuvred, to make it more pleasant. 

In future, even though we know that the Presidency consists of over 100 people though only headed by one man, more than one person should do the authoring of this speech. When it is made with such stringent rules, I think it makes it less palatable.

CAPT MIKE MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, I thank my colleague for giving way. I just wish to guide my senior colleague that the Vice President was fulfilling the constitutional mandate of His Excellency the President. As you know, His Excellency the President is supposed to regularly communicate to the state through Parliament, and I do not think the communication - as you rightfully put it - was in any way lacking. Her input as a Vice President was to communicate the aspirations and the vision of the President to you.  

MR GAGAWALA: I will not exchange any more words on that issue, but I think my views have been transmitted to him and to the Cabinet. I however believe that at this stage where we have got a few years before we get another President, it is important that as many people as possible should be involved in making this type of speech. That way they will actually sell it properly. Otherwise when it is very dry, it costs us something.  

I go on to say that on good governance and security, the government has done well. I must thank the NRM government for having come out with the idea of decentralization. This is a good idea. I am sure the honourable member from Busia, who has just left, is very happy with decentralization now that they have a district. I am sure Wakiso is very happy too, and I think decentralization is the way forward. 

Anybody who talks against decentralization - I say it frankly here - is more or less an enemy of the people of Uganda. That is because the people of Uganda have suffered with a highly centralized government. It is a great pity that when making his address, the President forgot that he came to Bulamogi and promised the people a district there, come what may. We are yet to see that, but I would like to tell the honourable Members of Parliament that the way forward is complete and rationalized decentralization. 

The people of Bulamogi are still clamouring and demanding for the district of Kaliro to be given to them. You cannot expect somebody to travel from Gadumire -(Interruption)-   

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, I think you have heard many others saying that we should stop creating new districts. I do not know what you say about that.

MR GAGAWALA: Mr. Speaker, as for the district of Kaliro, the facts speak for themselves. If we were to imagine Kinyara Sugar Works, which is only a sub-county, it is producing riches of Shs 61 billion, as per today’s quotation. A sub-county is producing goods worth Shs 61 billion -(Interruption)-  

MRS TUMA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to know from the honourable Member from Bulamogi if we have any district called Kaliro. Thank you.

MR GAGAWALA: Mr. Speaker, we the people who are living in Bulamogi currently are demanding that a Kaliro district be formed and a paper to the effect has been forwarded to the relevant office. I see the Minister for Local Government just walked out, but the fact is that there already is something being tendered, perhaps to Cabinet, about the formation of Kaliro district. It has not been formed yet.

That is why I am standing here to say that it is a pity that when the President made his statement, he did not mention anything about decentralization and yet this is a very popular thing to the grassroots communities. I do not know anybody who is against it. And if there is, I would like to convince that person that decentralization is really very popular.

Somebody asked why Kaliro district should be formed? Kaliro district should be there because even a Gombolola there is producing more money than some of the big districts. Kakira is only a sub-county, hon. Tuma knows it, but it is producing goods worth Shs 460 billion at the moment. It is a pity that the government is not taking the issue of sugar production seriously. People are now transporting sugarcane from Gadumire, from Nawaikoke, all the way to Lugazi because they are not allowed to take it to Kakira. 

So, the issue of decentralization is a serious one, and is the way forward. I would like to urge all honourable Members of Parliament to really support me when Cabinet eventually brings this issue on board, because it is a serious one. 

When I turn to security, it is a pity. There is an aspect, which I yesterday tried to bring to the attention of the Prime Minister; unfortunately he sort of shut me up by saying that it is bad leadership at the local level that is to blame. But the issue is that there is poor reporting of various aspects in an orderly manner in the country. If you now ask an LC III Chairman about what he is doing, you will not get a report. 

If you ask the Prime Minister to give you the reports that are coming in from each Gombolola about serious issues happening in different parts of the country, I am convinced that there is no such report. Because, if there were a reporting system, there would be a standard format for it right from LC I up to LC V. Now that that is lacking, there is no standard reporting system. It means that people are reporting in an ad hoc way. Therefore, there is no compiled report that one can revisit, for example about Kanungu, about Kabale or Tororo. 

Then PMA is not doing well. We should not deceive ourselves that PMA is going to take us out of poverty, because actually there is no reporting system about PMA. We do not know where we are about PMA, we do not know what progress we are making, and we do not know what mistakes are being made by the field officers. So, I am saying that there is a big problem on PMA. We have been talking about it for the last five years and we are going on for the next ten years. It is not doing very well and, therefore, it is likely that we may not even achieve our targets on fighting poverty. 

I heard that the government is trying to get the idea of co-operatives back on board. Co-operatives came here to fight Asians. But let us be careful about re-introducing co-operatives. Mr. Speaker, nothing killed this nation other than the big unions; Busoga Co-operative Union killed all the Basoga and created poverty. If we are going to introduce co-operative unions again, we must start from the grassroots, from the primary societies -(Interruption)-

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am giving information to the honourable Member from Bulamogi that when co-operatives were in Busoga, there was a lot of development there. So it is deceitful to tell this House that co-operatives killed the whole of Busoga. Most people went to school through the money from co-operatives. I thank you.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: It is a pity that the hon. Kubeketerya is telling me that Busoga Growers was a brilliant thing, and that it was helpful to the people! It was Busoga Growers, created by the primary societies that sealed the fate of primary societies. They have sold all the eight ginneries in my constituency. All of them have been sold!  They have sold all the big ginneries in the whole region and you are saying Busoga Growers is doing very well? 

You ask any big union here what it has done for the people. They have been eaters, looters and corrupt people, and you are saying we should put money back into the big unions? I urge this august House to consider that when the co-operatives are being re-introduced, they should start from the grassroots in order for them to succeed. I thank you, for giving me these few minutes.

MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Kapelebyong County, Katakwi): Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to add my humble voice to those who have already thanked His Excellency the President for making a clear and precise presentation to the nation. I have a few specific concerns that I would like to highlight for the attention of the President. 

During the campaigns, His Excellency the President put it very clearly that by the year 2003, there shall be 270 grant-aided secondary schools added on to those that already exist. Today, it is just six months away to 2003, and only 96 schools have been grant-aided. The President in his speech made it clear that the government is committed, but there is a rumour circulating throughout the country that the Minister of Finance is saying there is no money to grant-aid other schools. 

There is also another rumour that the Minister of Finance is also trying to cut down the number of schools from 84 to something like 50. They say that liars must have good memories –(Interruption)-

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. May I take this opportunity to inform the colleague on the Floor that there is no such rumour? Normally in planning, there is room for re-adjusting the program. So what the Ministry of Education is doing now is to re-adjust the program so that the implementation is more effective. Therefore the rumours are not true. Very soon, when we produce our Ministry policy statement, the colleagues will be informed in detail, which way the adjustment is going. I thank you.

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Hon. Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister for allaying my fears. It is no longer a rumour but it is a reality that there is some adjustment, and we are not sure which way it will go. The statistics are however available somewhere to show that the adjustment is a downward one. 

The President agreed with the Minister of Education during the campaigns that for an O’ level teacher to perform effectively, he should have 24 lessons a week. A’ level teachers should have 18 lessons, and a teacher teaching both O’ level and A’ level should have 20 periods per week. A head teacher should have six lessons, and the deputy head teacher 12 periods. This brings on board another 7,700 teachers to be recruited. Up to now there is nothing clear about the uplifting of the ceiling of secondary schools. 

I would like to know from the relevant Ministry if something is being put in place to ensure that the objective of the President of having one secondary school per sub-county is achieved within the set time. 

I read from the press, Mr. Speaker that the Government of Uganda secured Shs 100 million for students to be supported in Makerere University. This is a very good effort, but I have my doubts about it. I am yet to know, where are those students coming from? What criteria is the ministry going to use to select the students to be supported? My appeal is that if State House is funding these students, all the corners of Uganda should be considered. 

Much has been said about security. I would like to put on record my appreciation for the effort government has taken on disarmament. It has reached a new phase, and government should now take the effort to move on to the next phase. What are these other phases I am thinking about?  We do not know the gun population that is still in Karamoja, but there is relative peace.  I would like to ask Government to come out with programmes to support the economy of Karamoja. And more so, Mr Speaker, I would like to remind His Excellency and the Executive that the effects of the guns in Karamoja have been more felt in the neighbouring districts than in Karamoja itself. And for this reason, I would like to ask the Government to have planned a rehabilitation programme to support the districts that suffered out of the gun in Karamoja. 

In relation to this, Mr Speaker, the President promised that he would help to resettle the people in the camps.  As of now, the people in my constituency are still in the camps.  I read from the Press that some Shs720 million was allocated to help resettle the people in the camps, but up to now, I have not heard from any relevant authority where the money is.  We are still in the camps; even the MP is still in the camp.

Mr Speaker, mention has been made on the health facilities in the country.  I would like to thank the Government for upgrading 45 health centres.  In the speech, there is just mention that Government is going to support more health centres, but there is nothing exact. I would like to know; if I want also to rehabilitate a health centre in my sub-district, how do I access the facilities?  Because, from the district they will tell you it is supposed to be in the Ministry, from the Ministry, it is not very clear - (Capt. Mukula rose_)

CAPT. MUKULA:  Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague from Kapelebyong, hon. Mallinga that the plan of the Ministry of Health is being implemented through the districts, and we have what we call the health sector strategic plan.  That is the main vehicle the Government of Uganda uses in drawing up strategic plans in terms of the implementation of the horizontal plans in each district.  I would like to assure honourable colleague -(Mr Mutuluuza rose_)

THE SPEAKER: No, I think he is just giving information -(Interruption)- no, no, let him finish the information he wants to give, please.

CAPT. MUKULA:  Mr Speaker, it is also good that after this State of the Nation Address, we will be going in straight to discuss the budget, and I am happy to note that the Ministry of health has circulated its policy statement. Through that policy statement, we have drawn what you call the MTEF (Medium Term Expenditure Framework). I would like to assure the colleague that all the development plans in Katakwi District have been a case in the health sector strategic plan, more so, under the MTEF.  

I would like to assure him that the grade two and three health centres that already have been developed in Kapelebyong are also being equipped. So, in essence we have a five-year plan under the Health Sector Strategic Plan, and we will keep you informed as we develop. But you should always feel free to come to the Ministry to discuss the internal mechanics.

MR JOHNSON MALLINGA: Thank you very much, honourable Minister, for showing me the vehicle to use so that I will have the Kapelebyong centre rehabilitated.  

Mr Speaker, mention has been made by the President that Government will continue to improve access to land, and it is also said that Government will help to increase livestock restocking.  Some people in Uganda have fears.  I have had opportunity to travel in some parts of Mbarara.  

I would like to thank the President for the effort he made to resettle the cattle keepers in Mbarara, to re-organise them so that they know how to look after their animals and have a settled life.  However, people now have fears about what this access to land is because a group of pastoralists stormed Teso and we do not know whether this is the effort of Government who improved this access to land for them. At an appropriate time, we shall have to share with the relevant authorities and Members of Parliament to see how we can settle the problem of the pastoralists that have stormed Teso without permission.

It is true, I am aware, Mr Speaker, that the Constitution allows Ugandans to live anywhere in Uganda, but there are also laws that stipulate how we acquire land in Uganda. So, it is unfortunate that the law has been interpreted wrongly in some parts of the country, and interpreted very accurately in another part of the country –(Prof. Nsibambi rose_)

PROF NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable Member for giving way. Today I chaired a Cabinet meeting and the problems afflicting the people of Teso have been comprehensively addressed. I want to assure you that Government has not sponsored anybody to go to that area, and a comprehensive statement will be made either tomorrow, or the day after tomorrow so that we remove any fears, and we also correct wrong statements, which have been made that UPDF is protecting certain sections of Ugandans. We give parity of treatment to all people of Uganda, and I want to assure you that after hearing that statement and answering some questions, there will be no problems.

DR MALLINGA:  Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Prime Minister for beginning to cool down my heart.  I was so scared about my people, especially when people in authority were making statements that are contrary to the wishes of the people of Uganda.  I will quote for example a one Masereka, RDC Kumi District, who clearly stated that if the people of Teso tampered with the pastoralists who have invaded their land, there would be a worse genocide in Teso than it was in Rwanda.  But now that I have got a statement from the Prime Minister, I think we shall wait to hear the statement and then know how to proceed.  

Finally, the people of Katakwi and the people of Kapelebyong were given promises; the hon. Minister of Energy clearly promised the people of Katakwi when she was there with His Excellency that electricity would reach Katakwi by June 2002.  Now, this is July 3rd, I do not know whether I did not hear her properly! And we were also promised water in the town of Katakwi. There is no sign of water yet. 

In the State of Nation Address, there is nothing mentioned about Katakwi on roads, and yet when we were there with the President, he promised us security roads from Kapchorwa passing through Sironko and coming down to Alito and Obalanga.  Mr Speaker, I would like to remind the Head of State that his promises should be fulfilled so that the people of Katakwi will belong to Uganda.

Mr Speaker, once again, I would like to add my humble voice to thank Her Excellency the Vice President, Dr Speciosa Naigaga Wandira Kazibwe for ably representing the President in his absence. This is a clear indication that Uganda does not lack people to take over from the President when the time comes! (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable Members, I have noted hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, hon. Ruhindi, hon. Dr Nkuuhe, hon. Mutuluuza, their names have been taken.  I sense that honourable members are tired; they have been sitting here since 2.00 p.m., but those members whose names I have mentioned will start the debate tomorrow, and they have been recorded.  We come to the end of today’s business.  The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(Parliament rose at 5.35 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 4 July 2002 at 2.00 p.m.)


