



Tuesday, 7 July 2020

Parliament met at 2.32 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I have just a few matters to communicate. The first is that last week, the armed forces of Uganda suffered a number of misfortunes. The Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) lost four senior officers last week, namely Maj. Gen. Eric Mukasa, Brig. Victor Twesigye, Brig. Jackson Bell Tushabe and Col Nkera.

Maj. Gen. Mukasa joined the bush war in 1981, held several command positions and fought the insurgencies in northern and eastern Uganda. He was deployed as Inspector of Military Equipment and is reported to have helped to fight importation of poor quality military equipment in the army. He also served as Chief of Staff, Reserve Forces. 

Brig. Twesigye joined the National Resistance Army (NRA) in 1986, fought several battles and served in various positions, including as military attaché in India. At the time of his death, he was Uganda’s liaison officer for defence at the East African Community headquarters in Arusha, Tanzania.

Brig. Jackson Bell Tushabe served as the UPDF Fourth Division Commander in Gulu, Third Division Commander in Mbale and Second Division Commander in Mbarara. He was an ardent promoter and lover of football. He owned Victors Football Club, which won the Uganda Cup in the 2007/2008 and 2009/2010 seasons. On both occasions, Victors Football Club represented Uganda in the Confederation of African Football Cup. He was the Chairperson of the Super Division Clubs Association. He also served as the Federation of Uganda Football Associations (FUFA) Vice-President in charge of competitions.

Col Nkera joined the bush war in the 1980s. He served in the UPDF in various capacities, including under the Office of the Prime Minister in the Office of Disaster Preparedness. At the time of his death, he was attached to the Operation Wealth Creation secretariat. 

Honourable members, during the same week, the Uganda Police Force lost two detectives: Assistant Inspector of Police Emmanuel Mawa and Sgt Dick Magara from the Special Investigations Division. The two detectives were part of the cream in the investigations division. They died in the line of duty in an accident involving a police car and a truck at Magamaga in Mayuge District. 

On behalf of Parliament and on my own behalf, I convey our heartfelt condolences to their families and pray that they secure eternal rest and that the Almighty God satisfies their loved ones. We thank them for their service to the nation. Let us observe a moment of silence in their honour.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would also like to inform you that His Excellency the President has returned the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2020. He has taken issue with the amendments relating to minimum qualifications for the Local Council III (LC III) chairpersons as well as the district councillors. He requests that we review the amendments to section 111 and section 116 of the principal Act.

I would also like to inform the honourable members that our colleague, hon. Ezati Kassiano Wadri, has not been with us for a while because he is indisposed. We shall keep him in our prayers but also keep updating you on his progress. Of course, there are a number of Members who were not here at the session’s opening and they are still not with us; hon. Lubwama and hon. Zaake are still not able to join us.

Finally, honourable members, the Internet Service Providers Association of Uganda would like to thank the Committee on ICT and this House for the support they gave them in expeditiously reviewing the Uganda Communications (Fees and Fines) (Amendment) Regulations. As you remember, our House took up the issue and the regulations were revoked in the interest of the internet users. Therefore, they thank you and I would also like to thank you, honourable members, for your vigilance and hard work.

Honourable members, on Thursday we shall be having inter-denominational prayers. Normally, at the start of a new session, we do have our prayers, which join the Catholics, Anglicans and the Muslims. This time, we shall have it on Thursday, 9 July 2020 starting at 9.00 a.m. at the ground level parking lot here. This has been our practice at the start of every session and, of course, we intend to observe the standard operating procedures relating to COVID-19. Honourable members are invited to come and we start off with those prayers for the Session.

There are a few matters of national concern. Hon. Ogwal.

2.39
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, District Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, in response to the Communication from the Chair, I wish to thank you for having assigned a day when Parliament will gather together to thank God for what He has done for us in the last Session and to also seek His guidance for this particular Session. I feel that as we move to the next Session, we need the guidance of the Lord. We went through a very difficult time in the last Session and we believe that this particular Session really needs God’s guidance. 

Although we are coming on that day, we cannot all come because we have been advised that we still have to keep the number as small as we can. However, I believe that all of you, in spirit, will be with us because we need to seek the guidance of the Lord as we go through the preparations for the 2021 elections. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving us that day to pray for this nation and particularly for Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us have hon. Ntende for two minutes, followed by hon. Kibalya and hon. Lucy Akello.

2.40
MR ROBERT NTENDE (Independent, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Madam Speaker, I am here to raise a very important issue concerning our outgrower farmers in Busoga sub-region. 

The sugarcane outgrowers have a big outcry because as we talk, these outgrowers have cane in excess but they cannot sell their cane to the millers. Secondly, the outgrowers have burnt cane as a result of malicious people and bush fires and some of them grow their cane using loans. They get money from banks, microfinance institutions and village SACCOs. These farmers are now stranded. 

The millers in Busoga sub-region have refused to buy the burnt cane from our farmers. It is very sad. They have continued to crush their burnt cane but they cannot buy burnt cane from our famers. As a result, our farmers’ houses, land and some properties that they put as collateral security are being taken by these financial institutions. Actually, many houses have been labelled “for sell”. If you move through Busoga sub-region, you will find about five or even 10 houses in a village labelled “for sell”. 

As the people’s representatives, we would like to request the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to bail out farmers. As leaders, when we tried to approach the millers of Busoga, they said they have plenty of sugar in their stores which they cannot sell. So, they said they have no money to buy the cane from farmers. Government should buy this sugar using the loan facilities from Uganda Development Bank (UBD), so that the millers can have money to buy the farmers excess sugarcane. 

The excess sugarcane in Busoga, as we talk, stands at 7.5 million tonnes. It would take 10 years for the millers to finish crushing this excess cane. So, the farmers are stuck yet they have loans to clear.

I would like to also request the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to invite the millers and have a meeting with them, and to give our farmers priority. The only intervention we can have now is for the minister to have a meeting with the millers and request them to suspend the crushing of their cane and concentrate on crushing the cane of the farmers for at least 90 days. Once this is done, some life will come back to Busoga. Otherwise, right now, our people are limping. They are living in poverty and in great fear because their properties like houses, motorbikes and land are being taken by the financial institutions. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Ntende. The Leader of Government Business is not here. It is very unfortunate that the battle ground of the sugar industry is in Busoga. Last year, His Excellency the President came to Busoga and met the farmers and said that he would support farmers in Busoga to establish their mill. He also said that through the Uganda Development Cooperation (UDC), the mill would be funded. 

Honourable members, we have been waiting. In fact, this morning, I called UDC but apparently, there is no instruction, either verbal or in writing, from the President or the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. No one has written to them to ask them to support the farmers of Busoga to do this. That remains hanging.

Secondly, despite the law being made, there is no sugar board because the Act has not been implemented. That is why farmers are getting all these problems. I would like to, therefore, ask the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to come and address these issues. However, begin by meeting the millers and ask them to buy the cane from the farmers. They are crushing their own burnt cane but they do not want the brunt cane of the Basoga. This is really unfortunate. 

The minister should come back to us next Tuesday and give us an update on this issue. This is very urgent since it touches the lives of many people. Thank you. 

2.47
MR MAURICE KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue I would like to raise concerns Nsambya Police Barracks.

If there is any institution that is hard to change in this Government, even if there is change in anything, it is the Uganda Police Force. Last week, I went to Nsambya Police Barracks to visit someone. When you reach this barracks, you will not believe that this is the police that have the emblem of the Crested Crane and flag of Uganda and is a reflection of what we call the Uganda Police Force.

For close to two months, Nsambya Police Barracks has not had power. God was clear when he said, “let there be light” and He created light. In Uganda, we are saying Nsambya Police Barracks should not have light, yet we are saying that we are going to teach children using television. Nsambya Police Barracks, which should be the first police barracks in this country that we would be proud of, is suffering.

For some time, Nsambya Police Barracks has not even been having water. When they get water for a week, the next week they will not have water. Madam Speaker, if you went there – I would like to implore that the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs visits this barracks.

If you go to Nsambya Police Barracks, you will not believe that the people who are committed to serve this country are the ones staying in that barracks. There is total congestion and the environment is not clean. In fact, everything is appalling. You cannot believe that Nsambya Police Barracks is located in Kampala. You would imagine that it is located in Buyende or another place. 

Nsambya Police Barracks is in Kampala, the Capital City of Uganda, which we are proud of. We see these officers moving, guarding and helping us, but we do not feel and share want they go through. The situation in the barracks is unbelievable. We cannot live like that in this country; some are sleeping in a good environment with bungalows and yet the officers who are responsible for the peace of this country are suffering.

I would like to pray that the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs visits that barracks and gives us a report. The Government Chief Whip is saying there is COVID-19, but I passed Jinja and found officers from the Prime Minister’s office holding a workshop somewhere in a hotel in Jinja, which I do not want to name. It is the Government Chief Whip insinuating this.

I also pray that the Minister of Internal Affairs intervenes. Madam Speaker, when I was young, the Inspector General of Police (IGP) was Gen. Wamala and he promised the greatest environment for police officers. I wonder what happened and where that dream ended. I cannot believe what happened. When I was a member of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, there was a budget item on housing for police officers. I wonder what happened. 

I, therefore, pray that the Minister of Internal Affairs comes and tells us whether he is proud to have Nsambya Police Barracks in that situation with no power in the barracks.

Lastly, I would like to request the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - The finance ministers are always here saying there is need for a supplementary budget and they are diverting money from one area to another to do this and that. For once, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should consider Nsambya Police Barracks, which could be a reflection of other barracks elsewhere, and have these people live a decent life like the way we live. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the Minister of Internal Affairs should come and address this House on the state of utilities - both water and power - in Nsambya Police Barracks. 

Secondly, the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs should visit the barracks and give us a report.

Thirdly, when Gen. Kayihura was still the IGP, there were facilities being constructed in Naguru. I even visited them. They were supposed to be used to decongest many of the barracks, so that the officers could have somewhere to stay. I do not know what has happened. The other day, I flew over there. It seems they are simply there, incomplete. I do not know why. I think we need a report on that situation, so that we can know how our officers are going to live. 

Minister of Internal Affairs, come back to us on the utilities and also the status of the accommodation, which was being constructed for the officers at Naguru. Come back to us by  Tuesday next week because these are urgent issues.

2.52
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance regarding a shoot-out that took place at Elegu border on Friday night.

Because of the COVID-19 pandemic and the high infection rates at Elegu and many border places, security patrols the porous border areas. Unfortunately, at Elegu, this is being used to make money and crack deals. If you want to cross over to Uganda from South Sudan, you simply use these porous borders, cross over, pay some little money and you are good to go.

However, what is very disturbing is the business of the sale of marijuana/mairungi/miraa. This is what caused the shoot-out on Friday between the UPDF who are patrolling the borders and the soldiers from South Sudan. As a result, one of our soldiers was shot in the buttocks.

Madam Speaker, this is making the work of the district taskforce of Amuru very difficult. The number of community infections are going up every day in Amuru. The district is struggling with the little resources they have. We were hoping to get support from the security people to control the borders; unfortunately, we are getting this very disturbing news.

My prayer is that the minister in charge of security comes back and explains to us what is happening at Elegu. Why is there so much impunity, especially when it comes to the patrols and controlling of these porous borders –(Interruption)

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for allowing me to give her information. I am one of the MPs from the border. I would like to agree with my sister that we have too much deployment at the porous borders but it has not helped. The officers and security personnel who were deployed are complaining. How do you deploy a soldier who eats one meal a day and you do not expect him to solicit money from the people who are crossing?

Therefore, I would like to inform the whole country that these porous borders - Mutukula, Busia and Elegu - are the same. The security officers who were deployed there are soliciting money and encouraging people to cross. As I talk now, we have a COVID-19 positive case in the community in Busia; we have one case now. Because of the mishandling of information by the national taskforce, it is encouraging these people to solicit money from the common people.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. Hon. Macho is making it a routine to use the time of colleagues, who have serious information to give this House, to bring issues concerning his particular area. 

Madam Speaker, he could come to you to seek for special time to raise a matter which needs urgent attention in his constituency. However, this is the second or third time I am watching hon. Macho doing this. The honourable member on the Floor wants quick attention; therefore, she needs time to bring out the matter that concerns her constituency.

Is it procedurally correct, Madam Speaker, for a Member to stand up and interrupt a Member who is well informed about the issue she is raising? Is he moving on very well, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, sometimes I wonder why Members surrender their time. You have surrendered your time; you will not have prayers. You surrendered your time. People come and then they divert. Now, he is talking about bribery; you are talking about mairungi at the border. Let us have hon. Turyamuhweza and hon. Rwakoojo. If I give you an opportunity, do not donate your time.

2.59
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba County West, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Mine is really a reminder to the Minister of Water and Environment. I raised this matter on the Floor of the House on 17 March this year. It concerns harassment and eviction of the people in Kalombe and Nsowe forests in Gomba West County. 

The villages most affected were Kabale-Kamugole and Kigayaza. The residents were displaced by some privileged outsiders. There was no chance given to the locals to continue in occupation and plant the trees. Instead, outsiders were preferred.

The National Forestry Authority (NFA) officials were practising theft of crop harvest when conducting the exercise. They were even stealing essentials in the houses like sugar and salt. They carried out the evictions in an unfair manner. They were extorting money from old occupants and creating fear in the population because of the existence of the army in uniform.

There is an existing primary school and church, which the locals were even afraid to use. Well, now because of coronavirus, we cannot them. There was rejection of registration in the yellow book at the time, owing to that harassment they were getting.

My prayer is that violence, eviction, and extortion should stop immediately and that there should be an investigation of the actions of NFA, especially somebody called Mr Mugisha. Every local talks about him and how he swears that nobody, apart from the President, can stop him.

I pray that the Minister of Water and Environment investigates the matter immediately. Madam Speaker, you directed that the Minister of Water and Environment examines the situation in Nsowe and Kalombe forests in Gomba and he was supposed to give us an update by Thursday the next week. So, mine is a reminder, Madam Speaker. 

I am reiterating my prayer for the Minister of Water and Environment to investigate the matter. You had directed that she should investigate and examine the situation in Nsowe and Kalombe forests and give an update by Thursday of that week.

THE SPEAKER: How long ago was this? Did you say more than two months ago?

MS RWAKOOJO: That was 17 March.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Water and Environment is required to come back to this House on Thursday - because March is a long time from now – and respond to the issues raised by hon. Rwakoojo. They have taken very long.

MS RWAKOOJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the issue of Amuru border, the Minister of Internal Affairs is in charge of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substance Control Act. So, we ask the ministry to investigate the issue of the sale or use of narcotic drugs at that border. 

The Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs should update us on the relations between the forces at the border between South Sudan and Uganda. The Minister of East African Community Affairs should also join that team and give us a comprehensive feedback on what is going on at the northern border of Uganda. We are giving you up to Thursday next week.

3.03
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning vanilla growers in my constituency. 

My constituency is like an island in Heaven. Whereas many people in Uganda sell their vanilla at Shs 250,000 and sometimes even at Shs 200,000 per kilogramme, the people in my constituency are being forced to sell theirs at only Shs 50,000 per kilogramme. Yesterday and even today, people have been up in arms.  

I tried to reach the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, but it is as if he was on Mars – (Interjections) – Heaven is better because Mars is far. Well, I called him and sent him a text message too. I also tried to call the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) and several other officers because people had staged roadblocks stopping farmers from taking their vanilla to the market. I tried my best but it was all in vain; the minister did not answer my calls. 

As I speak, if you visit the vanilla growers, you will find them starving because their vanilla was even stolen when it was still young. They put in a lot of effort, they do not sleep, but it is disappointing that when it reaches the time of harvesting and selling their crop, someone discourages them like that.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that you instruct the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to immediately go to Katerera and have a meeting with those vanilla growers. I also pray that the minister, in any way, allows my people to sell vanilla in the markets all over Uganda. No particular buyers who have fixed prices should be sent to them. 

Lastly, I beg that instead of the security people preventing farmers from taking their vanilla to Kasese for sell, they should provide security for their vanilla. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is there a part of this country where you cannot sell something? Is there a part of this country where you are not allowed to move? 

MR KATOTO:  Madam Speaker, if you went to Katerera and investigated this issue, you would find that people are not allowed to carry their vanilla anywhere else. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries here? 

3.06
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, the matter seems to be multi-sectoral. When you talk about markets, it falls in the docket of the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries can only help in making sure the growers are organized but when it comes to selling, it is the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives concerned. 

It seems vanilla growers in Katerera need somebody to go there and organise them into a cooperative to save them from being fleeced. With a liberalised economy where products just hit the market, it would be very difficult for a minister, acting on behalf of Government, to set prices for any produce. What we can do is to organise them into formidable groups like the banana growers in western Uganda have done. You just do not get into a banana plantation without going through the leaders of the banana growers. They determine the price for the bananas. In some areas, the maize growers are doing the same thing. So, the vanilla growers in Katerera will need such concerted effort. 

I would like to pledge, Madam Speaker, that I will inform the Prime Minister so that he can decide which ministers can go and find out what is on the ground, and see how they can come in to help. Otherwise, to ask the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to do something, when your concern is about prices, will be asking for a wrong thing – (Interjections) – I was giving information; the Floor is not mine. I am done. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the farmers need assistance. However, I want to know first who prevents them from moving out of their district. I need to know that first before we get the other assistance. Who stops the farmers from moving to sell outside Katerera?

MR KATOTO: Madam Speaker, the district leaders claim that the order came from above. As I speak, there is an honourable member here who informed me that people in his area are selling vanilla at Shs 200,000 per kilogramme yet my people are forced to sell theirs at Shs 50,000 per kilogramme. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I would like to know who gave the order that Katerera people should not sell their vanilla outside the district.

MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI: Madam Speaker, I would like to advise my brother. I am a vanilla grower and I know that the current price is Shs 60,000. So, you cannot say that the people of Katerera – 

MR KATOTO: You do not know what you are talking about because there is a Member who said theirs is being sold at Shs 200,000 per kilogramme.

MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI: Let me inform you. The prices you – (Interruption)

MR KATOTO: You do not have information.

MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI: Wait a minute. Madam Speaker, what I know is that the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries does not control prices of agricultural products because we operate in a liberalised economy. Since 1992, all the sectors of the economy, including agriculture, were liberalized. This also applies to coffee. The coffee prices have been fluctuating. Now, coffee prices range between Shs 3,800 to Shs 4,200 per kilogramme. 

The price of vanilla, which was originally Shs 270,000, has come down to Shs 60,000 per kilogramme. Also, nobody is being restricted from moving their vanilla to sell it wherever they want. So, the information the honourable member gave us is wrong. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay honourable members –

MR KATOTO: Honourable members, I know there are people that you represent and so do I. Therefore, I cannot come to tell a lie to this Parliament and say that it is a fact. If you want, you can send someone to investigate the matter. People are forced to sell their vanilla at Shs 50,000 per kilogramme yet in Kasese, vanilla is being bought at Shs 200,000 per kilogramme. There is an honourable member who can attest to that. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I direct the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to go to Katerera to meet the vanilla growers and see if they are organised or not. If they are not, she should organise them. 

Secondly, the minister should advise them on the prices and the marketing of their products. She should go there and find out who “the people above” are, who do not allow Katerera vanilla growers to take their products outside the district. Can we have an answer by Thursday next week? Okay.

3.11
mr kaps fungaroo (FDC, Obongi County, Obongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I stand to raise an urgent matter of national importance about floods threatening the Obongi Ferry landing site and the roads connecting to it.

Flooding comes as a result of two things: 
One, the rising water levels of River Nile. We are already aware of rising waters in the lakes in the Nile Valley – lakes Victoria, Kyoga and Albert. The biggest threat comes from the second aspect, which is the flooding of River Zoka, which has its confluence with River Nile just near the ferry.

As a community, we feel that this problem can be prevented. We have raised this matter with Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) and discussed it with the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Works and Transport, and the Director for Ferries at UNRA.

What is disturbing is that the response of Government is very poor. What do we do? That ferry is the lifeline of Obongi and the people of West Nile where we have refugees and citizens. The World Food Programme and other United Nations (UN) agencies serving refugees use that ferry. Why should we allow a problem, which can be prevented, to continue and destroy the livelihood of people? 

This is the second time that this area is threatened by floods, yet we gave an early warning to the Ministry of Works and Transport. Madam Speaker, I remember that through this House, you gave emergency money to deal with issues of flooding. Where has this money gone to? We are not seeing this action on the ground.

Therefore, I stand here to request that the Ministry of Works and Transport and UNRA urgently come on the ground. We, the Members of Parliament, leaders of Obongi and Adjumani, have mobilised communities for a self-help response. We would like to work together with Government. 

We need sand barriers to be constructed. We have bought 2,000 sacks with contributions from the community. We would like the Government to give us three tipper lorries. The youth will ferry the sand and stones.

What is to be done should be assessed on the ground. I request the engineers who talk from Kampala to go on the ground and we work with them. If the people are willing to work with Government, why doesn’t Government come and work with the people? This is my prayer. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Honourable members, hon. Fungaroo is requested to go and meet the Minister for Works and Transport so that they can work out a plan to go and join the population to improve the situation at the Obongi Ferry.

3.14
Mr Johnson ssenyonga (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter I am raising concerns the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

When the peasants look at the sky these days and see blue clouds, it is a sign that they should start to prepare their gardens. In the past, the ministry has been giving out seeds through subcounties and districts. However, nowadays, whenever farmers request for seedlings, they tell them that Members of Parliament are the ones in control. This may not be the case because even last time, we were given only one tonne. How can someone distribute a tonne to 10 or 20 subcounties?

Our humble request is that this time, let the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries start distributing seeds in time to avoid last season’s experience when we received maize and bean seeds when it was almost too late for farmers to plant. Thank you. 

The Speaker: The Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is requested to address that issue and ensure that the seeds are sent in time to the farmers for the new planting season. He could update us by next Thursday on his plans for that distribution. 

3.16
Mr waira kyewalabye (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two related matters of national importance.

First, before the lockdown, about 50 per cent of the boda boda riders had acquired loans from their respective SACCOs and other financial institutions. After the lockdown, these boda boda riders could not operate normally, so they could not pay back the monthly loans. They have been paying an average of Shs 60,000 per month and they are now being arrested left and right. 

My prayers are: One, they should not be arrested in relation to payment of these loans until normal resumption of their duties; two, the interest be scrapped from March when the lockdown was announced up to the time it will be lifted; three, the loans be stayed from March until the situation is normal for them to operate.
 
The other issue is about the business community, which got money from money lenders. A big percentage of the business community did this. Madam Speaker, you are aware that the situation is not normal. These people are being arrested and their collateral securities are being sold.

My prayers are:
    i) No one should be arrested in relation to payment of these loans;
    ii) No person’s collateral should be sold until the situation is normal;
    iii) The interest should be scrapped from March 2020 until we see that the economic situation is okay;
    iv) Lastly, these loans should be stayed or spread out until the normal resumption of business.

I beg to move.

The Speaker: I think that can only be answered by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I do not know what you have to say about the issues of loans, interest rates, staying or not staying.

3.19
The Minister of state for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In a bid to ease the situation of the business community and also help our economy, there are a number of measures that were announced by His Excellency the President. Subsequently, we also followed up and announced them in the budget.

One of them was to defer payment of loan instalments by people who had borrowed from banks and other financial institutions for a period of three months. That order is still on. Bank of Uganda followed up to issue an instruction to the commercial institutions. 

We are also working with the Microfinance Support Centre and the Uganda Microfinance – (Interjections) 

The Speaker: Honourable members, we are receiving a response to a problem raised by hon. Waira. Why are you interfering?

Mr Bahati: We are working with Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority, which handles the smaller microfinance institutions and money lenders, to also issue an instrument that will allow people who had borrowed money from money lenders and also microfinance support centres to give them some relief of some period, until the situation normalises.

Therefore, we are going to also handle all those that fall into microfinance and money lenders, the way we did with the commercial banks. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I would be happy if you tabled here a copy of that instruction from Bank of Uganda so that we can take it to our villages and show them. They can use that to get protection. 

MS AVUR: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving me the opportunity. Madam Speaker, I get a little bit disturbed how many times, Government comes here and talks about the business community. It is only concentrating on COVID-19 and yet, we very well know how floods are ravaging the country. 

We have fishermen across Uganda that are suffering because of floods but nobody is talking about them; how are they going to get them out of the situation they are going through? What measures does Government have on issues of fishing gears? What waivers are you going to give to the fishing communities in Uganda? We need to know that.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I think my colleague was raising a point of national importance and you have to give some guidance on how it is going to be handled.

On the issue of taxes, we have already presented the Tax Bills that will help the business community. They are being handled by the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We are really working long and hard to ensure that we help our business community and all Ugandans, who are going through some difficult times, until that time when the situation normalises. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, one of the Bills we worked on has been returned by the President; one of those Bills, which was supposed to relieve landlords on rental income.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the President returned the Bill with some justification and reasons, which I think the committee will look at. As a House, we will again revisit it and see but there are others to do with Pay As You Earn, penalties of paying taxes and interests. I think those are good proposals that will help the business community. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you know when you started to speak about these issues, you reminded me about a petition I received today from the salon operators, who equally have problems. They say that instead of locking them up, can you guide them on how to operate in a healthy manner? They say they already use sterilisers, they had masks before the lockdown and were boiling everything they use.  

Therefore, they are requesting to be helped to work. They also want to know how to access the stimulus package. No one has come to tell us, which bank to apply in. You are talking generalities; you and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. People want to know how they can come from Kidera and get money. How can you come from Kitgum and access that money? That is what they want to know.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, on issues of how to further release the lockdown, including salons and some issues with arcades, the National Taskforce is analysing them and very soon, we shall inform the country on the way forward. 

However, on the issue of accessing money from Uganda Development Corporation (UDC), which we have allocated the Shs 1 trillion as the microfinance support centre, Madam Speaker, I beg that you give us time next week. We shall come, address the House on this subject and inform the country on how to handle this. Thank you. 

MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the minister that while the President communicated to the country that he was going to give a relief to those much affected players in business, microfinance institutions have gone ahead to reschedule the loans while factoring in the interests. One honourable member raised an issue concerning these players in business that have been affected and cannot move an inch. How do you factor in interest and move it forward as if you are solving the problem? Where are they going to get this money? 

This means they are going to sell the property they have had in the name of rescheduling. Can you clarify how Government is going to guide the financial institutions on how to deal with these boda bodas and the women dealing in the markets and are suffering with these loans? 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, on the issue of scheduling of loans, the Central Bank was very clear. We have requested the commercial banks to reschedule these loans. In rescheduling the loans, there is no interest on the amount rescheduled. If it is there, as the Rt Hon. Speaker has requested, we shall come here with the instrument from the Bank of Uganda to clarify that. If it is there, please, commercial banks, you are listening to us; that is not right. Stop it.  


MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DEPLORABLE CONDITION OF BUSIA COVID-19 QUARANTINE CENTRE CHARACTERISED BY INADEQUATE FOOD AND POOR SANITATION
3.28
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, indeed, the situation is not expected by anybody but we found ourselves in such a situation, like any other country in the world. 

The Prime Minister is aware of this requirement and he asked me to come and inform Parliament that the Minister of Health will come on Thursday with all this information. She is required to answer on behalf of the Prime Minister. That is the information I would like to give you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, Prime Minister, we shall wait for Thursday but note that it is now one month since we last got an update from the Government on the COVID-19. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE VERIFICATION OF THE BENEFICIARIES OF THE SOCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANT FOR EMPOWERMENT (SAGE)
3.30 
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity accorded to me to clarify on the concern raised by hon. Jovah Kamateeka, which she raised at the 11th Sitting of the First Meeting of this Session on Tuesday, 30 June 2020. 

The issue raised by hon. Kamateeka was in regard to the on-going verification and enrolment of beneficiaries of the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE) under the national programme rollout. Her concern was that the ministry seems to be focusing on deleting the names of the deceased beneficiaries without enrolling new eligible ones. That is how we construed her issue to be because she never gave the details. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to give this House a brief background of the SAGE programme so that we can put the response into a proper context. It would also be beneficial for Members to understand the whole programme since we are now doing universal roll out. 

You will recall that during the period 2010-2015, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development piloted the Senior Citizens Grant in 15 districts. These were Amudat, Apac, Kaberamaido, Katakwi, Kiboga, Kole, Kyankwanzi, Kyegegwa, Kyenjojo, Moroto, Nakapiripirit, Napak, Nebbi, Yumbe and Zombo. 

Approximately 123,000 older persons were covered in the initial pilot phase. The programme targeted older persons of 65 years and above for the rest of the country, and 60 in the case of Karamoja. Each benefiting older person received a monthly grant of Shs 25,000. The grant registered positive impact not only on the welfare of the older persons and their immediate family members but also on the local economies.

Following the successful implementation of the pilot (Phase I), Government in August 2016, took a decision to roll out the grant in a phased manner to an additional 40 districts over a period of five years from Financial Year 2015/2016 up to Financial Year 2019/2020. Under this phase, the oldest 100 older persons per sub county were enrolled on the Programme. The phased roll out started with 20 districts in a Financial Year 2015/2016 and subsequently, five new districts were added every year, over a four-year period as follows;

In the Financial Year 2015/2016: Kaabong, Abim, Kotido, Koboko, Gulu, Pader, Agago, Lamwo, Amolatar, Pallisa, Amuria, Kween, Namayingo, Mayuge, Kamuli, Kayunga, Nakasongola, Kibaale, Kisoro and Bundibugyo were added.

In the Financial Year 2016/2017: Kitgum, Nakaseke, Kabale, Bugiri and Amuru were added. 

In the Financial Year 2017/2018: Dokolo, Sembabule, Kasese, Sheema and Mubende and Financial Year 2018/2019: Alebtong, Adjumani, Otuke, Moyo and Kumi were added.

Madam Speaker, by the close of Financial Year 2018/2019, the ministry had rolled out the grants to 64 districts covering over 167,000 older persons. 

In November 2018, Government approved the national rollout of the Senior Citizens Grant to cover the balance of 71 districts, which were not on the programme, starting in Financial Year 2019/2020. The decision was to cover older persons from 80 years and above in the new districts, while maintaining the older persons who were already on the programme even if they are below the age 80. The age was adjusted to cater for those critically in advanced age and reach all of them and it was because of lack of enough funds to sustain the 65 initial age brackets. 

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is implementing the national rollout in all the districts beginning Financial Year 2019/2020. This exercise involves verification, registration, enrolment, and payment of eligible beneficiaries.

In the Financial Year 2019/2020, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development released funds for payment of beneficiaries in the new districts for six months; January to June 2020. The payment was launched by His Excellency the President, on 8 March 2020, in Mbale, during the International Women's Day Celebrations. 

The payments, although delayed by the COVID-19 outbreak lockdown restrictions, it is now going on in all the districts. All those arrears are being paid. 

Madam Speaker, I will now explain the process of verification, registration, enrolment and payment of eligible beneficiaries as follows;
The older persons who benefit from the SAGE are targeted and selected using data from NIRA. The lists of targeted potential beneficiaries are shared with local Governments. Parish chiefs, town agents/ward administrators are charged with the responsibility of verifying the targeted potential beneficiaries to capture the status of each beneficiary on the verification lists.

All the verified senior citizens who meet the requirements are then registered and enrolled and subsequently, paid by the approved payment service providers who are currently Post Bank Uganda and Centenary Bank. The eligibility criteria to be met by all beneficiaries of the programme includes; one being a Ugandan citizen, aged 80 years and above, not benefiting from a Public Service Pension and should be registered with the NIRA.

Madam Speaker, the reason for emphasising registration with NIRA is that NIRA is the agency of Government that is maintaining the national civil registry in Uganda. NIRA offers the programme with an authentic national ID information with the National Identification Number (NIN), as a unique identifier for each beneficiary. This eliminates the possibility of double payment and ghost beneficiaries. It, therefore, follows that any person who is not on the NIRA register will not be picked by the SAGE system. For the ongoing payments, the ministry obtained data from NIRA as at January 2020. That means that anybody who registered with NIRA after then, is not on the SAGE list and will have to be reconciled later.

In addition, the ministry has put in place mechanisms of reporting deaths so that people who are deceased are exited from the programme. This is a good practice, we believe, since timely deletion of the dead from the SAGE list enables the programme to keep a clean pay roll and free of ghost beneficiaries.

Madam Speaker, we are cognisant of the fact that some eligible older persons, who registered with NIRA, may miss out on the payroll. This is commonly occasioned by the following scenarios: i) Older persons who registered and entered the NIRA register after the programme has extracted data from NIRA for targeting and processing payments.

As already stated in this response, the ongoing payments are based on data obtained from NIRA as at January 2020. That means that anybody registered with NIRA after that date is not on the current SAGE list and therefore, not captured in the current payment cycle. 
ii) Older persons of the right age but have lost or have not picked their IDs from NIRA. This category of older persons will appear on both the NIRA register and SAGE list. However, since they do not have national IDs to confirm their identity, we require that they provide any other form of valid identification to confirm their identity that should tally with the details on the NIRA register, before they are paid. Madam Speaker, it is important that this due diligence is done to avoid paying wrong people. 

iii) Older persons who are 80 years and above but their dates of birth are wrongly captured on the NIRA register. We have older persons who do not know their dates of birth. Some of these people were mistakenly given lower ages and therefore, do not appear on the NIRA register for those aged 80 and above. As a result, they are left out of the SAGE.

iv) Older persons who did not register for the national ID. Older persons who missed registration for the National Identity Card and therefore, are not on the NIRA register and subsequently, not on the SAGE list of beneficiaries. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is undertaking measures to address the above challenges to ensure that a mop up exercise that enables all the eligible beneficiaries to be enrolled and paid under the programme is done as soon as possible. Action taken so far, is as follows:

i) The ministry has entered a Memorandum of Understanding with NIRA on access of information from NIRA database as well as prioritisation of the handling of older persons under SAGE; 

ii) The ministry has written to NIRA requesting for the updated information on NIRA register to-date. This will bring on board, all those older persons who registered after January 2020 for inclusion on the payroll.

iii) The ministry is working with the district local Governments and the National Council For Older Persons to put in place a referral mechanism to support the registration of older persons who missed earlier registration exercises by NIRA or have applied to replace lost IDs or correct errors in their IDs that may affect their age bracket or have not collected their IDs from NIRA.

The ministry has been running announcements on various public media to inform and encourage eligible older persons on how they can be helped to access the SAGE grants. 

In conclusion, I would like to thank you for allowing me respond to the concern raised by hon. Kamateeka. I wish to appeal to the members of Parliament to guide older persons to link up with the focal point persons at the district level for any assistance they may require regarding payments under SAGE. 

Allow me to add that next week, on 15 July 2020, we shall be launching the rollout in Lango and from there, we shall be in Ankole. We have been to Fort Portal already and my colleague, the minister of state was in Bukomansimbi.

I would like to let colleagues know that we shall be in your sub regions to ensure that the rollout is complete. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kamateeka is not here to ask any supplementary question. Next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS APPROPRIATED FOR THE EMERGENCY REPAIRS OF ROADS AFFECTED BY FLOODS AND OTHER DISASTERS
THE SPEAKER: Where is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development? – He has gone. Next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE PLIGHT OF VOLUNTEER HEALTH WORKERS AT BUSIA HEALTH CENTRE IV AND THE PLANS TO AVAIL AN AMBULANCE FOR THE HOSPITAL

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Health? She is not here. When she comes to speak on item 3.1, she should also speak on item 3.4. Next item. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE ALLEGED USE OF GOVERNMENT PROPERTY ON THE DISPUTED LAND AT KIWULA CENTRAL FOREST RESERVE, KAYUNGA DISTRICT
3.44
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Madam Speaker, I got your instructions to answer this question only yesterday. Please, allow me to come back on Thursday to give the correct version of what is happening in that forest. 

THE SPEAKER: Your counterpart was here last Thursday.

MR SEMPIJJA: Yes, he was here but I could not be here because I was upcountry. I got the information yesterday and I am working on it. The one who was here was a Minister of State for Animal Industry. He asked me to answer that question. 

MS NANTABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is over three months since I raised this matter on the Floor of Parliament and you assigned different ministers to intervene and report back to Parliament on the actions so far taken to stop the ongoing destruction of Kiwula Forest Central Reserve; the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries was one of them. 
The minister of state from the agriculture sector was here last week on Thursday. He asked for time to go and visit the forest and report back on the instruction you had issued him to remove those tractors from the disputed land. 

Madam Speaker, in a similar manner, you also instructed the Minister of Water and Environment to do the same thing. It is unfortunate to report that both ministers have not laboured to even comply with the instructions you issued to them. 

They have not visited the locus and they have not taken action yet degradation is still on-going. I am not getting responses from them. I have endeavoured to contact them to know what they are about to do regarding the directive you issued but none of them is forthcoming. None of them is effecting the execution of the directives that you issued. 

Since the ministers do not treat this matter with the urgency it deserves, Madam Speaker, I request that you allow us – because we do not want to take the law in our hands – to demonstrate. We would riot but we have decided to adopt the civil way of handling such issues. 

I now humbly request – because this Parliament has the mandate to gazette or degazette forests - according to the records we have, none of the three forests – one of them has gone, it is already a sugarcane plantation. The second one that I am vying to protect, is the one under threat. Madam Speaker, I have indulged Parliament but nothing is being done. 

It is upon that that I request that you take action because the ministers – I do not know whether they fear the mafias involved in this – are not effecting the instructions that you issued. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will give my ruling on that tomorrow.   

MS NANTABA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE PETITION AND OVERSIGHT VISITS ON OPERATIONS OF THE NATIONAL IDENTIFICATION AND REGISTRATION AUTHORITY (NIRA)

THE SPEAKER: Last Thursday, we instructed the Prime Minister to ensure the Minister of Internal Affairs is here. Is he here? Okay, he is here. Please, present. 

3.49
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Moses Nagwomu): I would like to take this opportunity to thank you, Madam Speaker, for tasking the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to go and carry out a business, which was presented to you in form of a petition. We also used the same opportunity to carry out our oversight role on the activities of NIRA.

This report was written last year and we have been on the Order Paper for some time. Nevertheless, it remains a property of this Parliament and therefore, I stand here on behalf of the committee to present it to this House. 

Introduction
Pursuant to Article 90 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rule 185 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs conducted an oversight visit in October 2018 to appraise the Learners Project through which NIRA seeks to register all learners in the country aged between five and 16 years. We covered the districts of Amolatar, Lira, Gulu, Amuru and Kiryandongo. 

Background 
The NIRA was established by the Registration of Persons Act, 2015. Its principal mandate and responsibility is to create, manage, maintain and operationalise the National Identification Register. The NIRA is expected to achieve this mandate by, among others, registering all citizens of Uganda, registering non-citizens who are lawful residents in Uganda, assigning a National Identification Number for all registered persons and assigning National Identification Cards and Alien Identification Cards to all registered persons, including refugees.

During a retreat of Government ministers and permanent secretaries in February 2017 in Kyankwanzi, a resolution was passed to operationalise the idea of the Learners Project whose aim was to register all learners in the country aged between five and 16 years. The project officially commenced in May 2017 and was expected to run until August 2018 but it encountered challenges and an extension was sought up to December 2017. 

Guided by Article 90(3)(a) of the Constitution, the committee convened meetings in September 2018 and interacted with officials from NIRA with an intention of finding a lasting solution to the issues that had affected the performance of the Authority, in particular, the Learners Project. 

Among the contentious issues were:
1. The composition of the Board of Directors who are very busy with demanding schedules from their substantive offices of appointment and had left a leadership gap in the Board of NIRA;
2. Implementation of the staff structure;
3. Gross irregularities in the functions of NIRA by the Executive Director; 
4. The need to construct a home for NIRA. 

A brief was presented to the committee on the operations of NIRA, the status of the Learners Project and the general challenges faced by the Authority. The committee resolved to undertake an oversight visit to the field offices in northern Uganda to ascertain the status of the Learners Project, to interact with the officers who facilitated the registration of learners who are disgruntled and have petitioned Parliament. They petitioned Parliament at that time and that is why we had to visit those various offices; and the extent of implementation of the recommendations that Parliament passed in March 2018.

The committee had received a copy of the letter written by the Rt hon. Speaker to the Minister of Internal Affairs asking for an explanation regarding the implementation of recommendations made by the committee in March 2018. Attached is the Speaker’s letter with copies of petitions from almost all over the country. 

The petitions mainly came from the District Registration Officers, the Assistant District Registration Officers, the District Information Technology Officers (DITO), Enrolment Officers and concerned citizens protesting the way the Learners Project was conducted and poor facilitation for such a hectic exercise. The committee was also interested in ascertaining the conditions under which the NIRA officers operate and the staffing at the different levels.

We had a methodology and during the visit, we interacted with members of the district coordination committees who included the Resident District Commissioners, the Chief Administrative Officers –

THE SPEAKER: Members can read the methodology. Go to the other areas.

MR NAGWOMU. Let me go to the findings. A comparative review of the committee’s previous findings in March 2018 and October 2018 revealed that most of the challenges that existed during the first oversight visit still persisted, namely: inadequate equipment, poor coordination between NIRA staff and the district coordination committee members, limited facilitation, limited office accommodation, unbalanced and unfavourable payment structures, inadequate understanding of NIRA activities and services by the local communities and a considerable disparity between the approved budget and the overall performance of the project.

Performance of Registration of the Learners Project
Madam Speaker, the committee observed that much as funds were injected into the Learners Project with a reported 9.6 million pupils registered out of the projected 10 million, there is still a big number of pupils who are not yet registered. This is because the initial registration exercise excluded some schools in hard-to-reach areas and some private schools, which NIRA attributed to insufficient funds for the registration exercise. 

The committee notes that an accurate projection of the magnitude of the unregistered learners will require liaison with the Ministry of Education and Sports. The committee further notes that additional funding would be required to facilitate another phase of registration of the pupils who were not covered in the previous phases.

The committee further established that funds for project activities during the Learners Project were not released in time. This caused a set-back in beating deadlines of activities that had been budgeted for by the regional offices and approved by officials at NIRA headquarters. This affected implementation of planned activities and officers were left with no option but to conduct the activities, incurring debts from service providers in order to serve the public.

Madam Speaker, the committee further established that some of the officers still demand for a refund from the Authority. The affected officers resorted to personal payments to service providers expecting that the Authority would reimburse them. A year later, this has not been honoured by NIRA. 

The committee was informed that a total of Shs 1.2 billion was used by the field registration officers and DITOs but so far, NIRA had reimbursed 60 percent, remaining to clear the 40 percent after an internal audit has been inspected to ascertain the authenticity of the claims. This, however, contravenes section 79(1)(m) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 which stipulates that, “No officer should incur unauthorised  commitments”.

The committee also learnt that payments of remuneration and office allowances, which is imprest, to the NIRA staff are inconsistently availed and mainly paid in arrears. This has affected the operations in the regional and district offices.

The committee further established the following:
a) It is impossible to register children born as a result of war activities, children with single parents and those who do not have parents because their parents' identification numbers are a pre-requisite.

b) A section of people living in Kiryandongo Refugee Settlement camp were registered and others were not.

c) Child headed families are not featuring anywhere in the programme of NIRA registration.

d) There was a big challenge in registering persons without fingers.

Recommendations
1. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Ministry of Internal Affairs to ensure that projects of such nature should always have planned detailed budgets so as to avoid under-budgeting and untimely release of operational funds.

2. We also recommend that Ministry of Internal Affairs and NIRA should find alternatives for registering children from child headed families, children without parents and children with single parents as well as those without fingers.

We assessed the status of office accommodation at district offices.
Madam Speaker, the committee observed that all NIRA offices visited lacked adequate accommodation. They all share offices either with the Electoral Commission or housed in the District Headquarter Offices, which is limiting and has affected the operations of NIRA. The committee was informed that during the peak of the electoral season, NIRA officers are thrown out until the Electoral Commission activities are concluded.

The committee further observed that some NIRA offices were housed in corridors and in very tiny rooms while other officers had their tables outside on the verandas. This is not only embarrassing to the Government as the employer but also affects the morale for work by the officers.

The equipment used in the registration of persons is expensive and delicate in nature. The information stored is sensitive and requires organised environment for safe custody. This calls for urgent permanent homes for NIRA activities as the equipment and the information stored are at a risk of being stolen or tampered with.

In the same vein, NIRA Headquarter Offices is accommodated in the premises of Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs at a cost of Shs 56 million per month. This also requires urgent attention as it is on the higher side and costly for the Government.

A review of NIRA's investment plan that relates to accommodation, estimates Shs 12 billion only was required to enable NIRA have decent office headquarters.

The committee observed that Uganda Police Force has vacant land of about 140 acres and that it was suitable for NIRA Head Office to be given the strategic security necessary for NIRA.

Recommendations
1. Uganda Police Force should give out some of the l40 acres of land in Naguru to NIRA for construction of permanent offices.

2. The committee recommends that Parliament should appropriate more funds to the Authority to enable the acquisition of permanent offices to house their activities in a phased manner. This is projected to in turn address the issue of limited office space and accommodation and improve delivery of services to the public.

Investigations into claims of the numerous petitioners
Madam Speaker, the committee engaged the District Information and Technology Officers (DITOs) and established that they have been working in interim positions for the Authority since 2014 and are paid a meagre Shs 945,000, which is very little, in comparison to the tasks assigned to them. Further to this, these officers are not on the NIRA approved structure and presently working without appointment letters. The approved structure has Assistant Registration Officers, who are directly under the supervision of the DITOs and yet, they earn Shs 1,800,000. 

The discrepancy in remuneration between these two positions has further caused disgruntlement and uncertainty to the District Information and Technology Officers. The committee believes that this is the reason they have been petitioning Parliament for a remedy. A copy of the letter from the Speaker is attached herewith.  

The committee observed that the DITOs have held office since the National Security Information System (NSIS) Project in 2014 that gave birth to NIRA in May 2015 to-date but the Authority failed to absorb them in the new structure.

Madam Speaker, the committee further established that most of the DITOs endured harsh conditions of working for low pay without any allowances in anticipation that they would be considered for the massive recruitment to fill up NIRA vacancies in the approved structures. One of the DITOs intimated to the committee that he acts as a District Registration Officer but only earns Shs 945,000. He sat for interviews to be upgraded to a District Registration Officer, passed but he has never been appointed. This has led to frustration of the DITOs and resulted into a general laxity in service delivery.

The committee further observed that most of the petitions to Parliament were filed by former enrolment officers and DITOs who accused the Authority of holding onto their payments and delaying them.

The previous inquiry had ascertained that most of these payments were effected using Mobile Money, which in itself is irregular as a means of paying salaries.

Recommendations
1. The committee recommends that a revision of the current allowance structure of the DITOS should match the current economic environment and cost of living in the country.

2. District Information and Technology Officers who have the required qualifications and acted for a period of six months and above should be absorbed in NIRA service as Assistant Registration officers.

3. The committee further recommends that for future projects, NIRA should fully prepare for implementation of these activities and only roll out when fully certain that sufficient resources in terms of human resource equipment and transportation are available to sustain the project in the different areas, where the projects are being implemented.

Madam Speaker, there is a five staff structure at the district level. The committee observed that of the approved structure of five staff in every district office, some districts have got two staff and others one. This has a strain on the posted officers, leading to failure to achieve the set targets. The workload has caused a strain on the existing staff, who have to work extra hours to meet the needs of the public. 

The committee was informed that some officers serve two districts. A case in point was the Gulu office that serves both Gulu and Omoro districts. The committee observed that NIRA head office faces a serious problem of understaffing and in most cases, staff were performing more than one job, hence affecting efficient and effective service delivery. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Internal Affairs should avail funds to the Authority for recruitment. 

We also recommend that District Information Technology Officers should be included in the approved NIRA structure. We also recommend that NIRA should address the concerns of the District Information and Technology Officers by revising the remuneration paid out to them, to match the revised salary structures in the Authority. 

Madam Speaker, in implementing the resolution on Registration of Learners Project; we carried out an oversight visit in the districts of Kampala, Wakiso and Entebbe after the commencement of the project, following negative reports that were awash in the print media regarding the project. 
A report was presented in March 2018 and was adopted by the whole House and resolutions were sent to the Office of the Prime Minister. However, to date, they have not been implemented. A copy of the resolutions is also attached. 

The committee recommends that the Office of the Prime Minister should coordinate the implementation of the parliamentary resolutions on the Registration of Learners’ Project. 

General operations of NIRA
a. NIRA Board 
Madam Speaker, the committee held meetings and interacted with NIRA officials on matters pertaining to the Authority. It observed that the Board of Directors occupy other pre-existing busy offices that demand most of their time away from NIRA and very often, fail to make quorum during important meetings where substantial resolutions are taken; implying that they cannot effectively carry out the Board’s oversight function. 

The committee noted that some important decisions pertaining to the Authority had been taken without a substantive meeting taking place. The committee further observed that the positions of Board Chairperson and Board Secretary are still vacant and this has affected the operations of NIRA.

Recommendations
i. NIRA should ensure that the Board Secretary is recruited immediately.
ii. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the NIRA Executive should ensure that the Chairperson of the board is appointed.
iii. We also recommend that representatives to the Board should not necessarily be the Principle Executives of the Agencies but rather any other person at the level of a Commissioner of the entitled Agency can be a Board member. This would ensure effective oversight of the Authority.

b. Need to be self-reliant
Madam Speaker, the committee further observed that the Authority does not charge any fee upon sharing information with the Ministries, Departments, Agencies (MDAs) and other private companies, notably the telecommunication companies. 

As a plan to become self-reliant in terms of funding, NIRA should stipulate or charge a specific fee, upon sharing information with the various MDAs and private companies. The laxity to levy such fees denies Government the Non-Tax Revenue and the Authority would be able to generate funds that would help in the acquisition of their own home. 

We recommend that as a matter of urgency, NIRA should start levying a fee on the Ministries, Departments and Agencies, plus the telecom companies that benefit from the information shared by NIRA. In so doing, Government would also realise NTR.

    c. Number of approved service points for NIRA operations
The committee further observed that the approved service points for NIRA across the country are 123, out of which 117 are for districts and five for the five Kampala Divisions. These service points are constant, regardless of the increase in the number of districts. 

In view of the Government policy of taking services nearer to the people, it would be logical that the service points are adjusted to match the number of districts. The committee noted that there is need for NIRA to expand its operations in the newly created districts and municipalities. 

We recommend that NIRA should service these points by increasing to match the number of districts in the country to date, subject to review in case of further increment. 

General recommendations
Like in the earlier report, the challenges of NIRA seem to be increasing rather than reducing. The committee, therefore, reiterates some of the recommendations that:
    1. The Auditor-General should conduct a forensic audit on the entire Learners’ Project, including the procurement processes, methods of recruitment, level of facilitation and mode of payment to the field staff.

    2. The remuneration of implementers of NIRA activities should be in tandem with the prevailing economic situation and structures should be in place to guide the payment of these beneficiaries.

    3. Due to the sensitivity of the mandate of NIRA, Cabinet should review the decision taken to streamline the Authority in the mother ministry, which is the Ministry of Internal Affairs. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, more needs to be done by Government to address the emerging issues and challenges to NIRA and the successful management of NIRA as an authority and its activities, among which is the Learners’ Project, requires a combination of strategies, including but not limited to strengthening the legal framework, increased monitoring and evaluation of these activities by Parliament, regular audits by the Office of the Auditor-General, increased appropriation of funds, as well as sensitisation of the public on NIRA activities and finally, improving the welfare of the staff in the Authority as highlighted in this report, so as to improve the operations of NIRA. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to appreciate the contribution of members of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and the technical staff in the production of this report. I pray that the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the petition and oversight visits on operations of NIRA be considered by this House and the recommendations therein be adopted. 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson, and members of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for that comprehensive report, which has been signed by the minimum number of Members. I want to receive the comments but first, I would like to know; how come a Government ministry can charge a Government department rent of Shs 56 million per month? 

MR NAGWOMU: Yes, Shs 56 million is paid by NIRA in form of rent and that was an issue to our committee. When we tried to investigate it, nobody could come up with an appropriate answer as to why. That is why we are also saying that for NIRA to stand on its own, the services provided to these MDAs and private companies especially the telecom companies should also be charged. I heard that these services are being passed on to the Electoral Commission, the police and all other agencies free yet we are losing money to a tune of Shs 56 million in form of rent. 

Madam Speaker, I do not think it is proper to charge yourself at your own expense and yet you are performing the same duty to serve the people of Uganda. 

THE SPEAKER: Did you see a copy of the agreement? 

MR NAGWOMU: They could not submit it because we even wanted to know where that money goes. We wanted to know the person to whom this money is paid. Of course, you know the challenges with the Executive Director of NIRA, which we enumerated in this report. There are so many inefficiencies in NIRA to the extent that even the children who were registered have never got their identity cards. There is a lot to be desired. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. Is there any comment? 

MR NAGWOMU: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a copy of the report. 

THE SPEAKER: You have two minutes, honourable member. We have other urgent work. 

4.22
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me straightaway go to the charging of a fee - maybe it is well known to all. At the beginning, all the citizens were not charged but now NIRA is going to start charging a fee for registration. I think it will be a bit unfair. Otherwise, your report is very good. 

I want to tell you that last year when we went for UNAA, the kind of fees Ugandans abroad were charged was too much. If you have a family of five people, then you would need $2,000 to register, which is very unfair. When I shared this matter with the Prime Minister, he said it was unfair to those people. 

I do not know if that fee can be – If the fee should be there, then it should be properly regulated. Otherwise, that was very unfair to our citizens abroad. I have not heard, in the report, about those in the diaspora but they are being charged very exorbitant fees. 

For our people who are up country – sometimes the national identity cards get lost and when they do, replacing them can take forever. Replacing them can even take four to five years. Some people in my district have been asking about their national identity cards because many institutions ask for them. So, I do not know if NIRA can also try to see how to speed up the process of identity card replacement. 

When we asked for decentralisation of the process, we were told that it is only the Kampala office that has the equipment. I do not know how expensive the equipment is that we cannot help our people better. Some disabled people have to struggle to come to Kampala when they need replacement of their identity cards. 

Decentralisation should be taken into consideration instead of asking everybody to come to the centre. We need to decentralise NIRA centres even if in a few locations; maybe every region can have a centre. 

There are very many issues with NIRA but let me leave space for others to also contribute. Otherwise, as it has been noted by the committee, NIRA has not been fair to our children in schools. The children who are in private schools are children of Uganda. In that regard, they all need to be considered. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this report arose from a petition relating to the learners. What you are saying is important and we need to address it but let us first focus on the issues raised in the petition and the findings. 

4.28
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On the issue of students who were registered by NIRA, it was a process that was announced and indeed, many students across the country were registered. Having a national identity card is a human right because we have seen, in many situations, where failure to have an identification card may cost you heavily. 

After pressurising NIRA so much, some people informed us that NIRA had faulty cameras during the process of registering students across the country in various schools. I do not know whether the committee was privy to that information. They could not process the national identity card for our children because the cameras were faulty. They had, however, spent a lot on the teams that were carrying out the registration and the faulty cameras. As we talk, many of the people who were registered for the national identity card cannot access their cards. 

Finally, I think it is very unfair – we all know that not having a national identity card – and we know that at any one time, you can lose the national identity card. How can we make replacing an identity card faster because there are institutions where even a duplicate is not entertained? 

Madam Speaker, we request that the process of replacing a lost identity card is quickened so that many Ugandans can access these cards because they are very important. Wherever they go, identity cards are demanded. Thank you. 

4.30
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I take this time to thank the committee for the work well done. 

I have two children who registered at school during the process of registration by the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA). Unfortunately, they have never gotten their identity cards. 

In this period when there are online studies, they wanted to get communication lines for their phones but they could not. When you want to open a bank account, some banks will not allow you to do so. 

After registration, many children have turned 18 years. They are eligible to vote but they were unable to register because of this process that was failed at the schools. 

Unfortunately, this is a situation where resources have been lost. Someone should be held accountable for those resources. I think that we should have proposed something more serious than those proposals. There must be accountability for the resources that were wasted in this period. 

In Kololo, people line up at 4 a.m. for NIRA services. We have regional offices, which should be offering some of the services that are done in Kampala. There are some Ugandans who have never travelled to Kampala. How will they replace their identity cards? How will they register those who have not yet registered? This is a concern that must be taken seriously by this Parliament. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you want to make proposals, you should. Do not just say, “You have not made it strong.” If you have something strong, propose it. 

4.33
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee for coming up with this report. I think the issue of national identity cards deserves priority in this country, given the importance that it carries. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to comment on the Learners Project. There are so many students out there who registered but did not get their identity cards. When they were being registered, they were asked for the telephone numbers of their parents. I wonder how NIRA could not follow up these students through their parents. 

I would like to request that the registration of learners be started afresh because some of the students are now at the universities and need these identity cards for carrying out very many activities. 

There are people who need to look for jobs but they do not have identity cards. Even the Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment (SAGE) for elderly persons, without identity cards – The minister has just presented a statement before Parliament that they cannot be registered. 

Therefore, so many people are missing IDs but most important are these learners. It is unfortunate that I do not see the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This Parliament gave money for this project. I would have loved the minister to tell us what happened to the money because there was a complaint that the money was released late and that it was not enough. As Parliament, we have to pronounce ourselves on this because these are our children. If we do not speak for them, no one will.  

Secondly, the report was talking about charging other Government Agencies - the Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs). The Electoral Commission has abandoned the issue of national identity cards as far as electoral activities are concerned because so many voters do not carry them. I wonder how we can say that MDAs should pay for these services, which are non-existent. A case in point is the electoral activities. You cannot charge the Electoral Commission when most voters do not have national identity cards. 

Therefore, NIRA should, first of all, clean their house. There are very many de-motivated staff both at the district and at the national level, so much that people’s particulars are not entered rightly. This brings about a standstill during processing the national identity cards. 

Madam Speaker, even I, as a Member of Parliament, lost my national identity card some time back in South Africa but up to now, I have not managed to secure one. One of the reasons I was given is that when they were entering my information, it was not done well. If, at my level, I can take years processing my identity card – I also have a colleague in this Parliament who took six years processing a national identity card. That shows that there is a very serious issue and this Parliament must find a way of addressing it through the relevant ministries, which are represented here by the ministers, to help our people out there. 

Finally, I would like to urge that all districts must have offices, which must be well staffed. This is so that elderly persons in the rural areas and people who have never stepped in Kampala have access to NIRA offices. These staff must be well motivated. 

The Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister for Internal Affairs should be here to tell us the way forward that they will address the problems that we have with NIRA. Thank you. 

4.38
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. NIRA is a very important institution in the lives of Ugandans. Apparently, everything is done upon the production of a national identity card. 

In the event that it is difficult to get a national identity card by members of Parliament, it is worse for the children and we passed Shs 10 billion for this exercise. I remember that the Minister for Education and Sports brought another supplementary request to the House to expedite this process. When they went to undertake this exercise, machines would take about a week without being in operation. They would say the machines are down. 

Another problem I observed is that the children paid money to photocopy their birth certificates. If you have asked for money to go and register the children, why do you ask for money from them to photocopy these documents? I thought that it was encompassing all those challenges. 

The report encompasses many pertinent issues. This means that Government is not taking care of this important institution. Why should these people pay money renting Government institutions? We need clarification from the Government. Why should this young and developing institution pay rent from the same Government institution property? 

I suggest that for proper services of NIRA to reach the people, the decentralisation policy, which is a Government policy, should be adopted. Why shouldn’t we decentralise these services so that they are at the sub-county NIRA offices? These offices should become operational so that the people of Uganda get services at least at the sub county headquarters, other than traversing from Kanungu to Kampala? 

Before the COVID-19 outbreak, you will realise that people were staying in the Kololo playground for a long time; even spending weeks and months. Madam Speaker, when I lost my ID, I took about four months before I could get one. I think I got it faster. 

The services should be decentralised. The forensic audit that the committee has suggested should take place and we need to give it time because we need to know why this exercise was never completed. What do they need for it to be completed? Ugandans and these children need to be satisfied and secure because this is a very important document. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

4.42
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the detailed report on NIRA.

NIRA, as one of the authorities in Uganda, is a very important institution. Since it was established, a lot of problems have been raised for lack of performance. However, I have discovered today that this is due to lack of funds; NIRA lacks all the things - even the staff are less than a quarter of what they are supposed to be. The furniture, as mentioned, and the equipment – that is why it is not performing well as expected. 

Madam Speaker, other authorities like the Uganda National Roads Authority get millions of money. They have enough money to perform their job; why not NIRA, which is very important? Without a national identity card, you cannot do anything. You cannot go to university, get treatment or even if you want to go abroad, you cannot get a passport. It is very necessary. Therefore, why not fund this authority like any other?

Honourable members, I beg you that let us put our foot down and advocate for the increase of funds for NIRA so that it can perform its job very well.

Regarding the project of the children and learners, I have heard that if your parents do not have a national identity card, you are not registered. There are very many parents over there that do not have the national identity cards. 

They also talked about orphans, single mothers’ children and so on but you are all aware that parents are always there. Single mothers are always there with their children. How can we leave out this large population? I think it is very important that we consider everybody. I know even if you are disabled with your children, they may not even register you because they marginalise you. 

Therefore, registration is a must and it is a human right. We must make sure that we facilitate NIRA to provide these national identity cards, which we need badly. 

Madam Speaker, NIRA should also improve its work. If you know that you are few, do what you can. However, the few that are there are not doing their work. For example, in Koboko, there are very many national identity cards that have not been picked by the owners. They do not decentralise them with sub counties and you may stay there for days looking for your national identity card. They are there but are being wasted. Some are already registering new ones. The few staff there must also work very hard. 

We also need to use the money given efficiently. There should not be any quarrels so that the little funds given are used for their purpose. We need the identity cards and NIRA to be funded so as to do their work very well. Thank you very much. 

4.46
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I would like to add my voice on the issue of ID replacement, which is a very serious problem. You will recall that sometime back, Government decided to hold issuing of sim cards; that they must be registered with one’s national identity card although that was aimed at controlling criminal acts. 

Nevertheless, as we talk, this might not be helpful. Many people are using their relatives’ cards to register sim cards. Therefore, that means that the original idea that a sim card must correspond with somebody’s national identity card does not really arise. This is already a challenge. The problem has been that everybody who wants to replace the national identity card must come to Kololo. 

My proposal is that if taking it to district level will be too costly for Government, it means we should have regional offices where people can go and replace their national identity cards. A friend of mine told me that he came to Kampala for around one week. He would reach Kololo at 4.00 a.m. but in that one week, there was no way he could access services until he went back. Hence, it is a very huge problem. 

I request that Government looks at decentralising this to regional level. The issue of replacement of identity cards could also be at the district level. That is my proposal because all the people across the country coming to Kololo is a very huge problem. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I think in the last debate we had, the minister undertook to decentralise. I hope he can update us today. About three months ago, he made that undertaking.

4.48
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a comprehensive report. 

My contribution and agitation will be around the infrastructural support and challenges that NIRA is facing. I can see that we are talking about rent to a fellow Government agency but a whole committee does not have the information on who is taking Government money and causing suffering to many Ugandans. 

I think the minister and the Leader of Government Business should be called urgently to address that kind of mafia operations that are fleecing taxpayers, causing suffering of Ugandans who would want to access services of NIRA and the money that could otherwise go to the necessary expenditure that NIRA has. 

You know very well that Ugandans have a lot of anxiety because even when you want to access bank services, they do not want any other identity card. Most banks don’t want any other identity card but the national identity card. This is an anomaly that we have seen in different agencies, where a fellow Government agency is considered a stranger or a foreign agency even when taxpayers have an infrastructure or a building that they have paid for. 

As Parliament, I think we cannot downplay the impunity that individuals portray by getting illicit money from Government agencies and causing infrastructural delays. Madam Speaker, we would like to use your Office to ask the Leader of Government Business to clarify because most of these Government employees in the authority fear for their jobs. That is why they could not divulge the individuals or cartel that is taking that rental money. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to you to use your Office and demand that the payee of the Shs 56 million becomes known to all of us. Otherwise, we will continue having impunity by certain circles who are frustrating Government services. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.51
MR OTHIENO OKOTH (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. Truth be told; there is chaos in NIRA and there is a management problem there. 

Due to these problems in NIRA, innocent Ugandans are suffering. I would like to bring to the attention of the Minister of Internal Affairs the challenge - some policemen were recruited and they used registration certificates and now, they have been undergoing training and they are about to qualify. Police is insisting that without IDs, these police recruits are going to be thrown out. It is not their fault that they cannot get their national identity cards. 

The Minister of Internal Affairs is in charge of NIRA and it is the one in charge of the police. We do not understand why the Ministry of Internal Affairs cannot fix the problems in NIRA so that Ugandans can get their IDs and be able to do whatever they are supposed to do. 

I would like the Minister of Internal Affairs to assure Ugandans that these police recruits are not going to be thrown out, simply because of a problem, which is not of their making. It is not them who have failed to ensure that NIRA gives them national identity cards. 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of payment of rent, there is a problem of connivance. This matter came to the Budget committee and we tasked NIRA to provide us with an agreement and they did not have one. We then asked them whether NIRA is paying the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs because then that must be NTR to the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs. We asked them to show evidence that they have ever paid this money and even the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs has no evidence that they have ever received NTR from NIRA to the tune of these Shs 65 million per month. 

Therefore, the committee needs to interrogate this matter further. There is connivance between the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs officials and officials in NIRA. It is not true that this money goes to the coffers of Government because that money has never gone to the consolidated fund. I would like to request the committee to dig further into the issue of the payment of rent by NIRA to the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs. 

I think there is a total management failure in NIRA and the Ministry of Internal Affairs needs to look into this matter squarely and come up with solutions. The same committee, in 2017, was chaired by hon. Judith Nabakooba - who is now the ICT Minister - and they had similar problems with NIRA. NIRA could not account for Shs 8.4 billion; money collected from the exercise of registering learners. 

Madam Speaker, there is a problem. You are getting the impression that NIRA is underfunded, which is not the case. This issue of underfunding is simply being used under pretext and cover to fail to give Ugandans the services that we deserve. 

However, there is generally mismanagement by the current leadership of NIRA. I do not know why the committee is shy to point out this because this is something, which is known to the committee. In 2017, they handed over NIRA management to the Criminal Investigation Intelligence Department (CIID) and I do not know how far CIID has gone with this matter. I do not know whether they were also compromised. 

We need a report from the Ministry of Internal Affairs; what happened when the committee of Parliament referred NIRA to an organ of the Ministry of Internal Affairs - which is the Uganda Police Force - regarding an organ of the same ministry, which is NIRA? Did the ministry compromise the police? We want to know and that is why the issue of management of finances continues cropping up under NIRA. What happened to that money since 2017? 

We are talking about NIRA failing to register learners but they misappropriated Shs 8.4 billion. How come today we are saying NIRA has no money? The issue is not money and the issue is not facilitation but there is a bigger problem and Ugandans should not be victimised because of the incompetence and negligence of the officials and leadership of NIRA. 

Madam Speaker, I urge the Minister of Internal Affairs to assure this country that the Uganda Police recruits are not going to be victimised by the incompetence of NIRA for failing to provide them with national identity cards, so that they don’t lose their positions. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.57
MS LILLIAN NAKATE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the comprehensive report. My concern is about the decent accommodation for the NIRA office. Whereas I agree that we need to have decent accommodation for NIRA, I also think that the committee did not do much before coming up with a recommendation that some portion of the Uganda Police Force land be given to NIRA. 

Madam Speaker, you will recall that the Uganda Police Force has land in Naguru and this same land has a number of activities planned. The committee did not interest itself in finding out what is even currently happening on the 140 acres. 

Madam Speaker, you will recall that we also have about 60 acres of land that have been proposed for the Regional Forensic Referral Centre of excellency, where we think that Government will even be able to get accommodation for over 30,000 units, among others. I would like to interest the committee to find out what is happening on that land before recommending that a portion of land be given to NIRA for a decent home. 

I also observed that in the investment plan for NIRA, they captured Shs 12 billion to come up with a decent home. Of course, it was not very clear if part of the Shs 12 billion is for purchasing land and the structure itself. We know that there is shortage of accommodation for NIRA offices all over the country; so, we do not know if in the investment plan, we have a plan for accommodation all over the country or plan for only the decent home as a headquarter. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to interest the committee that before they recommend having a portion of the acreage from the Uganda Police Force, they should find out what the entity has as a general plan. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.59
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Please allow me to register my appreciation to the committee for presenting a good report; it has made me know some things. For example, at first, I thought that NIRA is being underfunded, but as hon. Othieno said, maybe there is just mismanagement and negligence in that authority. 

Since NIRA came into place and started issuing out cards – I remember we discussed, in this House, issues to do with identity cards and resolved that the cards that had not been issued be taken to the sub counties to enable owners collect them. However, later on that was changed to having the cards distributed from the centre here, at Kololo.

Madam Speaker, as colleagues have said, people have suffered a lot while picking those cards. While there are cards that were not picked, there are those that weren’t taken to the right places at the right time. I prayer that the cards still at the NIRA centre at Kololo be taken to the districts for officials there to distribute them. Otherwise, having realised that NIRA is not being underfunded but rather mismanaging its funds, they should take it upon themselves to ensure those cards are distributed. 

I remember in the last elections, it was also an issue. People who did not have the national identity cards were asked to go pick them though later, election official allowed those whose names were in the register, to vote.  This time, I do not know how it will go in case we are to hold elections. 
Therefore, I would request that the cards that are there, be taken to the respective sub counties to help the owners receive them. Thank you. 

5.03
MS NOELINE BASEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the comprehensive report presented. The report has given us more light on what is happening at NIRA. 

I think there is a big problem at NIRA. Replacement of lost IDs is a serious nightmare yet possession of a national identity card is a right of every citizen. 

My sister applied for replacement of a lost identity card in 2016. To date, 2020, she has not received it. This is the same case with so many people in this country. Is the problem with the citizens? What is the problem? 

I would like to compare with other institutions that are very efficient, for example, Face Technologies Ltd that issues and replaces driving permits. They are very efficient. They replace driving permits in a week. 

For very important institutions like NIRA, handling citizens’ identity cards to be so inefficient and extremely ineffective, is very disheartening. 

Allow me comment on the registration of learners’ exercise for getting national IDs. I feel a lot of pain because I was in this House when we appropriated money to roll out that exercise countrywide. However, it was marred with a lot of irregularities and in many schools; they registered half the number of pupils. 

I am a victim of that process. Many of my children are not in the system. My 20-year old daughter, who is now eligible to vote, is not in the system. We went there and they said it is not possible for her to vote. This is happening to many of our children. Why are they that inefficient?

It is my humble prayer, therefore, that we urge the ministry concerned to take note of these problems. Let there be decentralisation. Identity cards issuance can be decentralised and the people access them at the sub county level. In our rural areas, it is extremely difficult for people to move to Kololo, Kampala to replace identity cards or even to register for the new ones for those who haven’t been registered before. It is also my humble prayer that these irregularities are attended to. 

I would like to buy the recommendation of the committee on the fact that the learners’ registration exercise for national IDs is thoroughly investigated so that concrete actions can be taken to improve the situation. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the minister before we take the vote. 

5.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, I beg that you allow me to pull my mask lower because I have asthma and if I talk when my mouth and nose are completely covered, I could have a problem.

THE SPEAKER: But you will have to learn to use it, like me. 

MR OBIGA KANIA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to apologise because when you called us last week, we were not around. We had another assignment upcountry investigating a matter involving some people who died in Northern Uganda; we are still investigating.

That said, I would like to thank the committee for presenting a good report. We take their recommendations very seriously. They have pointed out some of our weaknesses at NIRA and we entirely agree with them. 

On the issue of management, yes, it is true we have been having issues of management but I would like to inform the House that in the last few months, we have, as a ministry, taken steps to reconstitute the board. 

We have appointed a new board chairperson. In the reconstituted board, we have made it very clear that, because we have not changed the law there are institutions that are supposed to send members on the board, they should not send these officials.

Apart from the closure that happened because of Coronavirus, we are optimistic that this new board should be able to work better. 

Secondly, I would also like to inform the House that this board is now in the process of recruiting a new executive director after the contract of the outgoing executive director was not renewed. It has also advertised for the recruitment of the secretary to the board. We think these are major measures to push the board a little more forward. 

Now, because NIRA’s operations involve the public and gathering people all over the country, we closed the services of NIRA right from the headquarters up to the district and other offices on 17 March 2020 after we got the guidelines of the standard operation procedures. 

However, beginning a week ago, we started opening them starting with the headquarters. We are realigning the process so that what we promised in our last statement towards the end of last year - where we said we want to decentralise our services to make the district offices work effectively and where it is applicable to go to the sub-counties – can be operationalised as fast as possible. 

We will be briefing this Parliament on the progress, which we will make on this matter. We do realise the timing of this activity and how important it is for our people, particularly in matters of elections and now that the national identity card is almost part and parcel of people’s activities in the country, we will do as much as we can.

Yes, we have poor offices right from the headquarters in Kololo and I think the reasons are really explained. We are renting our headquarters from the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs. We have been trying to engage the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs so that the rent is waived off but we have not yet succeeded. I am sure we will involve the Office of the Prime Minister to help us so that we can come to a position.

I must also hasten to say something about charging for services by NIRA, which some colleagues referred to here as NTR. Cabinet, in its wisdom, decided that NIRA should not charge MDAs for the services it renders because of the importance and cross-cutting effects of those services. We intend to negotiate, in return, for a position with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to ensure that the cost we would probably incur in providing this service is provided to us by some subvention. 

The offices at the district headquarters are few and do not cover all the districts, as we would like simply because we do not have the funding. You know we have to hire an office and when you hire an office, there are services, which have to be provided for such as provision of power, water and so on.

Right now, we are staffed at about 50 per cent of our proposed capacity. We are supposed to be 826 staff at the minimum to cover the entire country but we have close to 470, which is about 40 percent. We have budgeted for some recruitment this financial year and as you know, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has also been reducing the amount of money. We hope that, that particular aspect will not be reduced so that we are able to cover some of these expenses.

Let me talk briefly about the Learners Project. The Learners Project was between the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Internal Affairs, as you recall, and funding was given for implementation of the first phase by the Ministry of Internal Affairs. We did register 9.6 million students although the Ministry of Education and Sports had estimated that we would have got about eight million people. 

However, even the 9.6 million was less than the number of students when you look at the entire country, including private institutions. Our estimate was that if you wanted to cover the entire country, you needed to register close to 14.8 million Ugandan children in schools. Therefore, we were unable to finish the registration of students. 

As I said earlier on the Floor of Parliament, those who were above the age of 16 years were expected to be issued with identity cards and indeed, the identity cards were printed and there were about three million. These identity cards, from all the information we have, were supposed to have been distributed to the schools or districts where the schools were located. 

In the last statement I made on the Floor of Parliament, I undertook to find out where these cards are and my information was correct that indeed, these were in the schools and districts. However, the mistake our people made was not to disseminate that information to the schools and the parents. This is what we are going to do when we are fully opened up.

Regarding those students who have already been registered, we do not propose to register them again. However, for those who were underage, we had promised here and they were assigned national identification numbers. Those are available and we will disseminate them in the shortest possible time so that even if they do not have the cards, they are able to know that they now have identification numbers in this country. Therefore, I would like you to bear with us that within a month or so, we will come back and tell you about what we have done.

There was an issue about policemen who have been trained and who will not be passed or who will be sent away from the training schools or the police because they do not have identity cards. That is not in our plan and that will not happen. I can confirm to you that all the police personnel who have been trained and those who are already out will continue to serve because at the point of their recruitment, they were recruited either on the basis of their national identification number or actual national identity cards so there is absolutely no reason why they should be removed.

We apologise for the delays, particularly relating to the replacement of lost identity cards. This will be cured by part of our process of decentralisation so that our people do not have to come to Kampala. They can go to the sub-county or district and report their loss. The only thing that will happen in Kampala is the printing of the identity card. Once the printing has been done, they should be able to send it to them and they should be able to collect it in the districts or the nearest points to them. There is absolutely no need for them to come over to the headquarters.

Madam Speaker, other than the other details, which I may not have covered, I think these are the main issues that I could respond to at this particular moment. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The UPDF representative wanted to say something – (Members rose)– No, honourable members, the debate is over. We have other work. Please, Gen. Kuteesa, come.

5.19
GEN. PECOS KUTEESA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. What I wanted to say is that the whole thing is a structural problem; how it is set up. Why do you build all these big offices in Kampala? Every day a child is born. When you look at this card, it shows the date of birth. If you look at this, it starts with the year 56, when I was born? Why don’t you decentralise? How do we run our hospitals? Why are we trying to get away from Mulago to - service will go direct to what you are saying. Why do we have to come back here?

Literally, we would have known how we can plan for this nation. NIRA would know even each child who has entered primary one so that we can plan for 50 years. In 10 years, what class will this child be in? This should be available.

Madam Speaker, every sub county must have a centre. Why do we put these offices and then blame the board of governors? Even if you change leadership, it will not do any better. My advice is that they should go back and state their role when they were established. Register every Ugandan who is born.

Madam Speaker, when you begin to use administrative problems to the structural inconsistencies – I do not think you are going to get anything better. That is my observation, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was surprised that the committee despite a finding that there was exorbitant rent being paid, they did not make any recommendation. I would like to therefore amend the recommendation by proposing that we have a forensic audit on the tenancy agreement between the Ministry of Defence and Veteran affairs and NIRA. Is that okay?  

Honourable members, I put the question that the report be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we want to go to the National Coffee Bill but there is something, which is time bound from the Minister of Local Government about statutory instrument. Where is the chairperson? Hon. Godfrey Onzima, where are you? Come and present the report. I am told it is time bound. If we do not do it today, it will become effective. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT (AMENDMENT OF THE 5TH SCHEDULE) STATUTORY INSTRUMENT, 2020

5.22
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Godfrey Onzima): Thank you, Madam Speaker -  

THE SPEAKER: If you could summarise since we are almost into curfew time.

MR GODFREY ONZIMA: Maybe I will just go to the observations and the recommendations.

THE SPEAKER: Say the subject and go to the observations.

MR GODFREY ONZIMA: Okay. Before that, I would like to lay on the Table a copy of the report and the minutes. I beg to lay.

The Local Government (Amendment of the 5th Schedule) Statutory Instrument, 2020, was laid before Parliament on the 23 June 2020 and referred to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government for scrutiny and report back to the House.

In scrutinising the statutory instrument, the committee was guided by Rule 196 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to-
(a) examine whether the legal requirements prescribed in section 175 were complied with as far as the enactment of this statutory instrument is concerned;

(b) examine the legality, rationality and appropriateness of the proposals contained in the statutory instrument; and
(c) recommend to Parliament to approve, amend or revoke the statutory instrument.

Madam Speaker, I request to go to the objectives of the statutory instrument, which is item 5.0

The instrument intends to amend the Fifth Schedule of the Local Government Act, making it a Local Government Statutory Instrument (LGSI), 2020. The instrument seeks to address the inadequacies in the current mode of operation that have greatly impended effective operationalisation of the instrument, emerging trends and challenges in the management of park user fees by providing for effective management and levying of Park User fees (PUF) payable by taxis and buses to local governments and Kampala Capital City, which is envisioned to boost revenue bases to these local governments as well as the central government.

Compliance with human rights
Madam Speaker, I beg that members read those areas. I will now go to the observations and recommendations.

Application of regulations
Whereas the statutory instrument does not contain an application section, it can be discerned that it applies to all local governments in Uganda, including KCCA.

Interpretation
It should be noted that the instrument applies to the following categories of vehicles:
(a) Heavy omnibus, being a motor vehicle having seating accommodation exceeding 60 passengers excluding the driver.
(b) Light omnibus, being a motor vehicle having seating accommodation for more than seven but not exceeding 20 passengers excluding of the driver.
(c) Medium omnibus, being a motor vehicle having seating  accommodation for more than 20 but not exceeding 60 passengers excluding the driver; and

(d) Taxicab, being, a motorcar used as a passenger vehicle which stands on a rank or plies for hire on a road or a fixed place of business and is licensed to carry passengers for hire or reward under a contract express or implied for the use of the vehicle as a whole at the authorised fee and rates displayed on the vehicle and the sum indicated on the meter.

Whereas, it is discernible that these regulations only apply to Passenger Service Vehicles (PSVs) that have been gazetted or designated parks for loading or offloading passengers, it should be observed that the definition as per the vehicles included is limiting and does not cater for lorries and other trucks.

The committee is of the view that the catchment be widened by use of commercial vehicles, which would now include lorries and other trucks. This would also require gazetting of such parks and determination of rates to be paid by these.

It is also important to note that under the Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1998, a person who intends to utilise a vehicle as a PSV is required to obtain a PSV license. Whereas, the vehicles that the regulations seek to apply to, are only those that carry passengers for commercial purposes, the definition in Regulation 17A, does not point to this clearly and runs the risk of applying to other vehicles, including private vehicles, such as school buses and tourist vehicles, which carry passengers in capacities indicated in the regulations. There is, therefore, need to provide for a clear definition and application provision targeting only commercial PSV and motorcycles.
It should also be noted that the statutory instrument only applies to a park, which is defined in Regulation 17A as:
“Park” means any public or private land or area gazetted and physically identified or planned by an urban authority within its territorial boundaries for the purpose of loading or offloading passenger.”

The committee observes that under allocation of the park user fees, there is no reference to meeting the interests of the private land or park owners and recommends that the regulations should also be explicit on how the interests of the private land owners of a gazetted park are to be taken care of. 

It should further be noted that whereas the regulations apply to taxi cabs, commonly known as special hire vehicles, these have - at least for KCCA - no designated parks. For instance, KCCA has gazetted eight parks: the Old Taxi Park, the New Taxi Park and parks at Nateete, Nakawa, Usafi Market, Namayiba and Kisenyi. 

These parks are gazetted for heavy, light or medium heavy omnibus and none has been gazetted for use by taxi cab vehicles, notwithstanding that they have passenger service vehicle licences. 

In that regard, therefore, since park user fees are charged for use of a gazetted park, the proposal to charge taxi cabs the taxi park user fees is still not clear. They can be charged commercial road users’ fees, rather than park user fees since they have no parks. Indeed, this was the case under Regulation 4 of the Kampala Capital City (Commercial Road Users) Regulations, 2015. 

Also related to the above, the regulations are limited in scope and do not apply to all categories of passenger service vehicles and motor cycles that are prevalent today. For instance, commercial passenger service motor vehicles or motor cycles, such as those using internet-based vehicle hiring or ride sharing apps such as Taxify, Safe boda and Uber, are not catered for under these regulations, in spite of their existence in Uganda, since these do not fall within the definition of taxi cabs as proposed in the regulations. 

It is, therefore, not clear as to which taxi cabs are being targeted in the regulations and why other categories of commercial passenger vehicles and motor cycles, which currently exist in Uganda, are not catered for in these regulations. 

The committee recommends that the minister should prescribe road user fees in some instances, rather than park user fees for the categories that do not have designated parks, especially taxi cabs and internet-based vehicles or motor cycle-hailing or ride-sharing applications.

Levy of park user fees and sharing of revenue 
Regulation 17B prescribes the following park user fees for every taxi cab, light, medium and heavy omnibus licensed as a public service vehicle, loading or offloading passengers within a district, urban authority or KCCA. 

The prescribed user fees are as follows:
    (a) For a person operating a taxi cab or light omnibus within more than one district, urban authority or within and outside KCCA is Shs 840,000 per year.
    (b) For a person operating a taxi cab or light omnibus within one district, urban authority or within KCCA only, it is Shs 720,000 per year.
    (c) A person operating a medium omnibus or heavy omnibus in all districts, urban authority or KCCA is Shs 2,400,000 per year.

The committee takes note that whereas the fees proposed are reasonable for persons operating within KCCA, which has a day population of five million and a night population of three million, meaning that about two million people commute to Kampala on a daily basis, the same cannot be stated for persons operating in other parts of the country. For example, Shs 840,000 in park user fees may thus be unreasonably high to those outside Kampala and a few other developed urban areas, owing to the low volume of passengers and the transport charges. 

The committee recommends that the minister should review the rates payable in the different districts, local governments and urban areas and where necessary, consider discriminating the park user fees against the current balance of these park user fees across the board. 

On sharing of revenue, Regulation 17D requires that in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, the Accountant-General shall allocate the park user fees paid in respect of each taxi cab, light omnibus, medium omnibus or heavy omnibus to a district, urban authority or Kampala Capital City, where it operates on a monthly basis. 

The revenue collected from the park user fees is shared as follows:
    (a) In the case of a taxi cab or light omnibus, to a district, urban authority or Kampala Capital City Authority, where a taxi cab or light omnibus originates, as indicated on the route chart, pays park user fees of Shs 504,000.
    (b) District, urban authority or Kampala Capital City Authority, where a taxi cab or light omnibus destination, as indicated on the route chart, pays park user fees of Shs 336,000.
    (c) All districts, urban authority or Kampala Capital City Authority, through which the taxi cab or light omnibus transits through, pay Shs 0.
    (d) In the case of medium omnibus or heavy omnibus, all districts, urban authorities or Kampala Capital City Authority, as indicated on the route chart, share equally. 

The committee observes that whereas a taxi cab or light omnibus is allowed to operate in more than one district, when it comes to sharing of fees, the fees are divided amongst the originating and final destination districts of the vehicle, excluding districts which the vehicle transits through; notwithstanding that the vehicle may actually use the parks in those areas to disembark or pick up more passengers before proceeding to its final destination. 

Further still, there is no equity in the manner of sharing revenue between destination and originating destination of a taxi cab or light omnibus, with the originating local government getting more money than the destination. 

In light of the above, the committee recommends that the minister should consider providing for the equitable sharing of revenue in the case of a taxi cab or light omnibus, with all districts and local governments indicated on the route chat, rather than as it proposed in Regulation 17D.

Payment of park user fees
Regulation 17C of the statutory instrument deals with the payment of park user fees and it requires park user fees to be collected by Uganda Revenue Authority and remitted to the Consolidated Fund. 

The provision further requires that:
    (a) A person shall fill in a bank payment advice form to be provided by Uganda Revenue Authority or complete an online registration, assessment and payment on the Uganda Revenue Authority online platform. 
    (b) A person paying the park user fees using a bank payment advice form provided by the Uganda Revenue Authority under sub-regulation (2) to deposit the amount assessed in the bank indicated on the payment advice form.
    (c) A person who has paid the park user fees under this regulation shall retain the bank slip or receipt as proof of payment of the park user fees. 

The provision finally requires that a person shall not be issued with a public service vehicle licence issued under the Traffic and Road Safety Act, unless he or she has proof of payment of the park user fees. 

The committee has reviewed the proposals and found them necessary. The provisions now require the payment of the fees directly to the Consolidated Fund, a matter that will make the administration of these fees easy and stop the abuse of such fees, as was evident in the past. 

It should, however, be noted that the provision has some enforcement challenges and is limited in scope. For instance, whereas the provision imposes an obligation on a person who has paid park user fees to retain a copy of the bank slip as proof of payment, it does not indicate what document will be issued differentiating a person who has paid, from the one who has not. 

Whereas the payment is for park user fees, there is nothing in these regulations that identifies the vehicle for which the payment is made or the route allocated to such a vehicle. This will make the sharing of revenue difficult since the person who will pay will not know what the originating or final destination of the vehicle will be. 

The provision does not allow for the monthly or quarterly payment of these user fees since it is envisaged on yearly payment. This will affect compliance since not all vehicle operators can afford to pay the annual fees. 

There is need to allow a payment of taxi user fee in a manner that is reasonable and within the means of most Ugandans. 

Allowing the monthly payments will ease compliance and will enable a Passenger Service Vehicle (PSV) that is not working in any month for any reason, not to pay such user fees since ordinarily these should only apply to a person accessing the park.

The committee recommends that the minister considers the following:
a) Allowing the payment of annual, monthly and quarterly park fees.

b) Including in the regulations, the issuance of an identifying sticker to a person who complies with the provisions and payment of park user fees.

c) Including in the regulations, the requirement that a person making payment should include the vehicle number and the route, which that vehicle plies. Otherwise, the payment of these fees to the relevant district or urban authority will be challenging.

On enforcement of regulations -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chair, could you read the subject and the recommendations and not the entire report. 

MR ONZIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On enforcement of regulations, the committee recommends that the minister should consider deleting the imprisonment penalty from the regulations, particularly, Rule 17F; it contravenes Section 175 of the Local Government Act and Section 18 of the Interpretation Act.

Amendment of Statutory Instrument No.3 of 2015
The committee recommends that the minister should consider the legal implications of the proposals and find a way of not only complying with the Interpretation Act but also incorporating the provisions of Rule 2 on applications; Rule 6 on exemptions from paying fees in certain circumstances; and Rule 7 on notification of the authorised officers. These can be adopted for inclusion in the amendment of the Local Government (Amendment of the 5th Schedule) Statutory Instrument, 2020.

Lack of commencement provision
The committee observes that there is need to add commencement provision to the Local Government (Amendment of the 5th Schedule) Statutory Instrument, 2020. If that is not possible, to at least have a transitional provision to cater for the existing valid commercial road user stickers that were issued under the Kampala Capital City Authority (Commercial Road Users) Regulations, 2015 or similar laws in other local governments.

Procedural challenges of Section 175 of the Local Government Act
The committee recommends that Section 175 be amended to ensure that the statutory instrument is first brought to Parliament for ratification before it is published in the Uganda Gazette.

Conclusion
Madam Speaker, in light of all the above observations and loopholes in the Local Government (Amendment of the 5th Schedule) Statutory Instrument, 2020, the committee therefore, recommends that the Statutory Instrument, 2020 be revoked. 

This House should direct the minister to consider issues observed and recommendations made by the committee before the instrument is re-tabled.

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chair and members of the committee on Public Service and Local Government for that detailed report and very careful analysis of the law and the impact. Are there any comments? 

If there are no comments, honourable members, I put the question that the report be - oh! The minister has something to - I think you have just come in. 

5.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jenifer Namuyangu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for presenting the report. 

Before we came up with the statutory instrument, we held wide consultative meetings with all the taxi operators, owners and the bus owners and operators. We even met His Excellency, the President to seek for further guidance. 

Here we are only dealing with taxis and buses. We left out the trucks, the motorcycles and the special hire cars. These are supposed to come in later after this instrument. 

The reason we had to handle the two first is that there was outcry from the operators and owners that they were paying multiple taxes. And so, we had to agree to remove the multiple taxes by ensuring they only pay once in a year. This was after a thorough agreement with the affected people. 
Also, the issue of paying taxes monthly was rejected by many because of what they have been going through. They told us they would pay Shs 120,000 to Kampala Capital City and Shs 80,000 to the local governments, totalling to Shs 200,000 per month.

What we have given them now will see taxis pay Shs 720,000 per year, which translates into a reduction of over 50 per cent. For the buses, payment has actually reduced by 83 per cent. 
So, by the time we came up with the instrument, we had been engaging these people for three years.

Madam Speaker, the local governments/Kampala Capital City Authority have lost the money for all that time. I really want to plead with the committee and the entire House to move. Even when we withdraw the instrument, I believe we are going to bring it back the same way because we had an agreement in place. 
The stage managers are going to be removed; they will collect their welfare fees through their SACCOs instead of collecting it from the stages. I believe that so far, the instrument, as it is, is agreeable to all the concerned stakeholders. 

Madam Speaker, I plead with you: we really need to move so that the local governments/Kampala Capital City Authority can now start getting some revenue to enable them extend services such as garbage collection, pay for utilities, work on the roads, and have their councils conduct business.

As you are aware, local government councils depend on local revenue to have their councils conduct business. I beg to submit.

The Speaker: Honourable minister, I understand that you met and had administrative agreements. However, what the committee has been examining is the legality and appropriateness of this instrument, its compliance with Section 175 of the Local Government Act, among others.

Therefore, I would like to advise that you read the entire report and address the issues. For instance, you have no commencement date. There are procedural issues surrounding section 175. Please read the report and then you can be able to respond. 

In the meantime, I put the question that the report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Report adopted

The Speaker:  Honourable members, we are way past our time. We are almost coming to six o’clock, so House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you.

(The House rose at 5.50 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 8 July 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)
 


