
Tuesday, 9 July 2002

Parliament met at 2.28 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last week we constituted sessional committees, and following that, respective committees met and elected their leaders. I want to announce the names of the people who were elected to lead the committees.

The Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries: 

Hon. Odit John - Chairperson
Hon. Bikwasizehi Deusdedit  - Deputy Chairperson

Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs:

Hon. Nsaba Buturo - Chairperson
Hon. Zziwa Margaret  - Deputy chairperson

Committee on Public Service and Local Government:

Hon. Byenkya Beatrice  - Chairperson
Hon. Yiga Antony - Deputy Chairperson

Committee on Works, Housing and Communications:

Hon. Nathan Byanyima - Chairperson
Hon. Byabagambi John - Deputy Chairperson

Committee on Social Services:

Hon. Hyuha Dorothy - Chairperson
Hon. Tumwesigye Elioda - Deputy Chairperson

Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development:

Hon. Ephraim Kamuntu - Chairperson
Hon. Omach Fred - Deputy Chairperson

Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs:

Hon. Simon Mayende      - Chairperson
Hon. Betty Udongo       - Deputy Chairperson

Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs:

Hon. Adolf Mwesige     - Chairperson
Hon. Dora Byamukama    - Deputy Chairperson

Committee on Natural Resources:

Hon. Ndawula Kawesi        	- Chairperson
Hon. Biira Bwambale Loyce     - Deputy Chairperson

The Committee on Trade and Industries is due to set up its leadership, I think, tomorrow. As soon as we get the results, we shall announce them. 

I want to remind you that we have some new standing committees, and I hope those who are interested in being members have already taken up the necessary papers to get the necessary secondment. Thank you very much.

MR AGGREY AWORI: Mr Speaker, I have noted with great concern that it is extremely difficult for the honourable members of the Front Bench to answer our questions, that is during question time, notwithstanding a number of promises, especially by the Prime Minister. 

I would like to take advantage of the presence of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and his first deputy, who is the Minister of Internal Affairs, to inquire on a matter of utmost urgency.  

Last week one of our nationals who was in the custody of the Ministry of Internal Affairs was kidnapped by a foreign government. He landed before a court in a foreign country without any trace of immigration, without any information whatsoever to us in this House who are in charge of making treaties with foreign countries.  

I would like to know form the leader of Government Business whether this national was a terrorist, a thief or an innocent person who fell victim of a conspiracy by certain people outside this country.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe before you continue, I was supposed to introduce some visitors who are in the strangers’ gallery. There are four students and three teachers from UK who have come to see what we are proceeding with. You are welcome –(Applause).

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me correct hon. Aggrey Awori’s preamble. It was absolutely fallacious to say that the Front Bench is finding it difficult to answer questions. On the contrary, I have asked the Speaker to set aside even five days when we would do nothing but answer the remaining questions. So, the ball is the in hands of Parliament. That must be made abundantly clear. 

The second point I would make is that when you ambush us, we sometimes avoid giving answers when we have not done adequate research. However, there have been occasions, because we are functionally versatile, when we have answered on the spot.  

May I take this opportunity to point out to the honourable member that there is a sector minister; the First Deputy Premier and Minister of Internal Affairs is requested to answer the question. I thank you.

THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Eriya Kategaya):  Mr Speaker, I know my Friend Aggrey Awori is fond of ambushes, –(Interjection)- he was a rebel and gave up, but he is a rebel in the House.  

The gentleman talked about was not kidnapped. This gentleman was working in Washington D.C –(Interjections)- I know what he is talking about, if I can be allowed to proceed.

THE SPEAKER: Proceed please.

MR KATEGAYA: This gentleman was working in Washington D.C in the prison department, and the allegation against him is that he stole some money when he was in the employment of Washington D.C. Details were given, which I can give, in terms of charges. 

He came back here, changed his passport, changed his names and got another passport. Now the Interpol contacted us to look for him, and when we were trying to look for him, we found him in a pulpit preaching. He was in the pulpit preaching in the Seventh Day Adventist church in Entebbe when the police got him. 

When we got him he said, “yes, I have two passports, I put aside one and what I have is the new one under the new identity”.  Secondly, he did not deny the allegations by the American Government or Washington D.C.

There is what we call “red signal”, if you are looking for someone under Interpol. Once you are on red signal, it means anybody or any organisation which gets you can pick you up. This is the arrangement that we used to allow Interpol, together with FBI, to take this gentleman –if he is a gentleman at all - to go back and answer charges in Washington. So, there was no kidnapping as such, and we are aware of what was going on; we are not irresponsible in looking after our people.

The only thing he said is that when he stole, he was stealing on behalf of Uganda, and I said this is not acceptable! You cannot be a thief on behalf of Uganda! But these are allegations, and that is what he told me. So, what was done was not kidnapping.  Thank you very much.

MR AWORI: In this country, Mr Speaker, we are responsible for making laws; and between any countries, nobody can be removed in the absence of an extradition treaty. I am just wondering if Interpol orders are outside or are above an extradition treaty!

MR KATEGAYA:  Mr Speaker, Uganda is a member of the Interpol. We signed the treaty in Interpol. So, we are obliged to implement and obey the provisions of the Interpol.  

DR STEPHEN MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, as far as Interpol is concerned, there are certain crimes which are red signal as the hon. Minister said, such as murder, terrorism and stealing from a bank. I do not think that crime belongs to that category.  Can the honourable Minister clarify whether this kind of crime was actually one of the crimes in Interpol which have a red star?

MR KATEGAYA: I do not know whether Mr Mallinga has exhausted those crimes which fall under red star.  This was one of them. And as I said, when we got this gentleman, we found that he had even forged two passports of Uganda; forged!  

Secondly, when we got him, he was a good Christian to admit that he had committed the offence and had no problem. In fact, he said, “I think I have been caught up with now”.  This is what he said!

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, when our children read the Hansard and they find this nameless gentleman, they will wonder who he was. I just wonder whether it is a matter of security not to mention his name; or at least for purposes of our records, mention the name and not the paper as the honourable member would like us to perform this afternoon. 

MR KATEGAYA: Mr Speaker, what I could do, just to bring an end to the debate, I can tomorrow produce the details I have talked about, because I was just getting this out of my memory from what I read on the file.  I will come with the real statements and dates, and the names and passports forged tomorrow, Mr Speaker.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE FIRST PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Eriya Kategaya): Mr Speaker, honourable members, I would like to make a statement on two issues which were raised in this House: one, the current situation in Teso region and two, the current state of security in Kampala and other areas in the country.

A few days ago, questions were asked in this House seeking to know:

(a)What Government is doing about the seemingly explosive situation in the Teso region, and 

  (b)What Government is doing about the upsurge in violent crimes in Kampala and other places in the country.

The situation in Teso:

This situation in Teso has come about as a result of the return to the region of pastoralists who once lived there but were forced to leave the area because of the insecurity in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The return of these people has been misinterpreted and politicised.  

Historical background to the problem:

From time immemorial, the people of Teso have lived in Teso and outside Teso in harmony with other ethnic groups.  

Honourable members, you will recall that other ethnic groups, especially pastoralists, have been living in Teso for a very long time. The pastoralists have always grazed their cattle and other animals in the wetlands in the districts of Kumi, Soroti and Kaberamaido. For example: 

i) The group that is currently in the Agu area, Ngora sub-county: This group is led by one Robert Kainamura who was born in 1959 in Kobwin, Teso.  It is his father who migrated there from Masindi Port before he (Kainamura) was born. This was a group of 50 people with 249 cows.  

ii) Groups that are currently in Kapujan-Kodida area:  

• One section led by Rugyemere Moses came from Masindi Port.  

• Another section, the Sabiny, came from Kapchorwa. There are 256 people with 1,123 cows.  
	
• The third section comprises of Banyankore (52 people with 467 cows) and Banyarwanda, (70 people with 530 cows). 
 
In total, there are 408 people with 2,120 cows in this area.  

Following the return of peace to the region, all these people who originally lived there returned.  Their return has been politicised.

Immediately the Government detected this trend, high-powered delegations were sent to the region: 

(a) To establish the facts. 

(b) To explain to the leaders and the population the facts on the ground. 

(c) Together with them, design the avenues to maintain peace, law and order in the region.

The following meetings were held:

1. A meeting with the heads of security agencies. This meeting was held in Soroti town. The National Political Commissar, hon. Kiyonga, hon. Mike Mukula, hon. Grace Akello, hon. Christine Aporu and hon. Mary Mugyenyi participated in this meeting.  

While they were in the region, the team made field visits in Soroti and Kumi Districts in places called Abokot and Agu respectively. 

In addition, question and answer sessions on the two FM radio stations in Soroti town were held.

2. Another meeting was held at Soroti Flying School. The ministers named above, the honourable Members of Parliament from the region, district chairpersons of Kaberamaido, Katakwi, Kumi and Soroti, Resident District Commissioners and the security personnel in the region participated in this meeting. The team was also able to meet with a cross section of other leaders, including religious and traditional leaders.

On 5 July 2002, a meeting was held here in Kampala. Those invited included: 

• Central and district leaders 

• The honourable Ministers of Internal Affairs, Agriculture, Disaster Preparedness, Security and the Environment. 

• All MPs from the Teso region. 

• Officials from NEMA, Lands and Disaster Preparedness department.  

• Five people from each of the four districts, Kumi, Kaberamaido, Katakwi and Soroti. The five from each district were the district chairperson, the district speaker, the district land board chairperson, the secretary for environment and the Resident District Commissioner.  

• All Members of Parliament from Masindi and members of NEC from Mbarara and Ntungamo Districts, where the cattle keepers came from.

As stated above, the purpose of all these meetings was to establish facts and design avenues to maintain peace, security, law and order. Honourable members will agree that these are pre-requisites for social and economic development.  

In conclusion, it is a fact that the situation in Teso has been tense recently. It is however calming down as a result of Government’s efforts to understand and to explain facts on the ground to the people. 

As stated above, members will note that: 

i) The Iteso have traditionally lived with many other tribes, now and in the past. The difference now was the campaign that was being waged by ill wishers and the fact that arrival of the cattle keepers mainly from Masindi looked like an influx.
  
ii) The recent history of Teso appeared to have made the Iteso suspicious and rather resentful of the cattle keepers from the west of the country. 

During the insurgency, some of the army commanders appeared to have made mistakes against some section of the population. It was in fact alleged that some of them either encouraged or actually participated in stealing cattle from the Iteso; and some of these cattle keepers who had now returned were thought to have collaborated in this condemnable act.

The way forward:

In view of the above, Government has decided to implement both short-term and medium-to-long-term measures to handle the situation.  

Short-term measures:

i) Acting in line with the law and policy governing wetlands, all the cattle keepers who have made settlements in the wetlands will be issued notice by the Executive Director of NEMA to remove these settlements within a period of six months. 

In the meantime, the following will    happen: 

(a) These people will be allowed to graze the animals in the wetlands.

(b) Government officers responsible for refugees and settlements will travel to the Teso region and establish the nationalities of each one of the affected people. 

ii) Those found to be non-Ugandans will be guided in accordance with the procedures that govern non-nationals.

iii) As for those who are citizens of this country, they will be categorised and guided as here below:

(a) Those who lived in Teso before and have land which they legally acquired will stay on the said land in line with the laws that govern the country.

(b)  Those who have settlements in their home areas but ran away from insecurity will return home when the security situation in these areas improves.

(c) Central Government, working with the local authorities and the affected people, will find another place anywhere in Uganda for settlement of those who recently came to Teso and do not own land there.

Medium and long-term measures:

(i) The guidelines that govern movement of large herds of cattle over long distances will be revised so that before the movement is allowed, it is ascertained that the place being moved to is appropriate and due legal steps have been taken for the reception of the animals and the people.

(ii) A policy on normadism will be developed.

I would like to announce that H.E the President will be visiting Teso region, I think tomorrow, and among other things he will meet a cross section of the leaders in Teso region to have this matter discussed further.

Lastly, Government appeals to all Ugandans, and in this particular case, the people of Teso, to act in accordance with the law. Let no violence be incited. This matter will be solved peacefully and in a manner that will ensure peace and unity in that area and in the whole country.  

Now I go to the second part of the statement:

THE CURRENT STATE OF SECURITY IN KAMPALA AND OTHER AREAS IN THE COUNTRY

Mr Speaker, violent acts in form of armed robberies and murder have caused loss of lives and property. Since there can be no social and economic development where lives and property are insecure, it is imperative that we all understand the causes of the insecurity so that appropriate counter measures can be put in place.

Possible causes of violent crime:

Government and security agencies have analysed the situation. It is believed that the crime rate has gone up mainly because of: 

(i)Too many guns being in the hands of criminals

(ii) Inadequate control and supervision of firearms by Government and private security organisations

(iii) Rivalries between individuals in business and social life 

(iv) Insufficient coordination between security organs. Sharing of intelligence information about criminals is not effectively done.

(v) Operating a cash economy, i.e. use of cash in business transactions instead of cheques and/or drafts. Cash attracts the robbers who then use firearms

(vi) Insider dealings. We think that sometimes bank officials give information to robbers when cash is being moved.

(vii) Delayed response by security agencies when called upon. This has sometimes made it possible for criminals to get away thus commit other crimes. 
The delayed response has been due to inadequate facilities available to the security organs.

(viii) It has been alleged that some security personnel are themselves involved in the crime.

Government, together with the heads of security agencies, have looked at all these possibilities.  As a result, certain measures have been put in place, and the following has been achieved:

Firearms recovered:

a) January 2002 we recovered: 

- Nine SMGs and 564 rounds of ammunition 
- Two pistols and 11 rounds of ammunition 
- One SAR 
- One Mark II 
- One stick grenade, and 
- Three toy guns.

b) February 2002: 

- Eight SMGs and 295 rounds of ammunition 
- One pistol and 12 rounds of ammunition 
- One she gun 
-  One greener gun and three rounds of ammunition  
- Two grenades.

c) March 2002: 

- Three SMGs and 247 rounds of ammunition 
- One pistol and three rounds of ammunition 
- Two other guns 
- One stick grenade.

d) April 2002: 

- 16 SMGs and 489 rounds of ammunition 
- Two other guns and 125 rounds of ammunition 
- Two toy guns.

e) May 2002: 

- 26 SMGs and 621 rounds of ammunition 
- Six pistols and 63 rounds of ammunition 
- Two other guns 
- Two grenades and 
- Two toy guns.

f) June 2002: 

- 27 SMGs and 953 rounds of ammunition 
- 10 pistols and 34 rounds of ammunition 
- Four other guns 
- Two grenades 
- One toy gun.

Motor vehicles stolen or robbed and recovered: 

January 2002 - 42 vehicles were stolen or robbed and 29 were recovered.

February 2002 – 40 were stolen and 25 were recovered.

March 2002 – 43 were stolen and 24 were recovered.

April 2002– 36 were stolen and 26 were recovered.

May 2002 – 38 were stolen and 27 were recovered.

Number of armed thugs put out of action:

January 2002 - six 
February - six 
March - four 
April - seven 
May – 16 
June – 24

In summary, so far this year, 131 arms have been recovered, 3,338 rounds of ammunition have been recovered, 236 vehicles have been stolen, but 147 were recovered, and 36 armed thugs have been put out of action.

As members may have read in the press, amongst the notorious armed thugs put out of action are:

1. Bob Weswera Sauta 
2. Emma Mwesigye, alias Bishop 
3. Abbas Kaddu, alias Bahati Charles 
4. Moses Bakutema, alias Musana 
5. Chris William Seruyange, alias Bongole 
6. Francis Sekiziyivu, alias Seki, alias Najoro
7. Munyoro
8. Kayanja
9. Kananura
10.Ntege Stephen
11.Kakooza Muhamade
12.Juma Lumala
13.Kiberu
14.Balikuddembe Joseph
15.Kakumba John

Constraints facing the security organs:

Mr Speaker, it is appreciated that what has been achieved so far is not sufficient. The security organs believe that they will be able to appropriately handle the situation if: 

a) Adequate transport is provided to them.

b) Adequate numbers to handle crime are made available. We currently have 14,120 police officers.  We need a force of about 35,000.  

c) The Police Force is suitably trained to handle homicide cases. 

Action being taken:

Mr Speaker, honourable members, in view of the above, Government is taking the following measures to re-enforce those already in place. As already demonstrated, with these additional measures in place, the security will be contained, peace will prevail and the social and economical environment will be ensured:

a) Full documentation and computerization of all arms in the country. We will then be able to know who has what firearm, and where that firearm is. Accountability for the firearm will be reinforced. Firearms’ movement will be restricted.

b)Mobilization of financial resources to acquire more patrol vehicles, bulletproof vests and helmets for Police officers on patrol. This measure will enable the security agencies to respond rapidly when the need arises.

c) Better co-ordination and sharing of vital information about crimes within the security organs.

d) Government will, in the future, be tabling before this House a law that will make it possible for criminals, for example, those in illegal possession of military equipment, to be dealt with more firmly.

e) Revival of complaints and information desks at police stations in addition to community policing. Efforts will be made to forge closer partnerships between the police and the public.

f) Increased sensitisation with the public about matters concerning security.

In conclusion, it is true the situation a few weeks ago was bad, but Government has decisively responded to the situation. The implementation of these measures indicated above will ensure that we all live in a secure environment. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Minister for the statement he has made. If I heard him correctly, or if I heard him badly maybe you can guide me, but he said that NEMA is supposed to be issuing notice to these settlers in Teso to vacate the place in six months time. 

He also said that these people are carrying about 2,000 cows, which are on the wetland. What I would like to know from the Minister is whether by the time those 2,000 cows get out of that wetland, that place will be a wetland or a dry land. 

Two, the Minister talked about illegal guns with the people. I come from Ibanda South; I have seen a lot of double standards in people carrying guns.  You find people holding guns and you ask them whether they have got permission from the Police, the answer you get is, “I got my gun from Commander so and so, therefore, I am not handing it over to the Police”.  

I have got facts on this, because I have got a family in my constituency which to-date is giving me a headache. We have managed to recover all the 26 guns from LDUs, but that family has refused to hand over the guns, even to your DPC. When he goes there, they tell him, “I got my gun from afande so and so, unless I get permission from afande so and so, that is when I will hand over my gun.” (Interjections). If you want facts on that, honourable Minister, I can see you in your private capacity and give you the names of those people holding those guns, and the name of the DPC who has failed to collect those guns.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, according to our rules, a statement made by a minister can attract a debate. When the Minister had concluded his statement, there were people who stood up to say that they needed clarification. I imagined clarification was intended to make the House clearly understand the statement that has been made.  

I would prefer those of you who only want clarification and do not want to debate on the statement to make those clarifications, so that the Minister can answer and we understand. Those who want to debate substantially can then do so after that. I think it will be better that way.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I wish to thank the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs for the report that he has presented – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member please let me know whether you are seeking clarification or you want to debate.

MR AMURIAT: I want to debate.

THE SPEAKER: Let us exhaust the clarifications then we can debate. You will be the first one to debate.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have just grasped a statement which was reiterated by the Minister twice. This statement loosely says that the people of Teso have just been living peacefully in any part of Uganda just like Ugandans have been living in that particular part. 

To me, that statement would imply that they do not have a legal basis to complain, because they are living in other parts of the country. So, how do you marry this statement to the long explanation you are giving about those settlers, because it appears that is the gist of what you want to say? You began with it, and you summarised with it?

MR DEO KAYONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable Minister made a statement in regard to security in Kampala, and he categorically said that this is what was said here on the Floor of Parliament during the past one or two weeks. But he did not say anything about the Sudanese issue, which is rampant. There are so many Sudanese in my constituency and the entire division. I would like the honourable Minister to clarify on this, because it was also raised.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you suggesting that the presence of Sudanese is causing insecurity? How is the mere presence of people relevant to the issue? Anyway, he has got the issue.

MR KAYONGO: Mr Speaker, it is relevant because he was answering issues on security.

THE SPEAKER: So you are asking whether he does not appreciate that the existence of the Sudanese is causing insecurity?

MR KAYONGO: Right.

MR GEOFREY EKANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification in light of the fact that the country is having a housing and population census. The Iteso initially were the second largest tribe in Uganda, but because of distortions of the housing and population census, our population figure has been presented in a manner that does not really show the number of the Iteso. What programme do you have to make sure that since these illegal migrants will still be there during the housing and population census, this is taken care of?  

Two, the fact that these migrants entered Teso, what law have they broken in the process of their movement. What programme of compensation do you have for those who have lost their properties and those who have suffered injustice as a result of those people’s settlement in that place?  

Finally, as regards security, honourable Minister, I have written to you several times about the incapacity of the policemen in Malaba and in my constituency to protect the people. I have not got a response. About 10 people have now been burnt because the public does not see policemen as offering them a solution. So, there is mob justice.  

Recently, Parliament went ahead and contributed money, and the President said it was nonsense for the Inspector General to move around fundraising.  In this respect, therefore, what programme do you have to give capacity to the policemen in my constituency to provide security? Thank you.

MR ALEX NDEEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  My question pertains to the first issue, the issue of tension in Teso and the arising human rights implications.  As per our Constitution, all Ugandans are free to move and live wherever they wish. Now it is as if moving from one district to another qualifies me to be called a foreigner. I am interested in knowing how the rights of these people who are moving to other areas can be guaranteed by your Government, and particularly the Ministry of Internal Affairs. 

For many years, we have been talking about building a nation, it now appears that we have or we can talk of having groups or mere tribes always living in a certain culture. My question is very simple, I would like to see how we could protect the Constitution, which guarantees the rights of our people to move freely and build wherever they wish. Thank you.

MS DORA BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my thanks to the Minster of Internal Affairs, and I seek clarification on two issues:  The first one is on his statement that a policy on normadism is being developed. I find it ridiculous! 

I thought that the Government is interested in developing a policy on resettlement. Normadism has many problems, some of which have come up with the same issue as in Teso. Services cannot be availed to such people. Therefore, I would like to hear more on this policy that is being developed.  

The issue that perturbs me, and which I heard him state, is that there will be a record on who has which firearms and what kind of firearm that person has at a given time. I did not hear anything about increasing the numbers of ballistics and fingerprint experts, because in this country when firearms are used, it has been almost impossible to connect the crime to the person who may have committed it. These are the few clarifications I would like to hear, Mr Speaker.  Thank you.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for that lengthy explanation. But I would like the Minister to really be very honest and explain to me what actually is happening.  He has mentioned three categories of people who are settling in Teso area:

One group are those people who were originally living in Teso, but because of the war in the eastern region, they went away. That is one group. The second group are those who have decided to move from their own homes to Teso. The third group is the one which comes from Rwanda.  

This war ended a long time ago in 1995. Why didn’t these people return earlier than that? Why are they still living in Uganda? - (Laughter). The way these people move, they must have been originating somewhere, and they have just appeared on the surface of Teso land. Can you tell me where these people are coming from? Why can’t they go back?  Isn’t that colonisation within Uganda, Mr Speaker? - (Laughter)

MR WAGONDA MUGULI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for his statement. In the figures he gave about the firearms recovered, it is very clear that the majority of these firearms are AK 47s. These are assault rifles, which are not normally available for civilian possession under the Firearms Licensing Act. 

I would like clarification as to what the source of these firearms is, because it is a matter of concern. The 2000 plus firearms recovered are almost equivalent to five or six battalions! This is a very heavy leakage if these firearms would be found to be a leakage from the national cache of arms Could the Minister clarify?

MR JOHN ODIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to seek clarification on three or so areas: One, if these people fled, where did they ran to and how much land did they leave behind in Teso that they are claiming now? In addition to the animals they are coming back with, what properties did they lose in the course of running away from Teso?  
 
My second concern is on the statistics that the Minister gave about the recovery of firearms and the loss of lives. I heard the names of the people who were killed by the robbers and the number of arms, but the Minister has not told us how many Policemen lost their lives in the course of operation. 

I know that a very senior officer in my town of Lira, by the names of Inspector Olowo, who came from Tororo, was murdered by the robbers who had robbed a car from here. They carried a lot of SMGs in their vehicles and a bag full of money from here, and this case is not being mentioned here.  I do not know whether the Minister is aware of such cases as well. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR DANIEL KIDEGA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister so much for this very good explanation and statement.  

There are two scenarios I am trying to marry to the statement, which I would like to get clarification on. There has been rampant talk on the matters of guns illegally in civilian hands. There is also a new scenario coming up that there are people who are actually supposed to be soldiers or security personnel in this country but they are “ghosts”; they are not real people. These are people either in the army or in other security organisations who actually are supposed to be deployed in areas of operation, but they are not actual human beings. 

There must be a situation of accountability of deployment of forces vis-à-vis the firearms which are being given to the field. In the event that there are “ghosts” being deployed and the firearms are there, I wonder whether these firearms are not finding a way to account for their presence in some of these “ghosts” in the security agencies. So, I would like the Minister to allay my fears that there is no connection between the existence of “ghosts” and guns going to the civilians. Thank you so much.

MR STEVEN BAMWANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to seek clarification from hon. Kategaya. Much as they are trying to carry out a disarmament exercise of guns from the gangsters, until we know the source of these guns, it will be an exercise in futility.   

We have seen, and we have heard the public complaining that high-ranking officers in security organisations are the source of these guns. One member has said that somebody in his constituency has refused to hand over a gun simply because it was given to him by one of the afandes. 

While you are taking stock of the guns in circulation, it is very important that we know exactly who these criminals who have been put out of action are. The Minister of Internal Affairs has not told us whether among those who have been put out of action, there are security personnel involved. He only mentioned names and yet the outcry is that there are security operatives who are the source of the guns; who are renting out guns. 

I actually do not see how civilians can rent out AK 47 guns. So, what are we trying to do about the disarmament of these gangsters and also making sure that the security forces cannot have more than one gun in their possession?  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think we should get the Minister’s reply and then we can go on to debate.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, on the names that the honourable Minister gave, as my honourable colleague has just put it, what is there background? Some of them sound like people who were retrenched sometime back; others seem to be the people who had advantage of training under mchaka mchaka. 

Mr Speaker, I also need your guidance. Last time you gave us guidelines on ministerial statements; I am just wondering whether the honourable Minister is going to conform to those guidelines so that we get a copy of the statement.  

One of our colleagues here in this august House narrowly missed death at hands of gangsters; he was almost shot dead, and he escaped narrowly. He was held at gunpoint at a place that is generally patrolled by the police highway patrol group. At one time this House appropriated over US $2 million for the Ministry of Internal Affairs to purchase a helicopter, why can’t they use it for quick response in a matter – (Interjections)- I can lease them mine. Why can they not utilize this expensive helicopter? 

MR KATEGAYA: Mr Speaker, I thank those who have contributed, particularly the last speaker, hon. Aggrey Awori. If he could lend me his helicopter, I will use it very well.

Hon. Byabagambi raised the question of wetlands. He is asking for the timeframe in which these people will leave the wetlands. I say it is within six months. It could take two weeks, it could take one month, but when we asked the people from NEMA, they said they could do it within two weeks. So six months is the limit. It is up to NEMA to expedite the removal of settlements from the wetlands. 

The question of guns in illegal hands is precisely the point I addressed in my statement. Perhaps I was not clear. Before you know whether somebody has a gun illegally or not, you must ascertain the existence of that gun. This is the first thing I said. The first exercise we are going to do is to document and computerize our stock. Reason is that even when we recover any guns, we cannot tell whether they are from the Police, or from other security or intelligence organizations. 

The problem we have now is that there are no correct records of what we have in terms of arms in this country. This is why I say that we are going to record and computerize our stock. That way, if we get any gun in action we can say, “yes, we can trace it back to the force, or a given unit or even an individual.” 

As you know, this country has seen so many civil wars. There have been guns in this country for a long time. We had seven fighting forces in Kampala before the NRM took over; or was it six? All these guns have been moved up and down the country. 

Secondly, the UPDF has been on constant operation. Since we came here in 1986, there have been wars going on. So in terms of documentation, it has been very difficult to record all the arms, and that is what we are trying to do. We will first document them and then we shall know the source of these arms And hon. Byabagambi would know this perhaps, because there has not been strict control of issuing of guns. I am sure some of the so-called afandes he is talking about were giving out some of the guns to friends and family. That cannot be ruled out.  

I did not understand what hon. Otto wanted me to say, and I am afraid I will not answer what I do not understand.  

On hon. Kayongo’s question of Sudanese, Mr Speaker, I said, and rightly so, that I have had some correspondence from the Mayor of Kampala on this. I have also had correspondence from a gentleman, an LCV councillor, and I have asked people to investigate this matter because I was not aware of it. Once we have compiled this information, and if there are refugees, then they will be dealt with by the Department of Refugees in the Prime Minister’s Office. 

My concern with the matter would be if they have caused insecurity, and so far we have no information about that. Most people are only complaining about their presence so far. People are saying that these refugees should be in settlements. As I said, after the arms documentation, I am going to be in touch with my colleague, the Second Deputy Prime Minister, and then we will handle them as refugees. But so far, according to the report, there is no insecurity linked to these Sudanese. 

Hon. Ekanya, census is not my department, you should address it to its respective department. I would like everybody to carry his or her lubengo. As for compensation, we have not compiled any information about property destroyed. And as I said, the people concerned with documentation will go there and find out if there was any destruction of property.  

On the third question of increased incapacity of the Police, yes I am aware, absolutely aware of the inadequacy of the facilities of the Police. First, their number is very small and secondly, transport is not adequate. Radio communication is not available the way it should be, so I am aware of that one too. In this coming budget, I think we are going to first improve on the patrol vehicles. 

We had a meeting with the President and he has directed the Ministry of Finance to give us 50 vehicles for patrol. I am sure Tororo will benefit from that. And as I said in my statement again, we are going to make sure those policemen who go on patrol have bullet-proof vests and helmets so that they are protected.  

Hon. Ndeezi, I share your views very strongly. I think we must absolutely protect Article 29. For me, it is in fact sad that we are talking of “strangers”, “invaders” and “foreigners” when referring to Ugandans. One time I was in Soroti and I called my DPC and said, “what is happening here?”  He said, “oh, we have invaders.” I said, “from where?” He said, “From Masindi.” 

Surely we have a duty to educate ourselves first. This is one country and as long as people are not causing insecurity, they must freely move within this country. That is my belief. If people cannot relate to each other within the country, then we are going to have problems In fact, part of the strangeness is because we do not know each other, that is the problem. We do not visit each other!  

Hon. Byamukama says she is disappointed that we are encouraging the practice of nomadism; but nomadism is still with us. We must actually find a way of stopping nomadism. You say we are going to develop a policy of nomadism; we are saying, “how can we help these Ugandans to produce effectively with this going up and down?” That is what we are talking about. 

You also said that I did not mention the issue of ballistics and fingerprint experts. That is another problem. The first issue I want honourable members to understand is that we are going to register the guns we have so that we know them. Ballistics experts come in when they are investigating a crime. But the important thing is to know how many guns we have in this country. That is our biggest problem, and that is where we should put our emphasis.  

Hon. Wagonda, as I said in my interview in the New Vision, there is one source of SMGs, namely the Government. That is officially true. There are however other SMGs which we have found among the wananchi even when we took over. UNLA was here then, it had its own guns, FEDEMU had its own guns, UFM had its own guns. And the common gun, which is easy to get, is the SMG. So, the source is largely Government but there are also some in private hands. There are some people who still harbour them.  

Honourable member from Lango, I do not think I have the figures you want. You want to know how much land and property was lost. I do not have that information. It can only be attained by doing a thorough investigation, and documentation. 

What I probably did not mention is the loss of policemen. I know that some policemen have lost lives; I am aware of it, but I did not want to mention it because we handle that within the force. The losses I shall show are those of the robbers and gangsters, and I would not like to group my policemen with gangsters. I do not think that is fair. 

Hon. Kidega, I do not know whether there is a connection between “ghost” soldiers in the army and the firearms If there is, I do not have that information as yet. I shall find that out. 

Hon. Bamwanga was again raising the question of the source of the SMGs. I think I have answered that question already. They are partly from the Government and partly from private hands. 

Among the people who have been put out of action, we do not have anybody who was active in the security services. Of course training in arms is not something that we do not know in this country. 

People have been trained in many ways, like mchaka mchaka, the civil war, and I am sure hon. Awori also trained with some and he has never handed them over officially. We do not know where they are. But so far, we have not arrested anybody connected with active security details or work.  

I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, and the members for their contribution.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR PATRICK AMURIAT (Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I wish to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for the report that he has presented before this House this afternoon. I am going to make observations on the first part of the Minister’s presentation. 

In his presentation, the Minister observed that the Iteso are living in so many other districts of this country. Indeed they even live outside this country, but I do not think that is enough justification for the Iteso to allow pastoralists to come in big numbers, with so many head of cattle, to occupy wetlands. I see this as intimidatory and a means by which Government is trying to push us into submission. 

I would like to give a brief history of the stay of the said pastoralists, especially those originating from the western part of the country, and probably those coming all the way from Rwanda. Many people - and this has appeared in the press and other media – suggest that the people of Teso are tribalists. I would like to dispute this point of argument and say that the people of Teso are peace loving, the people of Teso have lived with people of different races, let alone those people hailing from the Republic of Uganda. 

It is historically true that before the onset of the insurgency in Teso, we lived with people other than the Iteso. What the Minister does not state very clearly is the fact that these people came as porters. They came to look after our cows. At the time they came to Teso, they did not have a thing. They were paupers, and we were sympathetic to them and accepted them. 

When the same people however got the power and backing of certain undisciplined people in Government, they took advantage of our weakness, they came and claimed the many cows that the Iteso had been able to collect over time. 

I would like to give an example, for I have facts with me. In Abuket village, an old man called Otala employed a herdsman from the west for many years. And this old man acquired a large number of cattle, about 300 head of cattle. When we Iteso became weak, when we did not have the support from the relevant authorities, when Teso was in a state of insurgency, when the people of Teso had no one else to resort to, the herdsman attacked Otala. 

With the use of an undisciplined army, and I remember I said this in the House some time last year, this gentleman who was a porter, a herdsman, came and took away all the 300 head of cattle leaving the old man, Otala, without any property. Besides that, two of his sons got killed. I think that is a very serious situation. 

I have ventured into narrating to this House the background to the problem that these pastoralists create in Teso. Mr Speaker, for anybody to stand here on the Floor of this House or in any other forum and state that these people have land or had land in Teso, is a great mistake. As these people came to look after our cows - and we were very rich people incidentally, and I am proud of that – they were shown small pieces of land to stay on. Most of these pieces of land fall in what we refer to today as the wetland. For these persons to come up and say they have got land that they left behind in Teso is actually nonsense!

In his submission, the Minister of Internal Affairs did educate us about the laws governing wetlands. He said that arising from the several meetings that Government has held with several stakeholders, it has been decided that the pastoralists vacate the wetlands within six months. I feel this is outrageous. 

The presence of the pastoralists in these wetlands was observed towards the end of last year, and Government cannot say they were not informed about their presence. 

Some time in November last year, and the Hansard has it, hon. Epetait the Member of Parliament for Ngora, did point out that a group of pastoralists had come into his county. At the time Government ignored our cry. They only looked at the security perspective, and hon. Muruli Mukasa, the Minister for Security, did come and allay our fears as far as the insecurity originating from these pastoralists was concerned.  

The Government did not make a follow up, and is now coming here, over half a year later, to give another half year to the pastoralists. In any case, we do not know when NEMA is going to give them notice. Suppose it takes another six months before such a notice is given? It would mean that these pastoralists would live in Teso for one and a half years!

Besides that, we have our fears about co- existence, about the relationship between these people who have come into Teso and us. They continue to degrade the wetlands. If you had gone to Abuket, honourable Minister, like your colleagues did, you would have seen the level of felling of trees that has taken place in that wetland. Because of this, I have a fear -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, due to the interest in this subject, please cut short your speech. Make your suggestion as -(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: I am summarising. My fear is that given the six months, the entire vegetation, especially the trees in this wetland, would be cut down. Incidentally we have not lived on those wetlands, we have left them as a preserve of the environment. So, I think it is unfair to the people of Teso who stayed away from the wetlands. That is loss of economic value to them and –(An hon. Member rose_) I am well informed –(Interruption).  

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Speaker, I thank you, and I thank the honourable member for allowing me to give him information. As Minister of State in the sector of Environment, I have to say something about grazing in protected areas and wetlands in particular. 

Grazing per se is not a prohibited activity in wetlands, but establishing a settlement in a wetland is a prohibited activity. That is why NEMA is taking time to study the category of the wetland in question, because it is not usually uniform throughout. 

There are three categories of wetlands as stipulated in the National Environment Statute, 1995, and therefore, seeking an outright eviction or permit for stay in this case is not timely. It is being studied and it will be technically handled.  

Lastly, I wish to say that protected areas, as we know them, under Article 237 of the Constitution are not strictly no-go areas. These include forest reserves and wetlands. The management of protected areas is called “wise use” of these areas. When NEMA comes up with a decision, as it is likely to do, about “wise use”, this should be well understood. Our law allows for wise use of wetlands, including grazing in them.

MR AMURIAT: I thank you very much, honourable Minister, for that information. I am just wondering whether I benefit from it. In my hand is a report that has been produced by NEMA, and I would be very happy to share it with the Minister. For his information, what is going on in the wetland under contention is that the pastoralists have established settlements there. I believe that is against the NEMA Statute.

In conclusion, talking from a humanitarian point of view, the conditions under which these pastoralists live are appalling. There is no sanitation, there is no clean water for them to drink, and that wetland is infested by lots of mosquitoes. In that wetland, there are children, old men and women living there and these people are defecating in the wetlands -(Laughter)- I mean it! 

This wetland is sandwiched by two water masses, which water masses are used for domestic purposes not only in the surrounding villages, but also in the civic centre of Ngora. So, the earlier they leave, and I believe the honourable Minister will agree with me, the better for us all. I thank you very much. 

MS MARY AMAJO (Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the Minister for his report. The Minister’s report however seems to be heavily premised on the fact that these people who are in Teso have something to claim, and that is land. 

I would like to say, and I am old enough to know, that when the pastoralists who were non-Iteso were in Teso, they did not own any land because they were moving from one place to another. And they were happy doing that. There are perhaps a handful of them who can claim some land, but I do not think it is a general statement that they are all going back for their land. 

The Iteso respect property that is left behind by people. I can give you an example of one family of Mambule in Ngora. He left land in Ngora and everybody in that area knows that that piece of land belongs to the family of Mambule. So, it is not right to premise the argument, as the Minister did, on the belief that these people are returning to their land.  

Secondly, I would like to remind the Minister that these pastoralists are not only in the wetlands. In my district of Kaberamaido, they are actually in the forest reserves. And like my colleague who spoke before me said, the people are getting very jittery because we have been telling them not to exploit these forest reserves, and now they see other people who are foreigners –(Interjections)- honourable members, by “foreigners”, I mean the people who are non-Iteso - coming to exploit the land, especially in Kaberamaido and Kasilo. So, the tendency now is for them also to go ahead and exploit these forest reserves. 

I would like to explain to the Minister in charge of Environment that the forest reserves and the wetlands’ exploitation have been exaggerated because even the local people have joined in the exploitation. 
 
Thirdly, I would like to really ask the Minister not to amplify the fact that the Iteso Members of Parliament are criticising the issue. Because you can imagine if your people wake up one day and find herds and herds of cattle in an area with many people over night, what would the reaction be?  This is the kind of reaction we got when we went home. There is tension at home, and we are right to represent the interest of our people by bringing the issues ahead and raising their concern.

I happen to have been involved in the committee that probed Kibaale, and one observation that we made was that when people have these mass movements, it is very difficult even to integrate them in the host communities. 

Also, one observation, which is very glaring, is that this country does not have a resettlement policy. I am therefore wondering, to what extent are we going to do this ad hoc resettlement of people moving in big masses, when we know that it is even very difficult for them to be integrated in the host communities? This is the reason why there is so much tension in Teso now.

I would really like to request the Minister that the six months are too long for the reasons that I have outlined. If it is within six months, let it be within less than one month. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute on this rather emotive subject. I want to say right from the word go, that there have always been pastoralists in our history - nomads becoming settled and others remaining unreputed nomads. I am the grand child of nomads and I am a child of pastoralists; well, not on the move, but settled ones. 

I know that particularly Banyankole families have moved for many years, and settled in many parts of Uganda and lived there very peacefully. I want to say that it is true that many times when they went to settle, as far away as even Acholi and even crossing over into Sudan, they would go because they had lost all their herds. They were trying to start life afresh. 

So, I want to agree with my colleague who just said that very often they arrived with no cows and grazed the cows of other people before they accumulated a herd of their own. Sometimes they would settle in the areas where they had roamed to, sometimes they would return back home, it depended.

But what was common was that they moved in families and not in big groups. One family would become dispossessed and keep moving trying to create wealth.  That was a general pattern. So, I find it a bit odd when now we are talking about big groups moving together. It is unusual in the nomadic culture to move like that - (Laughter). It also becomes even more unusual when they move with guns! Now, that is not usual of our pastoralist, nomadic Kinyankole way of life. This is now a new phenomenon.

Mr Speaker, there are hints of tribalism here, and I want to say that a long time ago, on one side of the House, sat a very old man called Byanyima - we share the same name - and on the other side of the House sat another man called Lakidi, an Acholi. Between themselves, they shared a joke; each one called the other, “Acholi ming.”  And it meant, I am told, that Acholis are foolish. 

This was a story that Lakidi shared with Byanyima on this side about Banyankole herdsmen in Acholi who would arrive with no cows, get a job to graze an Acholi man’s cow, and every time a cow gave birth to a she-cow, he would take the she-cow and give the Acholi man a he-cow and keep accumulating slowly.  Then one day the Acholi man would see the Munyankole man riding a bicycle, and he would say, “but you man, you have just come to graze my cows, where did you get money to buy a bicycle?”  And the Muhima man would say, “the name of my bicycle is Acholi ning”, meaning that “I know my secret and how I made my wealth.”

So, it is true that there was this pattern of dispossessed Banyankole moving and accumulating cattle as they grazed other people’s cattle. But why the tribalism now, why the resentment now?  Because, as I said, here was an Acholi on the other side of Government and an opposition Muhima man making jokes about this thing, and there was never a debate like this before the House. Why do we debate this and why is there a sense of tribalism now? 

I want to lay this problem squarely at the feet of the NRM Government, and I am going to say why. When there was insurgency in Teso, I saw with my own eyes, lorries carrying cows from Teso down to Ankole -(Laughter)- where I come from –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: I thank you very much for giving way, hon. Winnie Byanyima. I have grown up in Ankole, I know very well that the cattle we keep down there are long-horned cattle. When the insurgency was taking place in Teso, fortunately enough I was mature and I was seeing, but I have never seen short-horned cows in Ankole. I would like clarification from hon. Winnie Byanyima as to where those cows were taken and where they are at present?  Thank you very much.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you very much, hon. Byanyima. I would like to give information for the benefit of my colleague and the benefit of the House. Until the crisis in Teso, Ankole region never had a problem of contagious bovine pneumonia. The outbreak of that disease arose from the fact that cattle were transferred. 

The endemic area for that disease is Karamoja, but periodically, every year, the Karimojong cattle would graze in Teso, and with the outbreak of that disease in Ankole, you do not even need anything else - (Laughter).  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Byanyima, it seems your account is that during the insurgency, you saw lorries taking the cattle, will you not be comforted by the argument that now they are returning them to the area? (Laughter)

MS BYANYIMA: Well, Mr Speaker, I was going to come to that. The fact is that, there were some soldiers who misbehaved; who when they went there, instead of suppressing the insurgency, they stole Teso cattle and brought them down to Ankole. 

And I was going to say exactly what my colleague has said. Even the spread of that terrible disease in Ankole came during that period, because of the cattle that were looted from Teso and brought to our region. This matter was even brought to the High Court; there is even a record in the High Court. This evidence was produced in a court matter. This situation –(Interruption)

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I represent Mbarara District here, and certainly, I would like to know the real places where these cows went! Really, this is a very serious matter – calling us thieves is not a joke.  So, I would like to know the places where these cows went. Surely if we stole, then we should really admit, and bring back these cows.

Secondly, I heard the last statement she made, that some soldiers were misbehaving and were bringing cows. I wish to think that it is not only Banyankole who were soldiers in the NRA.  Therefore, if there were soldiers from the whole of the country, is it only the Banyankole soldiers that misbehaved and took the cows to Ankole or the soldiers from the whole country misbehaved and each of them took the cows to different places?

MRS MARY MUGYENYI: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking further clarification from the Member of Parliament for Mbarara Municipality. And here I would like us to be more scientific than sensationalizing a bad situation, and tribalizing this country.  

While I appreciated her analysis of the pastoralist Banyankole and their way of life, which was quite correct, I would like first of all to inform her on two issues: There is nothing like massive movement of Banyankole pastoralists –(Interjections)- because I was there myself. In actual fact, there are not more than five Banyankole families on that Teso land. That is a fact, let us get statistics and you will see it! 

Secondly, there is no factual truth that these Banyankole are carrying guns. That is not true.  Again, that is a lie.

Thirdly, the honourable member said that she saw with her own eyes lorries carrying cattle from Teso to Ankole. Where exactly - on which farms and in which parishes? In which counties or sub-counties were these cows ferried to?  

I am about two years older than the hon. Byanyima, I have lived in Ankole most of my adult life, I was there during the period that she is talking about, but I never saw a single lorry bringing cows from Teso. I challenge her on that. If I can be shown statistics on when and where these cows were settled in Ankole, I would be satisfied.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in view of the exchanges that I have detected now coming on Banyankole, Iteso and so forth, and in view of the position of Government in a statement by the Minister of Internal Affairs, don’t you really think that we could find a better way of handling this problem of Teso without these kinds of exchanges that we are now going to develop?  

I suggest that maybe we find a better way among ourselves, but it is up to you. The Executive has given its position, but it seems we are not satisfied with it. Can’t we find a way ourselves here as Parliament and deal with this situation, other than these exchanges which I am seeing developing into naming tribes? Don’t you think we should conclude that way, hon. Byanyima?

MS BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, it is just that this issue is so emotive. I had not drawn my conclusions; I was making observations. In fact, if my sister, Mary Mugyenyi, was listening carefully, I said we are now talking about masses of people. It is a new phenomenon if people are armed! I had not reached my conclusion. 

I am talking about what I know, and also what I am hearing. What I know for sure is that cows from Teso did come to Ankole.  On that one, I will swear an affidavit if I must! And that this new disease, of which even my family property was a victim of, did come from that region and had never been a problem in Ankole. That is proven. I maintain that cows came from Teso, and I also know for sure that – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I was just asking you, can’t we handle this matter differently? 

MS BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, also there have been other precedents that can make people of Teso uneasy about pastoralists, whom in the past they used to receive without – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I was asking for your assistance in view of these exchanges which are coming in.

MS BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, I thought that if I come to my conclusion – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No. I am asking you whether you do not think we could handle this matter differently, through a committee.

MS BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, I started an intervention and I beg your indulgence to allow me to complete it because – (Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Mr Speaker, is hon. Winnie Byanyima in order to belittle this debate and to derail us? The way this debate is going on, it is going to divide us, and I will not stand here and listen to a debate when it is going clearly in the wrong direction! I am saying this because when you start referring to issues which are to do with – (Mr Eresu rose_) I am moving my point of order.  

THE SPEAKER: Would you please sit down! Hon. Wambuzi, the thing is that members are entitled to hold a general debate on a statement made by the Minister. The honourable member of Mbarara Municipality was doing exactly that! 

I only posed one question arising from the exchanges that were coming in and were dealing with tribes and maybe it would spread from one tribe to another. I only posed a question to find out what she thinks about maybe handling this matter more effectively by our structures rather than continuing with a debate, which will name Acholi, Baganda, Basoga. I was just asking that. But the question was directed to her. I do not know whether she had an answer or somebody else could assist?

MS BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It could be good for maybe a committee to go and study the problem and bring a report. I would support such an approach. But I also beg your indulgence that as I had started my intervention, I am allowed to complete it because it may be difficult to know what it was that I wanted to recommend simply because some honourable colleagues from Ankole are feeling very uncomfortable.

THE SPEAKER: Let the member conclude and then we can see how we proceed.  Please conclude.

MS BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. So, I was saying whereas in the past nomadism was something that people in many parts of the country lived with and pastoralists were accepted, certain other things that have happened recently have made other sedentary people, such as the Iteso, uneasy about receiving nomads again. 

One of them is for example, the forced takeover of ranches in Buganda and Ankole by these same nomads who were supported by the Government and actually led to takeover property that was owned by Baganda and Banyankole ranchers. This probably makes the people of Teso wonder whether this influx will not lead into a takeover of their own land!  

This is a matter that was brought before courts, this is a matter where, as I have said before, a one man Byanyima won a court case against the Government for the takeover of his land by the so-called squatters or so-called nomads who were even grazing cattle looking like cattle from Teso - (Laughter).  

There is a reason why the people of Teso are jittery if they sense that their land is going to be taken over by these nomads in the same way that nomads came and settled on people’s land in Ankole and Buganda and soon became the owners of that land with the support of the Government. So, there is a reason why the Iteso are anxious about this thing.

Then you go further, – I am trying to explain this tribal sensitivity and why I blame the Government - recently, a man who hailed from Kibaale was elected by his people in Kibaale. The President came, put the Constitution aside and pushed this man to step down because he is a Mukiga and not a native of Kibaale – not a Munyoro – (Applause). So, what should the people of Teso think? -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Byanyima, – (Laughter)- don’t you see a problem because the people from Kabale went to Kibaale and settled there, now there is resistance. The people maybe from Ankole are going to Teso and people are preventing them. Then hon. Ndeezi is saying that the Constitution says you can settle anywhere you want. Don’t you see the problem really? Why don’t we really find a way out of this debate?  

MS BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, all I am saying is that there is tribal suspicion and resentment as a result of a Government that keeps shifting and turning to suit political interests and not standing by the Constitution and defending the property and individual rights of Ugandans according to the Constitution.  

The people have no faith that the Government will defend their property and individual rights, but that at a twist, it will come in to favour the group it wants. So, therefore, they are saying let them stay away. We do not trust that the Government will have good intentions towards us always.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would propose that in view of the fact that I believe that the Iteso do not trust the Government as a neutral arbiter in case there was a problem between them and the pastoralists, because they do not trust that these are genuine nomads of old who have not come to grab their land, we need a quick solution to this problem or we risk having insecurity there. Deploying the military to protect them only intensifies the problem and deepens the resentment the people of Teso will have for these people protected by the army. It is better to have a non-military solution and a quick solution. 

This six-month solution seems to be one of those. Their attention will go away, and the problem will not disappear. I do not think the problem will disappear.  I think we have worked ourselves into a corner of suspicion and mistrust. We better solve this before we get a riot on our hands.  

I want to conclude by saying that I know that perhaps most of these people are genuine. Perhaps these are people with their cattle and they are looking for pasture and somewhere to be.  But such has been the politics of this country that people no longer trust what they see.  What they see is not what is.  The Government has been duplicitous, and therefore, they do not trust it. I urge the Government to bring a quick solution to this problem.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR AMURIAT OBOI (Kumi County, Kumi):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In view of the debate and the gravity of the matter on the Floor of the House at the moment, I am basing on Rule 42 of the Rules of Procedure of this House to move a motion.  

Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of this House to be adopted that:

1.Government undertakes to expeditiously resettle the immigrant pastoralists away from the wetlands and forest reserves in Teso in a period of 30 days

2.  Government institutes a commission of inquiry into the loss of livestock in the Teso region during the insurgency of 1986 to 1990.  

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER:  Do we need a debate really? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY 11 JUNE 2002

 
MR ALEX ONZIMA  (Maracha County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  But strictly seven minutes.

MR ONZIMA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to say – (Interruption)

MS MUGERWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minister’s report was basically on two parts: The part which was touching on Teso and another part which was touching on a general debate. I am referring to the second part, which touches on the general debate, particularly since I even lost my brother on the 24th of June. Sir, I wanted to make a general comment, which I feel actually touches my heart and also the public at large.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, my advice is, we have moved to the next item on the Order Paper, but this is also a general debate, and since it is a general debate, you can cover whatever you wanted to contribute on the other part of the statement.

MR ONZIMA:  Mr Speaker, I want to talk about good governance as reflected in the President’s address.  When the Movement took over power in 1986, many of us got excited because of the political upheavals the country had passed through. We had a lot of hope that this time round, we would see achievements in politics, in the economy and other social aspects in this country.  Of course as they progressed, we saw in 1989 the expansion of the NRC. I witnessed it. The elections, particularly in our area, went on smoothly. 

In 1994 we had the CA elections. I was also happy about the CA elections, particularly in my region where there was no intimidation. They did not involve a lot of money and other unnecessary things attached to the elections of late. 

In the 1996 parliamentary and presidential elections, and more so in the parliamentary elections, things started to change. This idea of individual merit started turning sour. 

We all know that for areas like Rukungiri, where those people were not on our side then, the Semwogereres were stoned because they wanted to deny them the opportunity to sell themselves to the people of this country. Then of course we are all familiar with what happened last year both in the presidential and parliamentary elections. 

Gradually now, it is becoming clearer that under the Movement system, and more so under individual merit, people who do not have enough money are losing the opportunity of leading this country.  I know of my friends here who told me that they had to spend well over 80 million shillings to come to this House. They are saying they are not going to contest the next elections. 

For posters for nomination and going to other places, I had to spend 8.4 million shillings in my constituency. There are so many Ugandans in Maracha who are probably even more capable to represent Maracha in this House and yet because they cannot raise that money, they cannot dream of contesting to come to represent Maracha in this Parliament.  I know it is not only in Maracha, but it is also in so many other places.  

What NRM came up with as democracy is gradually eroding and degenerating into an autocracy, whereby if you are not rich, you do not stand a chance to become a leader in this country. It is very unfortunate! 

Some of the people who walked barefooted into the capital city to capture power in 1986 can raise money to contest for the presidency, but for people who do not have the money, there is no opportunity for them. This is why some of us are saying that we should re-open the space and change the political management of this country.

I want to congratulate the people of Zambia for having an ideal Parliament. When Chiluba wanted to amend the Constitution so that he could stand for a third term, contrary to what is stipulated in the Constitution, his Vice President, ministers and MPs in the ruling party said “no”. 

Recently, just last week in Malawi, the President again wanted to behave like Chiluba, the Parliament said “no”. So, I envy the people of Zambia and the people of Malawi, and I am only praying that at one time the Parliament of Uganda will behave like the parliaments of those countries - (Laughter).  

MR MWANDHA: I just want to seek clarification from the honourable member on the Floor as to whether he doubts that when the time for our President to leave comes, the President is likely to behave like Bakili Muluzi behaved.

MR ONZIMA: Well, I think I said that last year. If you were not there, you should have read it in the papers. But of course it is just thinking aloud. It could be true; it could not be true.  

I also want to say something about this issue of putting blame every time on Obote and his UPC. For those of us who belong to the medical profession, if a person presents himself or herself before you for medical attention, you are supposed to investigate the complaint of that person. After thorough investigation, you come to a diagnosis.  After the diagnosis, you give the appropriate treatment. 

I want to tell all Ugandans that we the people in Maracha, and I suppose also other parts of Uganda sympathize with what happened in Buganda here in 1966. We also sympathize with what took place in Luwero when the then NRA was battling with the UNLA - the massive killing in and around here and other parts of the country. We also sympathise with the atrocities caused by the Idi Amin Government. But it is not enough for leaders in this country to heap blame on Obote and not talk about what really caused Obote to bring problems to this country. We also know that at the time of independence–(Interruption)

MRS SEBAGEREKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, honourable member for giving me the Floor. I would like to inform the honourable member that once you are a leader and some atrocities are committed during your term of office, your name will still be talked about. For example, it is ages ago since Hitler led Germany, but Hitler is still being talked about. Indira Ghandi and all other leaders are also still being talked about. 

I do not see why the honourable member thinks that it is bad to refer to Obote. He was a past leader, he is still alive and the atrocities are still clear in our minds. I just want to inform my colleague that this is the course of the day and we have to take it by the horns! Thank you.

MR ONZIMA: Well, I wish you had only waited a little bit longer. I am not saying that we should not blame Obote for what happened, what I am opposed to is saying that Obote should be blamed 100 percent for that. First of all, who were the people responsible for creating the opportunity for Obote to become a Prime Minister and then a President of this country? When the people had the first post-independence elections, an opportunity was given to the people of Uganda to elect the Government, –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Onzima, you have only one minute.

MR ONZIMA: Okay. We had an opportunity to get a leader probably from the Democratic Party, but the Wazungu, who were to hand over political power to Ugandans, connived with the Buganda Kingdom. The people here had indirect elections, and after that, they instituted a plan by the colonialists so that the Kingdom could marry; a political marriage was created between the kingdom and the wazungu. 

This arrangement was based on religion because the white man wanted to also maintain his superiority in his religion. A situation was created whereby the Democratic Party lost an opportunity to lead this country. I strongly believe that if the DP had won, I do not think any crisis would have happened to the extent as it is today.  

In my view, I attribute 25 percent of the blame of atrocities on Obote, 35 percent on the British who set that political marriage between the Baganda and UPC, which caused a lot of problems, and 40 percent on the Baganda who accepted to get married politically with Obote and cause us problems We must blame all the parties concerned, but do not say “Obote”, “Obote” all the time, just because we want to make political capital out of this Kingdom of Buganda. Thank you.

PROF. TARSIS KABWEGYERE (Igara West, Bushenyi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join all those who have spoken before me to appreciate the contribution of the President in his national address. I take this opportunity to address four points very quickly, and I hope I have time to speak more.  

The first point I want to address is what is happening in Durban today, the formation of the African Union, which is taking over from the Organization of African Unity. I think we should, in this House, recognize this as another milestone in the advancement of Africa, with all the limitations that we have had. Each time you start a journey and you move one inch, I think you are advancing.  

Africa has seen many stages: the stage of independence, the stage of coups and counter coups, and now we are looking at a serious possibility of an African government, an African approach to issues and, therefore, a strengthening of the African people.  

In this meeting in Durban, it is also an occasion when the Pan African Parliament is going to be talked about. As a Parliament here, we should be listening in and waiting to hear more of what the assembly in Durban decides as to the final content of what the African Parliament or Pan African Parliament will look like.  I thought we should take note of that. 

There is a lot of work to be done, it is true, but what else is there because human society is about solving problems Sometimes you fail, sometimes you succeed; and that is why some of us talk about the old leaders, but we also recognize the contributions that were made.  

With all eyes on Africa now, we can actually see that something has happened and we are even talking of intervening in internal affairs when a threat of genocide is anticipated. So, I think we are moving, and certainly we would like to welcome the formation of a Pan African Parliament, which will actually include people from this country, people from this House. When that time comes, certainly some of us would want to make our points.  

The second issue I would like to talk about is the problem which has engaged this House this whole afternoon, the question of security, the question of citizenship. I sometimes feel desperate when I see how some of us address these issues. Instead of looking at the economic backwardness of our societies that is forcing people to move from one corner to another, we are instead bothered about these foreigners entering our territory.  

Instead of wondering how we can move from a situation like you have in Kigezi, people eking existence from a small piece of land, and now moving out to another piece of land where they are actually also eking for their existence using a hoe, we are saying this one was the legitimate leader and so on and so forth. 

What if these people who moved from Kabale went to Kibaale and they were working in an industry, do you think it would be the same problem? Why aren’t we leaders now looking for a formula to liberate these people from moving from one corner with cows, chasing cows and staying in swamps?  

We are saying it is our people, when in fact tomorrow it may be Iteso moving into Kabale or from Kabale into Fort Portal. I think we really have a burden to carry, and I wonder why we look at some of these issues as if there is no tomorrow!  

Let me not mention names, but the situation in Kibaale, to me, presents a bigger problem than people have been looking at. Perhaps it is because I have been involved for nearly four years now in the Buruli peace talks. 

People have been killing each other and you wonder for what reason. If anybody were to insist that you can have a person of this origin in an area like Kibaale to be the chairman and the people do not want him, people in this House advocate a presence of soldiers to protect the person who has been elected!

Democracy protected by guns following an individual wherever he is cannot work. We are wearing democracy like people wear beads. We must look at the stage at which we have reached in building democracy. If Uganda was a democratic country, people would move anywhere they wanted, people would own properties anywhere they wanted and it would not be an issue like we seem to be talking about. 

My serious worry arises from an experience of what happened in Rwanda. Why would people with their senses, human beings like all of us, engage in killing one million people? What had really gone wrong that was so fundamental that you should commit such an atrocity like what happened? We are still having that dilemma of coming to a solution.

When we are talking about inter-relations or interaction between different groups, this House should be looking at how we can liberate the people from a disease. Backwardness is a disease! Poverty is a disease! How can we liberate people from engaging in actions like Kony does? Does Kony have a programme for people?  How do we get around it?  

In fact, Mr Speaker, my last point is on how we can create trust between the leaders in Acholi and the leaders in Government. I am talking about a mutual trust so that the two can work together to handle a problem that is a menace to all of us. How do you create that trust that creates bridges? 

To me, the honourable Members of Parliament from the area do not feel that the Government is doing the right thing; the Government thinks it is doing the right thing, and the people are suffering!  Something must happen so that we create mutual trust, so that when hon. Reagan Okumu is talking, he can talk a language that the Government is talking as they help the people of Acholi to recover from this disaster. Kony is an enemy to both Reagan Okumu, and to Museveni and to all of us. 

We must be united in facing these problems like we have been united in facing AIDS.  If one group goes in one direction and another goes in another direction, we are not getting anywhere. I thank you, Sir, for tolerating me for a few more minutes.

MS JENIPHER NAMUYANGU (Woman Representative, Pallisa):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I want to add my voice to those who have thanked the President for a comprehensive speech.  I am going to make a few observations: 

On page 12 of the President’s speech, that is on water, he talks about standard works. I want to agree with him and note that in some areas like Pallisa, many boreholes that were sunk have already dried. I believe this is due to poor quality work, and I do not know if the Minister is going to come up with a programme to work on such anomalies.  

I know that most of these boreholes were just drilled up to a certain level. They did not reach the real water table, and it has become a real problem because money was given out to the people who worked on these boreholes and right now they are dry.

The other issue I want to note is on page 14 of the President’s speech, where he talks about preventive measures for diseases. This is true, but on the other hand, we realise that there are some diseases like rabies, which are very rampant in my constituency. We have already lost some people just because there are some wild dogs. 

As much as there is a campaign to carry out vaccination on wild animals, these people are normally bitten by wild dogs that have rabies. And when the dogs bite people, when they try to go to the hospitals they are told that there are no drugs.  

There was a victim who was bitten by a dog and he was referred to Mbale Regional Hospital, but Mbale Regional Hospital had no drugs. He was referred to Iganga, but Iganga had no drugs.  Eventually he was referred to Entebbe. But looking at the economy of our people, somebody cannot really afford, after moving to those various areas, to come to Entebbe, hence loss of life.

There is also another issue on co-operative societies, this is on page 9, where the President says he is going to make people access credit at sub-county level –(Interruption)

CAPT. MUKULA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way. I would like to inform my honourable colleague from Pallisa that the Ministry of Health has stock of the rabies vaccine. And I will be very glad at an appropriate time if she will be able to get in touch and see how we can effectively restock the area as soon as we can.  

It is also important that the nation gets to know that we are now launching a major thrust to make sure that some of these very sensitive vaccines, which have a life span, can be stocked in regional hospitals, so that if you have a case like that one, one is called upon to increase capacity in the lower organs of the health delivery mechanism. I thank you.

MS HYUHA: Thank you very much for giving way, hon. Namuyangu. I just wanted to supplement what the honourable Minister has stated.  As chairperson of the Social Services Committee, I have always received a copy of communication from the Director General of Health Services copied to all directors of Health Services, that vaccines worth 1,100 have been sent to the district. And for the month of June, I have already received that circular, and I believe that these vaccines have always gone to the district. So, I think the onus is on us to find out where exactly these vaccines go; why don’t they reach hospitals? 

Although, I would wish to agree with her, because in certain cases I have also experienced some problems in my district, whereby a wild dog bites somebody and when we go to a hospital we cannot find a vaccine. So, I will at least request the Ministry to give out this circular, which I have always received - that these vaccines go to the district- so that we find out whether they reach the rightful places. I thank you very much.

MS NAMUYANGU:  I want to thank the Minister and the chairperson of the Social Services Committee for the information.  

Mr Speaker, I was on the issue of co-operatives.  On page 9, the President talks about co-operative societies at the sub-county level. I am aware that we had co-operatives upcountry, and as I talk now in most areas, the co-operatives are not functional. I want to know the logic as to why, in the first instance, the co-operatives were abolished and what logic is there in renewing or bringing them back?
 
When we talk of value addition on agricultural products, I am also aware –(Interruption)

PROF. RUGUMAYO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and honourable member, thanks for giving way. The co-operatives were not abolished; they died a natural death through mismanagement and swindling by managers of the co-operators’ money. It is as simple as that. It was mismanagement through misappropriation of co-operators’ money. 

So, that is why we want these new co-operatives to be member-driven and member-managed, so that the clever guys do not swindle these people again. And we shall put in place a regulatory framework, which will ensure that the properties and wealth of the co-operators are protected, and we are working hard on that, Mr Speaker.  I thank you.

MS NAMUYANGU: Mr Speaker, I thank you and I want to thank the Minister. I was talking about value addition. The President suggests value addition, especially when we are going to market our products through AGOA. But some of us who come from cotton growing areas, you realise that most of the ginneries are non-functional. Some ginneries were sold off by the people who bought them but had not been able to manage them, and many have collapsed. 

I wonder if Government is coming up to build new ginneries and unions, or if they are going to allow the investors to continue. Maybe Government should come up with a policy that whoever buys these ginneries should be able to maintain them, so that we do not end up travelling long distances in search of ginning machines for our cotton.

On page 18, the President talks of electricity. In some of the areas, the rural people have come up with their own initiatives like buying electric poles and even paying for labour to dig holes, but some of them are now stuck. I have an example in my constituency in one of the sub-counties - that is Buseta - people have done that, but now they are stuck. I will request the Minister of Energy to come in and do the needful. Mr Speaker, as I wind up -(Interruption)

MS SYDA BBUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable colleague for giving way. I really want to thank the people of Pallisa for the effort they have put in to electrify their area.  But I have stood here several times and stated that we are now going to promote the Rural Electrification Plan and Strategy. 

Under this plan, the private sector is going to be intensified.  They are going to be given money with high subsidies at very low interest rates to go and implement re-electrification in the villages. 

One of the primary reasons we want re-electrification is because we want to activate economic activities in the areas.  So I want to assure my honourable sister that under this new programme, funding was approved in the last session. There are going to be lots of opportunities for taking power to the rural areas. 

I would like, as I give information to the honourable colleague, to inform all the members that the opportunities for electrifying the rural areas are now abundant. I would like to request them to motivate the private sector to come in and take opportunity of this golden chance. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS NAMUYANGU: I want to thank the Minister, but I hope that when she starts her programme, she will give priority to those who have already lifted the luggage.  

As I wind up, during the Presidential campaigns, the President brought up an issue of 3,000/- as graduated tax for beginners and those who are poor. But people throughout the country took it that everybody was supposed to pay 3,000/=.  I have gone explaining to my people, but they say that they do not believe in anybody; they only believe in the President. They are saying that if the President could make a statement telling them about the changes that have occurred, it would be good enough for them and they would abide by that –(Interruption)

MS BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you my sister for giving way. I just wish to inform my sister that if the people of Pallisa and the rest of the country vote wisely next time, it will be zero graduated tax –(Laughter)- The graduated tax will be completely abolished.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

MS NAMUYANGU: Mr Speaker, I want to inform my dear colleague that the people of Pallisa are content that they voted wisely - (Laughter).   

As I wind up, I would like to say that we appreciate the UPE programme in schools. But I want to note that it is high time Government came up with a policy on nutrition in these schools, because in many schools, children are going without lunch and it has affected the performance of these children.  

Mr Speaker, I want to end by thanking you for this opportunity.  Thank you very much.

MS OKOT SANTA (Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this time to give my presentation.  

I am reacting to the President’s State of Nation Address on the point of security, which is on page 5. The President indeed, in his speech, stated that security is the basic right for our people in this country, and he went further to say that one of his objectives is to strengthen our army in capacity and then training.  He went further to say that the army will deal with all the rebels or all the groups which will be disturbing the country.  

I am informing this House that my people in Pader District are not being protected by the army as indicated in the President’s speech to the nation.  I say this with a lot of proof, Mr Speaker.  

On Saturday we left here in two groups to go to Gulu District, after which we proceeded to Pader District.  We left in two groups: one group was the Acholi Parliamentary Group and then the second group were the journalists picked from the different sections. We went with 19 journalists.  

The reason we went with these journalists was to make them our ambassadors to try to explain to the Government and the public about what is happening in Pader District. And also for another reason, because it was alleged by a Member of Parliament in this House and another member, who is not a Member of Parliament but is a senior officer who works in the Secretariat, that the Acholi Members of Parliament are rebel collaborators, they are agents of these Kony rebels, they are commissioners; and it was also supported by the Minister of Defence -(Interruption)

LT COL KATIRIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I hope the honourable Member of Parliament on the Floor is referring to me. Mr Speaker, I have already asked for an opportunity from you to allow me to make a statement in this House, and which statement is also possibly in the hands of some of the members.  But we have explained that the honourable members from the Acholi sub-region who are being referred to are not the entire group of the Acholi Parliamentary Group. We are referring to a group of honourable Members of Parliament from Acholi who called a press conference on Tuesday. And if you allow me, I will make a full statement so that all the members of the House can get the facts right instead of going around the point when the statement is already in my hands ready to be given to the House.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The problem is that currently, hon. Santa got onto the Floor to contribute to the debate.  But I want to inform the House that I have received a copy of a personal statement from hon. Katirima about the matter, and because of the busy schedule we had today, it was not possible to accommodate him for today. He will make his full statement tomorrow. 

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I want to thank hon. Santa for giving way. I just want to put records correct. I was present when the issue the honourable member is talking about was raised by hon. Okumu Reagan. It is not true that the Minister of Defence supported the document that hon. Okumu Reagan was talking about. The Minister categorically disassociated himself from that document. He informed Parliament that he had not read it.  

What the Minister said is that Kony has got groups of politicians who are advocating for him using the current status of democracy we have in the country.  He did not support the document from Kajabago Karusoke, which was talking about Members of Parliament. That is what I wanted to correct, Mr Speaker.

MR OKOT SANTA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I believe all the honourable members, if not only a few, were not in this House when the Minister was meandering with his statement as he was explaining about this statement of Karusoke and hon. Katirima. None of us understood the information, because each time he was not very direct in his explanation –(Interjections)- Can I proceed, Mr Speaker. 

I am giving this information because I was on the ground. We left here on Saturday with Members of Parliament from Acholi and the reporters. We wanted the reporters to give their views, and the reporters we went with were not only Acholi; if anything, there was only one journalist who was an Acholi, they were Banyankole, Baganda and all other tribes. So, we wanted them to give their view because it seems as if whatever statement we make here is misunderstood by some few groups of people who know better about how the rebellion in the north started and how it will end.

I made a statement that my people are not being protected because I witnessed it myself. They are now between three fires: The rebels have already denied the people from living in the protected camps. We found out that most of the protected camps have already been burnt, and as they burn the huts, they write letters stating that people should vacate the camps.  As the people leave the camps to go and hide in the villages and caves, the UPDF mobile forces chase them from the bush to go back to the camp. 

That is why I say they are between fires; and it is not just a matter of chasing them, the men are beaten and chased from the bush back to the camps, and the women are raped. We are very sure that they are going to get different types of diseases. Already, when we went to Awer camp, about 12 women testified that they were tested and found to be having syphilis.

I go further to say that my people are not being protected because the soldiers who are supposed to protect them are very few. But each time I read statements in the papers that security in the north is being beefed! I do not know where some of the soldiers have gone! I do not know why they have left soldiers in Sudan and yet the rebels are already in Uganda.  

Mr Speaker, yesterday I was in Pader District, in Patongo sub country where an attack took place. We found that when the rebels came, they overrun the barracks and the soldiers run together with the civilians. The commander took off naked, and his clothes followed him to wherever he was hiding! 

Up to the time when I left Pader District, there were very few soldiers as you go along the road - because I drove in my car without any protection. When we went to Gulu to beg for protection, I was told to follow a long protocol, which I could not wait for, because I was anxious to go and see the people in the district – (Interruption)

MAJ. BUTIME: Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the honourable Member of Parliament for Pader.  Can she tell us who this battalion commander who was naked was? What rank was he? What time did the attack take place? Where was the honourable Member of Parliament? When were the clothes put on? And what rank was the soldier who followed the commander who ran away?  

I am asking this, Mr Speaker, because in an operational area, there is no commander anywhere in the world who will sleep in bed or in his trench naked. That cannot happen anywhere in the world. I challenge you to tell me what rank, which battalion commander, and the platoon, if you can, because you seem to understand these things a great deal; isn’t it so? Then I will really follow up this matter as a senior officer in UPDF.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS OKOT SANTA: I thank you very much, honourable Minister, for those questions. First of all, I do not know your name. And two, I even do not know which Ministry you are in. To inform you, honourable Minister, I am a wife of a UPDF soldier. My husband died in 1994 in battle, and I know what it means. 

I also want to inform you that I represent the people of Pader. I do not represent the UPDF.  What I am telling you was from the ground. I got this information after assembling all the local leaders; even the commander who replaced the one who took off naked yesterday was not wearing his pips. He only told us that his name was Captain Faruk Lumumba, but he was not wearing his pips. And I believe the reason he was not wearing his pips was because of fear that if anything happens- because the barracks was overrun completely- when you die, the pips remain and they will know that you are a captain. 

So, I want to inform you that I was a wife to a UPDF soldier. My husband was a senior soldier; and not all the soldiers who are in the battlefield sleep with their clothes on them, because I have the experience – (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, allow me to now give you a detailed report of what happened in Patongo sub-county. We found that 19 people were abducted from the sub-county -(Interruption)

MAJ. BUTIME: Mr Speaker, I am RO811, Maj. Tom Butime – not retired - Member of Parliament Mwenge North, Kyenjojo District and Minister of State for Foreign Affairs. I am also a historical, and I fought from 1981 to 1986, but I was not sleeping with women in an operational area.  So, if you were sleeping with your husband, that was not in an operational area but a different place in the barracks.  I thank you.

MS OKOT SANTA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank him for that information. But like he said himself, my husband was also one time in the battlefield, and I know what happened to him that I cannot explain here.  What I know, Mr Speaker, is that all those soldiers who are on the frontline with their women in their mama ingiya pole are not doing the best in terms of security. When an attack comes, instead of jumping out to begin the war, he first takes his child or the wife to hide somewhere else.  As he comes back, the war is over. 

I would like to inform the Minister, if he can possibly inform the Minister of Defence that the UPDF who are on the frontline should be checked, and possibly their wives stay somewhere else as they do the operation - (Ms Nankabirwa rose_) Mr Speaker, I wanted to wind up

THE SPEAKER: I think, honourable Minister, you will get the information; you will check on it.  

MS OKOT SANTA: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much.  I had not finished with the three fires. The information we got from the people also is that when the helicopter is flying above cross-checking whether the rebels have come, they spray bullets not knowing whether you are in the garden or you are in the swamp fetching water, and so many people get affected. This is the information I wanted to give. 

This is the result of what took place in Patongo sub-county, and the local leaders gave this documentation to me. First, I want to inform you that 19 people were abducted, including one policeman, school children and two teachers. They have not come back home.  

I also wish to inform you that 39 huts were burnt, and the school which was affected most was Patongo Primary School. They burnt nine huts which were teachers’ quarters, and they killed one of the teachers; he was shot as he was running out of his house. So, in total - I do not know the number of soldiers who died, but the war started from the barracks, and I understand it was commanded by a woman rebel with a child on her back - five people died and four vehicles were burnt down. This is the information I got from Patongo sub-county. 

The people of Pader District have requested Government for more protection. Soldiers are not enough; they are already tired of the war because it has taken long. You find that in a detach, there are about eight or ten soldiers. They cannot always outweigh the number of rebels. The people of Pader, who are also suffering, have requested me to inform the Government that they need food because many of the huts were burnt with properties and foodstuffs inside, and they are now under trees.  

In Patongo yesterday, they had formed a small committee to collect food. If you have maybe more than what you can eat, you take it to the committee and later on in the evening, it will be divided and distributed to the affected people. In the same way, they were also looking for those who have used blankets and maybe clothes which they are not being using, to send them there so that they distribute them to the people.  

Honourable members, I also request, if you have gomesis and coats which you are no longer using, you send them to me so that I send them to the affected people of the district. This is the information I wanted to give to the House as far as rebels are concerned. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR VINCENT NYANZI: Mr Speaker, before this year, I happened to be a minister of state for sometime. When I was in that office, every time we were being instructed by the Leader of Government Business to come to attend Parliament daily in order to make sure that we clarify issues raised by Members of Parliament.  

Now, what I have learnt, most probably from last week, is whenever a minister stands to give information, Members of Parliament do not accept!  Many of them are giving us wrong information because many of them need to make headlines in papers. The next day you find wrong information in the papers; our people are fed up of reading wrong information in papers!  

On a point of procedure, Mr Speaker, shouldn’t these ministers come here to give us right information about issues concerning their ministries?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not think what you have stated is correct in the sense that I have not seen any minister who was prevented from giving information –(Interjection)- well I will explain. You must have strength to make this observation because of what has happened today. 

The ministers have been coming and they have been giving information. It was only at the last stage of hon. Santa Okot’s submission when she said she had information that I told the Minister to please wait and receive the information instead of coming in to react. But the Ministers have stood here: the Minister for Health stood, the Minister for Internal Affairs gave information, the Minister for Trade gave information, and the Minister for Energy gave information.  So what is the statistics?

MR CHRISTOPHER MBALIBULHA KIBANZANGA (Busongora South, Kasese):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There are very many issues to talk about, but we do not have the time. I would like to zero on the security situation in northern Uganda. I thank Government because they have tried to cool down the security situation in western Uganda by defeating the ADF thugs. But the situation in northern Uganda is really worrying us. Some of us who were born in situations like that one in northern Uganda understand the language Members of Parliament from northern Uganda are using. Some of us even get worried when we see the members of the Front Bench trying to confuse a situation, which they cannot explain. I would like to suggest -(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member has made a very serious allegation that members of the Front Bench stand in this august House and confuse issues they are unable to explain. Is the honourable member in order to make such an allegation without substantiating the allegation he is making? Is he in order to make such a serious allegation about honourable members of this House, who are as competent at their job as he is at his?   

THE SPEAKER: Well, if the member’s view is that ministers stand here with an intention to confuse, then that is imputing an improper motive on the ministers’ side. They may give an explanation, which may not be satisfying, but that does not mean that they are confusing. Perhaps the member can substantiate. Can you substantiate before I rule on the issue of deliberately confusing the House?

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. 

THE SPEAKER: Was it a slip of the tongue then?

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What I am saying is, the situation in northern Uganda has gone on for –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable member, you accused the ministers of confusing the House. If you know that they deliberately come here to confuse you, then you substantiate it. Otherwise, by not doing so, you are imputing improper motives on the ministers and that is out of order. Since you cannot substantiate -(Interruption) 

MR KIBANZANGA: I can substantiate, Mr Speaker. It is not always easy for me to withdraw my statements. The situation in northern Uganda has gone on for 17 years. People have spoken about it, but whenever the issue is raised on the Floor, you see several ministers standing up with uncoordinated statements. Why do you not listen first then co-ordinate your statements through the Leader of Government Business? He can then be able to give us a statement that is correctly researched. Why don’t you do that?

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting they get confused or they are confused? Those are two different things -(Laughter). Confusing means giving you information that confuses you, but if it is confusion among themselves, that has nothing to do with you. I think we should end this matter here. It is out of order to impute an improper motive of the ministers, but proceed anyway.

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was saying that the situation in northern Uganda is really worrying most of us. And those of us who were born in such a situation really understand it. We know war. 

Why some of us get more confused is that we are told that Kony is not very strong militarily. He is not very strong because he has always avoided the military deployments. Despite that, Kony has waged his successful war against unarmed civilians for 17 years. We are told Kony does not have a political agenda, but his acts speak louder than what he is claiming he is fighting for. So if Kony does not have a political agenda, why has it taken Government 17 years to defeat this Kony? 

Recently Kony was declared a terrorist. When the Americans were hit, we were asked to bring a bill to denounce what happened in America. I understand that Kony was declared an international terrorist then. Why can’t we, as a country, as the world, gang up against this Kony? If we supported the Americans, why don’t they support us? 

I thank Government for having restored relations with the Sudan. The sincerity of this relationship is however what is worrying most of us. Sudan has at least confirmed that they supported Kony, but all of a sudden it is behaving as if it cannot meet with him. Why? Mr Speaker, even some leaders in the Government of Uganda confirmed that they have been supporting Garang, and to me the mere relationship that the Government of Uganda -(Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank my brother for giving way. The honourable member has raised a lot of issues, beginning with telling us that LRA has been in existence for 17 years now, which I highly doubt. He is also making serious allegations that Sudan is making a U-turn, and that is not possible, given the bilateral co-operation deal we signed.

When he says that Sudan is not serious in supporting Uganda, I get worried. As far as I am concerned, we are moving on with Sudan behind us. They support our presence in their territory and we are there to look for Kony. We are getting some setbacks, which my sister was talking about, and we call them diversionary. 

Kony is strategizing, he wants us to move away from Sudan, come back to Uganda and chase these few groupings of his so that he can find time to go –(Ms Byanyima rose_) I am just giving information, the Floor is not mine. Mr Speaker, I would request that I give this information and sit down, and then the honourable member will seek her clarification.

THE SPEAKER: Well, clarification is always sought with the permission of the person holding the Floor, and she has declined to take whatever you want to pass on to her.

MS BYANYIMA: Point of order, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Oh! What has developed within a minute? Let her proceed then you shall be able to make the point later.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. From the point of view of the Ministry of Defence and Government, we have not reached a point of saying that Sudan is not helping Uganda. So far we are moving on well with Sudan. Sudan has assisted us to attack some of the camps of the LRA, and we returned some of the weapons that we captured from the LRA. Therefore, when my colleague stands here and says that Sudan is not supporting us, I get worried. 

He also asked why it has taken us long to finish off Kony. I want to inform him that the ADF, which he appreciates that we dealt with, was part of our delay in dealing with the LRA. Now that we are finished with ADF, I want to restore hope in Ugandans that we shall deal with this problem in the north. 

You asked, “Why is America not assisting us?” I think you have missed the point. America has come in to help us in negotiations with our sister Sudan and this is the result. The protocol we signed is a result of America coming in, because we have to move together globally to fight terrorists. Kony is one of the terrorists, so Americans came in and they are assisting us. 

Those are the few remarks that I wanted to make, and the information I had to give my colleague. Thank you very much.

MR KIBANZANGA: I really thank the Minister for her information, and I am eagerly waiting for the result of this relationship with Sudan. The biggest element in the security question of northern Uganda is Kony and Garang, nothing else! The fact that now the Government of Sudan is simply behaving as if they have never met Kony, as if they cannot relocate Kony –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, whereas you can talk and criticize many things in the country, when it comes to a foreign country like Sudan, which we are working with, debating and criticizing it here is really counter productive. If the Government of Uganda itself has accepted that Sudan is assisting them, then that rests the matter. For you to come here and criticize a foreign country, I think, does not impress anyone –(Applause). You can criticize what is happening here though; it is your country.

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I only pray that this new relationship results into something positive for our people, so that we do not give them false hope.

In the President’s speech, he tackled the issue of attracting investors to this country. It is a positive move, but the President was saying that there are some people - apart from Parliament, which he is always accusing - who are sabotaging his investment efforts. Mr Speaker, the President identified officials in the department of Uganda Investment Authority. This is very bad and I want the Executive to deal with them. 

On the same issue, it should not always be very easy for people to attain work permits in this country. We still have a very weak economy and we have some people coming in, posing as investors, only to end up as international hawkers and crooks. As much as we are crying for international investors, there is a need to protect our younger business community. 

On the producers’ associations and AGOA, our emphasis on agriculture as a means to fight poverty is a positive step in the right direction. A number of members have talked about it, but some of us do not know how these producers’ associations will be different from the co-operatives; and if they are not, then we better think first before we start them again. 

On emphasis on agriculture as a way to fight poverty, I have this to say: Our peasants have tried their level best to do what they can with their meagre resources. The problem we have in this country is that we give the peasants false hope. You can imagine growing cotton and at the time of planting, you are promised Shs 400 per kilo, but at the time of picking, you get only Shs 200 or Shs 150. It is really frustrating to our farmers. 

I am appealing to Government that if it thinks that agriculture will eradicate poverty, then we must guarantee the prices of our produce. Let Government come up to guarantee the price of cotton, let Government guarantee the price of coffee. Otherwise we are wasting time. We are demoralizing our peasants. 

It is good that Government has realized that entandikwa, by only dishing out miserable funds to the peasants, cannot help. I call upon the Government to stop this entandikwa. Instead, assist peasants through their means of production. Entandikwa has a lot of problems One of them is disrupting the rural set up; therefore, I advocate that we subsidize our farmers, let us guarantee their prices instead. 

I do not know whether these co-operatives will reduce the rate of middlemen who only cheat our farmers. If you can guarantee the prices of produce, my people in Busongora South do not need the Shs 50,000 entandikwa, which only gives them the false hope that everyone can become a businessman. Some of us were born farmers and we were born peasants. You can only extend a hand to us through our means of production; guarantee our prices.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I sense that honourable members are tired, but I have recorded the names of those who want to contribute and I will start with you tomorrow. Thank you for your kind attention. We have come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.53 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, July 10 2002 at 2.00 p.m.)

