Wednesday, 5 July 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Chairman, Joseph Ekemu, in the Chair.)

The Council was called order.

MOTION FOR ADJOURNMENT OF THE COUNCIL

THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Mr Eriya Kategaya): Mr Chairman, I beg to move a Motion for the adjournment of the Debate on the Budget, so that we can discuss some matter of definitely national importance.  As you are all aware there is a Motion on the Floor of the House which was moved by the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning on 16th June, 1994, which is waiting to be seconded and fully debated.  

In conformity with rule 28, of the NRC Interim Rules of Procedure, I beg to move that the Debate on the Motion on the Floor of the House be adjourned to enable me initiate another debate on a definite matter of urgent public importance; and if my Motion is acceptable to the House I proceed to invoke the relevant rule to reinstate the Motion on the Communication from the Chair made to this Council by His Excellency the President on 16th June 1994.  

It will be recalled that the Motion was debated and concluded - without the approval of the Council, because a number of issues raised by the Members during the Debate were not adequate addressed by the time the debate ended on Thursday, 16 June 1994.  The purpose of my Motion is to adjourn the debate on the Motion on the Floor to enable Government make its response where required in order to satisfy the concerns of the NRM Members.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  The Motion moved under Rule 28 is it supported by Members? (Interruption)

 HON. MEMBERS: Yes, yes.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Very well hon. the Prime Minister you can ago ahead to move your Motion.

THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Mr Eriya Kategaya): Mr Chairman, the Motion for the Resolution under rule 39(3) of the Interim Rules of Procedure of the NRC.  Rule 39(3) states it shall not be out of order to attempt to consider any specific question upon which the Council has taken a decision during the current session, except upon a Motion to rescind that decision made with the permission of the Chairman.  Whereas on 21st of June, 1994 the following Motion was moved by hon. Elly Rwakakooko, Member for Ruhama and seconded by hon. Angelo Drani Dradriga, Member for Ayivu - that is to say: ‘that thanks of this Council be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of Government Policy contained the Communication from the Chair make by H.E. the President to this Council on 16th June, 1994;’ and whereas that Motion was on Thursday, 23rd June, 1994, rejected by the Council on various reasons including the non-provision to the Council by the Government of Explanation and information on the Government Policy and on various other matters which the Council considered to be serious in regard to the welfare of Uganda, and whereas the Government is prepared and willing to provide to the Council the necessary explanations and information through the responsible ministers and by all reasonable means, and whereas the permission of the Chairman of the Council has been obtained under sub-rule (3) of the Rule 39 of the Interim Rules of Procedure of the NRC to the moving of this Motion, now therefore, be it resolved by the Council as follows: one, that the National Resistance Council rescinds its original decision to reject the Motion moved by hon. Rwakakooko on 21st June, 1994; and the accordingly the Council may process that Motion to enable the Government satisfy the Council on the very important issues raised by hon. Members of the Council against the Motion.  (Applause)  

I remember that traditionally the vote of thinks to the President was moved by Government for Leader of Government Business or one acting in his capacity.  But two years ago we changed its procedure, it has been moved twice by back benchers; and I think the reasoning is correct to say the Government should not be seen thanking itself for what it has done.  It should be the duty of the Back Benchers to appreciate or not appreciate the performance of the Government.  

When I was in the House and this Motion was being introduced by hon. Rwakakooko, I whispered to the Assistant Clerk to the House and I said what has happened, he said the procedure has changed.  I said, okay.  But in the process of this new change there was no provision when the Government should come into answer any queries raised by Back Benchers.  That is why the Government was not duty bound to come here and answer your entire question. But this does not mean that the Government does not want to answer the questions of the Members.  Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman. I just wanted to inform the speaker holding the Floor that, that is a tradition that has not changed either in fact or by the rules that hon. Ministers are supposed to be part of this House and therefore, you would normally furnish us with the necessary information. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KATEGAYA: Mr Chairman, I thank the Member for his information but I was saying that the Government still respects this House.  (Applause) Because I think there is a feeling in the House from what I had gathered that the Front Bench for the Ministers no longer pay the due respect and attention to this House.  I want to assure you, Mr Chairman, and assure the Members through you that the Government has not at any time retained any idea to respect this House because we still believe and we believe in supremacy of the Legislature.  It was unfortunate as I said in the procedure which we set up the Government was not given specific opportunity to answer all the questions.  

The Government is ready as I said to answer any queries that may be raised during the debate of the House on the Communication from the Chair.  I have had a privilege to get notice from the Clerk to the NRC, these are some of the issues that were raised by Members on which we want answers from the Government and the Government now in a position to comment on those issues and other issues which may be raised if, Mr Chairman, my Motion is accepted, and some of the Ministers are here.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Steven Chebrot): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I rise to second the Motion moved by the First Deputy Minister.  I think it is import in future for Government to listen to questions raised by the hon. Members of this House. It is only in this spirit that happy marriage will exist between Government and the other Members that Government recognises their contribution to this nation.  I note that a number of Members did raise a number of issues and I will touch specifically on one issue.  That is the impact that the war in the Southern Sudan has created in Uganda.  

As you know, currently we have close to over 20,000 citizen Sudanese refugees who have moved into Northern Uganda, basically in Moyo and Arua.  These refugees have crated a lot of social economic problems in Arua and Moyo. (Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, if the hon. Deputy Minister is seconding this Motion, I do not think it is time yet to go into the details of the Motion until that Motion has been passed.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, please, restrict yourself to the Debate supporting the Motion.

MR CHEBROT: Mr Chairman, I beg to move I thank the hon. Member.  Thank you.

MR KAYONDE:  Mr Chairman, I support the Motion.  Members will recall that the rejection of the Motion moved by Elly Rwakakooko in my view it was a protest not on the Motion but on the absence of the Leader of Government Business and the absence of the ministers.

Secondly, there was an attempt for the Members to ask an adjournment so that Government can be given an opportunity, which unfortunately, was not granted.  So, the Members did not have any alternative other than to reject the Motion.  (Applause) Since, therefore, the Government has considered and the Leaders of Government has come and appealed to the Members and the Government is willing to give an explanation in my view we should support this Motion, so that the Government can give us the due explanation.  I thank you.

MR KANYOMOZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We appreciate the Government realising the procedure that should be followed when debating issues of this House; and maybe the intention of this Debate recognition should be taken to account.  But there are some issues which the First Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business mentioned which are of concern to some of us.  First, I have never known any reason or any time when we sat down here and agreed to change the rules of procedure in presentation of the Communication from the Chair.  If, in the past it was done by default we should have realised that and stopped that problem which I think is right for us to do.  I have found it very difficult as a Back Bencher to give a vote of thanks on a Government Policy to which I have not formulated, but I am supposed to receive and unlease.  It is very difficult I think, for Back Benchers to be the ones to move a Motion of that nature; and -(Interjection)- I am saying it was on a mistake in the past and it is a mistake even now.  It would be proper that a Motion of this nature after a Head of State has given his legislative programme for the session which it is intended to do, but the Government elaborates on that Motion so that the queries which the Members should be raising are discussed or explained to them so that they react to the presentations from the Government side.  

I think that is where the mistake was done, and it caused problems because I do not think the issues raised by Members would be adequately answered by my dear Colleague hon. Rwakakooko and his Seconder to the Motion.  They were not in position to. They are not in Cabinet, they cannot know what the intentions of Government are, until they hear from the Government; and I think that is what caused the crisis that we landed into.  I am sure when the Members reacted to the Motion they reacted more to the procedure than the content.  I am sure that is what happened, they reacted more to the procedure than the content; and of course, in the content also one would have raised issues.  

Two or three times the President communicated from Chair and most of it was, I think, on the Budget and issues related to economy.  The only Legislative programme which I saw in there, was where the President said, he would cause Government to do something about food production and famine, that one was definitely a direct thing - the others were things like a Background to the Budget which we are going to land into, but that is not the main issue.  The main issue is, let us stick to the rules, we are not going to invent the rules let us invest the rules let us have a procedure which are  -(Interruption)

MR LUBEGA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  I would like to give the information to the hon. Member on the Floor that there was nothing strictly wrong as far as our rules of procedure, as written down in the rules.  What was wrong was that the tradition as not followed.  But the rules of procedure in no way prevents.  Back Bencher from moving the Motion such as hon. Rwakakooko moved.  Maybe you could argue that there is a lacuna that we need to be improved upon our rules of procedures as we have been doing before in the past, but when we look at all our rules, there is no any provision whereby Back Bencher cannot really move a Motion such as he did. The Members, the House found it really pertinent that they reject the Motion not on rules of procedural grounds as far as our rules are concerned.  But because of the desirability that the Government should answer to some of these questions; what I am informing you now is that probably it is now desirable to improve upon our rules of procedure whereby provision can be formulated that the leader of Government Business will always move such a Motion as hon. Rwakakooko did.  (Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that there were about four levels in the business that is before this House.  First of all, the Communication itself was read by His Excellency the President.  Two; hon. Rwakakooko moved a Motion to thank the President.  Three; Members made contributions to hon. Rwakakooko’s motions. And four; there was a reply which was never actually done.  At what level are we starting this business? Definitely, I think we are not starting at the level where the President is going to open this House again, I do not think that one is going to be the case.  Is the hon. Prime Minister now going to move the Motion that was moved by hon. Rwakakooko so that we can contribute and then he can listen to what we are going to contribute?   Are we starting again and more or less canceling rather than canceling hon. Rwakakooko’s Motion and starting a fresh.  Because during the time, we make contribution, the First Deputy Minister was not in this House and therefore, we do not know whether he can respond to the points he raised when he was not here himself.  At what level are we starting?  I think we would like some clarification there, so that we know what level we are starting this business.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order please. Hon. Members, the Motion for the House seeks to rescind what was decided last time, and reinstate that Motion as it was moved by the hon. Member, and then from the point where the debate stopped, we shall carry on.

MR WANENDEYA: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I thank you and would very much want your guidance.  I would very much want you to give us your guidance on this matter. When the Motion was rejected, Members were thinking of saying that some of the Government policies on this matter.  When the Motion was rejected, Members were thinking of saying that some of the Government policies from each Ministry had not quite been explored and, therefore, when His Excellency spoke here, I do not think he had collected all the views and notes from each Ministry, therefore, it seems that more clarification had to come in from Government, and therefore, the First Deputy Prime Minister wants to nullify the Motion, and we would agree, but what about the input?  So, I would very much wish that you clarify on some of these things before we could go further.  I thank you.

DR KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of clarification.  I thank you, Mr Chairman. This Motion, Sir, is very clear, in the last request by the Mover of the Motion.  The First Rt. hon. Deputy Prime Minister.  He said that accordingly, the Council reinstates that Motion to enable the Government to satisfy the Council on the very important issues raised by hon. Members of the Council on the very important issues raised by hon. Members of the Council against the Motion.  

As I understand it, the Debate had been completed; many hon. Members had raised very pertinent issues touching on the policy of the government.  The reason, they rejected the Motion was because Government had not been in position to answer those very pertinent question.  The government now, says, pass this motion and give us opportunity to present those reasons that you wanted, and therefore, I suggest that we go ahead, pass this Motion and give government opportunity to give us reason for which the Motion was originally rejected.  Thank you, Sir.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, these are the confusions that we would always want to avoid.  Let us first say to the Chairman of the Rules and Procedure that I was not saying that there was anything that stops a Back Bencher from moving a Motion.  But institutions of this nature, work by tradition and precedence; and the one we try to create for the benefit of the hon. Member, principally; the one trying to create is the one which has caused us to do the work all over again. Because we are going to do the work all over again from what I am listening, and I am saying that in future, in order to avoid such situations happening, let us follow known state norms and arrive at a decision that could help us -(Interruption)

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I have been in this House for some considerable time, and I would like to inform the hon. member, that this was not the first or second or third time for this Motion, the Motion like this one thanking the government for clear expedition of government policy to be moved by a Back Bencher. In fact, from 60s it has always been the tradition that is moved by the Back Benchers, normally on the government side, somebody prominent whom they are thinking of giving promotion. (Laughter)  So, Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  My point of order, is this that information received from the Clerk’s Office, was that hon. Rwakakooko happen to have been around and second supporter of the Motion was also around, when there were no other Parliamentarians of the Motion therefore, this Motion was brought up.  Is it therefore, in order, Mr Chairman, for the hon. Deputy Third Prime Minister to say that this was the case of promoting hon. Rwakakooko? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: The hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister is in order.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, normally information should be very brief.  If any hon. Member wishes to go and search in the Hansard in the 60s definitely during the period of - you will find that this Motion have been removed by people like hon. - I remember one which was removed by hon. Isanja, he was a Back Bencher, another one removed like other hon. member and even I there say I think, I am going to say that this is also the positions in the House of Commons.  

Therefore, there is nothing wrong for a Motion to be moved. Once it has been moved, of course, it is the duty of the government or the opportunity given to the government.  But may I also say that we are just the Motion that come the next, there is also another Motion whereby every aspect of government policy can be considered and people can talk on anything under the sun.  So, I try to say that, there was nothing wrong and we are not creating a new transition as NRM, to have a Motion of this kind of nature moved by a Back Bencher.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, I am not an agimp, myself, but an agimp is anybody in power.  I have not been long enough to have gone through a system like that, which the hon. Attorney General was trying to advise me.  But let me also tell this hon. House, in Parliamentary democracy, the Back Benchers who have those motions would have been briefed in parliamentary group before they come and move such Motions.  At the moment we do not have that briefing to enable any Member of us in the Back Bencher to play that role, and I am sure the hon. Third Prime Minister is aware of this.  

In Britain, and during the time Asiaju would move such Motion, he would have been briefed and grilled and gone through that governments statement before it come to the House.  And I am saying that it is a handicap to any Back Bencher who has not gone through the speech, who has not got a brief from the ministers on the government side to us his expression, to be able to give an adequate to move explanation on the Communication from the Chair.

MR PINTO: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I would like to seek clarification from hon. Kanyomozi. At the stage we had reached, when hon. Kanyeihamba guided the Council, that accordingly the Council reinstates that Motion, to enable the Government to satisfy the council on the very important issues raised by hon. Members and the Council against the Motion. I do appreciate that he raises issues like, in future, the correct procedures would be having a situation that is prevailing now and having reached this far.  Would the hon. member clarify to me whether it would not be wise for use now to receive the explanation from the side of Government so that we can get on with business?

THE CHAIRMAN:  I think hon. Kanyomozi do not dwell too much on that point. Now, you can go ahead.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, I do agree, the Motion has been brought and it express some comments on it, and that is exactly what I am doing.  Eventually, I am sure the House as usual will adopt the Motion and will proceed with the business of the House. But I think I was expressing an opinion on these issues, so that we can avoid situations (Interruption)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is the hon. Member now holding the Floor in order to intimate that this House as usual will do whatever is proposed when he knows very will that in the past, this House has rejected many Motions of this kind, is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN: You are not in order, hon. Kanyomozi; you are out of order.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, I was -(Interjection)- yes, I am not challenging the ruling, I am just saying, this House has always been reasonable -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Can you wind up your Debate now, hon. Kanyomozi? 

MR KANYOMOZI: And it is definitely going to be reasonable as usual. Mr Chairman, I think we do appreciate that we are going now to get the fell, and get all these things that the hon. Members raised, in fact, we are giving the Ministers an easier work to do.  Because now, they know what the problems are, and they are going to give us fully explanations of the issues raised.  Therefore, in the usual manner, I think we give them a chance to give us an explanation and that in future since we do not have a parliamentary group to brief us, it would be a saving to this country and to us on our time, that motions of this nature are moved by the government either through the Leader of Government Business or by a Minister, so that we avoid the reputation of having to debate a Motion twice, which we should have done once. 

I must confess that I have no problem about this Motion having been moved by a Back Bencher.  I mean to me that is not a fundamental issue whether this Motion was moved by Rwakakooko and seconded by another Back Bencher who is not on the Front Bench.  

I have two or three points I would like to raise to this House.  One of them is that at the political level, I believe that the government is very concerned that this Motion of the President’s Communication from the Chair was thrown out and, therefore, there is a feeling of loss of faith and defeat.  But at the same time, I think this House should also be conscious that the general public also is looking at us as a House and that we have a faith also to say and that they will be asking whether at the time when we threw out this Motion we were at the top of our weights or we threw it for reasons other than objectivity.  

Mr Chairman, Communication from the Chair is very, very important Speech and I must say I have been privileged to listen to the Communication from the Chair since 1979, the first one being that of Prof. Lule who was under UNLF, and I always feel that the Communication from the Chair is a review, a very basic document by government read by a whole Head of State giving a review of past performance of government and setting a time table for the future.  

One of the complaints we have in this House is that due to some lazy bureaucrat, the speech of the President lacked contents and therefore, it was not just a question of the Back Benchers feeling that the Speech was moved by a non-Minister.  I think one of the reasons the government should take from what we have done is that next time somebody is writing a President Speech, somebody is writing a Communication from the Chair, it must have contents.  A Communication from the Chair, Mr Chairman, in all countries and Uganda is not exception, is a state, it is what we normally call a State of the nation, and I think this is a very important message to us.  

Another problem, I think, there was a rash on that day the government was trying to kill two birds with one stone.  The President was coming to open the Session of Parliament and at the same time somebody wanted to read the Budget on that today. I think this is something that we should not do again in future.  First of all, we find it difficult.  A Communication from the Chair may take us long as two hours.  And a Budget may take about one to two hours - to three hours.  So, you are forcing the President to read this speech sometime therefore forcing the person who is writing that speech to make it as short and brief as possible and, therefore, causing a problem we have had.  

At the same time, the country is getting tuned on the issue of the Budget, and much taxation. What is going to happen?  So, I think this is a real administrative problem.  When you are having a very august Official opening of Parliament, a Session of Parliament, you can have it on Thursday, a day before, and the following day people get relaxed and the Minister can read his Budget.  So I think this is also one of the problems we have.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman. In fact, this scramble to kill two birds with one stone over-shuddered the importance of the Communication. With excitement that normally goes with Budget, of course the President’s Speech was socked under the carpet.  And this is possibly why at time our communication was being discussed here that the Front Benchers, the ministers and deputy ministers, gave it very low reception.

MR SIBO (Nominated): The existing Parliamentary Calendar in tradition and this Calendar I think has not been observed.  I can state this as someone who - maybe I may not have experience of sitting on the Benches, Members’ Benches other than the last five years or so, but I have had experience sitting on the Treasury Benches and for those who do not know Treasury Benches, are those benches there. 

This Calendar requires opening of a Session, an annual Session, and that Session has always been opened in April.  Now the fact that we joined - we mixed April and joined the opening of the Session and the Budget is most unfortunate. You see you tend to undermine one important function and that is the Statement from the Chair which is as important - or it might even more important than the budget itself, and the budget is in June, and these dates should be clearly separated.  They are landmarks of the operations of Parliament and they should not be joined, Mr Chairman.

MR OMARA OTUBO:  Mr Chairman, I thank all those who have given very useful information to support my point.  Finally, the Mover of this Motion has said that accordingly the council reinstates that to enable the government to satisfy the council on the very important issues raised by the hon. Minister of the Council against the Motion.

I would like to say that the Communication from the Chair goes on record by virtue of its own right; if you go to the Library now, you can read Communication from the Chair since Independence. And the debates that follow those Communications from the Chair are not attached to that, in other words I can go to the Library and pull a Communication from the Chair read by the President Museveni in 1987, and I will read that Communication in its own content and its own right.  We are being told by the government having considered that this Motion lacks that content; and that they are ready to answer questions raised during the Debate.  But a person who is coming to read the Motion that is the presence Communication from the Chair in isolation of the record of our debate will not know what went on during that time.  

In other words, if we pass this Motion, is the Mover at the right the First Deputy Prime Minister going to have the President’s Speech re-written to contain everything that we need? And possibly re-read in the House in his own right.  Because what we are talking about, is the content of the Speech, is the content of the State of the Nation, is the content of the Communication from the Chair which somebody can pick read it in its own right without referring to our debates.  I agree the Minister will answer questions regarding refugees, regarding foreign relations and all this.  But what about the content of the Communication from the Chair.  I thank you for that. 

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA (Rubabo County, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  It is rather unfortunate that we should be spending yet more time on this matter.  But I think it is also equally important that the executive arm of government recognizes where there have been inadequacies.  (Applause) I must state here and publicly that I got terribly disappointed to come to this House and watch Members of this House preaching to themselves.  The only place where I hear they do it, is in Hide Park in London.  In other words, I would like my Friends in Government to really take it seriously that it is impolite for the Front Benches to be practically empty when a very important Debate is going on.  (Applause) Some of us took pains to step  -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and other hon. Members of this House that while we are concerned about the continued absence of Ministers in the House, we should appreciate their absence, and the reasons for their being absent.  When we complain about their absence, nobody has pointed a figure at what unless things, all matters not concerning government, they are occupied with when they are not in the House.  We should appreciate the absence in the light that Ministries were reduced.  Therefore, ministers were given expanded duties.  So, Mr Chairman, in conclusion, for my information, I am sure that ministers have taken note of our complaints and we should continue with discussing more important issues rather than complaining more about the absence of ministers.   Thank you.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for her very personal opinion about this Debate -(Applause)- certainly it would have been better if she had gone through appropriate ways, and that is asking for our opportunity to contribute to this Debate.  Because, it is not proper for us to ignore situations like this.  We can get derailed, but I think it is very, very significant that government can come to this House and publicly state that a mistake where it has been made has been recognized and remedial steps are being taken.  In my own opinion, may be it was just good that this situation arose.  The House and Government are much more united together now, than they have been before. (Applause and Interjection) Yes, I am giving my opinions here.  (Laughter)  

I think it is appropriate that the First Deputy Prime Minister should have ought opportunity that Government ministers be allowed to explain some of the important issues raised by Members.  And as far as I am concerned, I do not agree with the previous Member who had the Floor before me, that the Statement from the Chair must be totally and fully self-explanatory.  There is not such a thing in the whole world, even the Bible has different books written about it and if you want to understand it better, you better read those books.  

Therefore, I am advised that even the Koran I have no experience with, is not good enough, and even the hon. Member is saying that Amujwa has little experience that I, but any way, I think we should not dwell too much on the contents of the statements by His Excellency the President after all, it has been conceded that the President’s Speech is - what is contained in there, is written by members of this Government.  Therefore, where there is inadequacy, Members of the Government are going to be given an opportunity to fill in those clumps.  That is why I would beseech my colleagues in this House to support this Motion and pass it without delay. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KARUHANGA (Nyabushozi County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I think all the debates surround the question of procedure of how to move when the President’s address to the nation is made.  In the Draft Constitution, it is proposed that the President should address the nation once a year at least.  There are already Members who are arguing that he should address the nation at least three times a year or else the one I heard latest was once every three months, but that is outside our situation now.  

The second point is what is also being discussed in the CA, that Members of Government on the Front Bench should not be Members of Parliament because they have no time to do both jobs, and that is also a question of Debate because in the Presidential system the President appoints minister from outside Parliament, they can come, they can explain what is happening in their - but in a Parliamentary System, they must be Member of Parliament, and they must attend Parliament.  Our Rule is a Parliamentary one; ours here is a Parliamentary system and the ministers who do occupy ministerial jobs are aware of their responsibilities.  

Rule 71 of our Rules of Procedure compels them to attend every sitting of this House like all of us in the Back Bench. In the absence that we are supposed to brief another minister in charge of their portfolio and to answer for them.  In one case one Minister here when we said he was representing the Prime Minister and could speak on financial matters he said, no, no; he did not want to say so, to commit himself, which was wrong.  One thing, which I want I would like to point out which I personally find difficult to agree with in this Motion.  

Two reads that, ‘accordingly the Council reinstates the Motion to enable the government to satisfy the Council on very important issues raised by hon. members of the Council.’  If you could stop here instead of saying on Council against the Motion.  Because Members, some yes, tell that the President’s Speech does not have sufficient content, but the majority of the Members have no problem with that.  So, to say that when we are speaking, we are speaking against the Motion, is not correct.  

So, I would like to ask the Mover of the Motion to delete those three words at the end.  Because those words if they are meant to import the fact that the Motion was rejected, they are already in one, where we say in one - where you say that the National Resistance Council rescinds its original decision to reject the Motion moved by the hon. Rwakakooko so that is already there.  

So, now to repeat that, we were speeding against the Motion is not right, it is repetitive and it brings in a wrong meaning, it means that every time we are contributing here, we are all against the Motion which is not correct in my view. And if the Mover can accept to make that Amendment, I have absolutely no hesitation to support this Motion as it is, and I think it is a good Motion, it shows that the repentance so there is - it shows that we made our point in rejecting that Motion.  That in future when things are brought in such a rough way we should also refuse them.  I think some order is established, and we have achieved, that, and I think this is going to reverberate in other areas.  Thank you. 

MR KATEGAYA (Historical Member):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to thank the Members for their contribution and I have taken the useful contributions into account for the future.  As I said in my first remarks, we have to find a way of keeping the Back Benchers moving the Motion to thank the government but at the same time government coming in to answer any queries that are raised during the Debate. Now this Debate is definitely wide; the Debate which follows the Communication from the Chair is wide, and it is not confined specifically to the Communication from the Chair.  Therefore, there will be other issues that are not covered in the Communication from the Chair.  And, therefore, a need for the government to be around to answer any new issues which may be raised by Members.  Mr Chairman, by accepting this Motion, there is no loss of faith or defeat of the House; you had good reasons why you rejected a Motion, namely that the government did not satisfy your queries, and that is a good reason you gave which the public should respect and I respect also.  Now that you are coming to rectify the very grounds on which you rejected the motion, I do not think there is a loss of faith.  

I think in conducting public affairs this idea of losing faith and I do not believe in them myself.  I think what we should do is, the correct thing to keep the country together and stable and that is why I have no hesitation in mind if the government is wrong to come and say so.  So there is nothing in losing faith, losing to whom? Whom are you losing the faith to? Whose faith are you losing, if the country is stable we are fine, and I think this is the very spirit.  If there is a mistake everybody should admit the mistake and recall the mistake and move forward.  (Applause)

The question of Hansard recording; that is a physical matter.  We could ask those recording the Proceedings that if the Speech of the President comes - your first contribution to the Debate follows and if - and what we debate now follows.  So it is a technical matter, it is not a question of - it is not very possible to handle.  And I would like to go to the contents of the Communication from the Chair; because that could be if you accept the Motion then may be we can come into that.  But I want to say this, I am sure the President himself must know what he wants to say to the country it is not  - incompetent bureaucracy and the rest.  The President I am sure is an intelligent man he knows what he wants to say at a particular time to the country and that is what he decided to communicate in his Speech.

On the question of having the Communication form the Chair and Budget at the same time, there was a bit of a problem if I may say so.  Because he was going to embark on his trip that he has just completed, and at the same time he had to open Parliament before he leaves.  So, there was a kind of adjustment of time, there is nothing that was showing inefficiency on the part of the Government.  

Lastly, I would accept amendment moved by hon. Karuhanga and the other three words could be removed.  Number two reads that, accordingly the council reinstates the Motion to enable the government to satisfy the council on the very important issues raised by hon. Members of the Council.  Lastly, those who are pontificating are also allowed to do so.  I think, that is part of democracy.  They are those who are fond of preaching how good they can do things; it is okay, and we know their record, some of them.  So there is no problem on that one.  So, with these few words, Mr Chairman, I beg to move the Motion.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the Motion as moved by the First Deputy Prime Minister and seconded by hon. Chebrot be passed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of Procedure.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I believe the purpose of this Motion is really not to open up the Debate and repeat ourselves what we said.  We should not repeat ourselves again but the purpose is to enable the Leader of Government Business to answer queries that were raised during the Debate.  That being the case, I believe the Clerk to the Assembly and also the Hansard did take note of our Debate, and I believe that hon. Rwakakooko himself will have taken some notice, and I think this notice will have been passed on to the Deputy Prime Minister.  And therefore, I should be able to follow that notice to answer the Debate instead of repeating ourselves.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

CAPT. GASATURA: Point of procedure

THE CHAIRMAN: Please, do not repeat what hon. Sibo has already said, I have taken note of that.

CAPT. GASATURA: No, I will say what I wanted to say, Mr Chairman.  While it would have been expected, indeed we expected that the First Deputy Prime Minister and the Government indeed has got or familiarised himself with what was raised here.  Apparently that is not true because -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Point of information from the First Deputy Prime Minister, please, let him give you information.

THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Mr E. Kategaya):  Mr Chairman, I have received some note from the Clerk to the NRC on some of the issues raised and we are ready to answer some of them this afternoon but I am also not opposed to Members to want who contribute more.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members I said that the Minister should reply as a few hon. Members who may have succinct issues will be able to raise them.

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, I thank you very much for giving me way.  I know that the Debate on the President’s Communication from the Chair is now apparently stale but we have the opportunity now may be to say something concerning our constituencies and the state of the nation.  Before I speak about my constituency, there is one issue that I would like to put before the House, which is a wider issue outside Uganda, and this is the question of the French involvement in Rwanda. 

I would like to take this opportunity to say that the involvement of a European state in an African state at this time in the twenty years century is re-colonialism resurfacing.  What the case is a good case or not, as long as OAU refused to allow this to happen and these people have come here without the consent of OAU, I think it is arrogance of the highest order and now I understand on hearing on the news that when the French President went to South Africa, President Mandela also told him that he should not singly try and interfere in an African state and I would like to say that this sis a very unfortunate thing and it should not go, since this is a neighbouring country, uncondemned.  Because for me I think myself -(Interruption)

DR MAGEZI:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I seek clarification from hon. Elly Karuhanga in view of the fact that thousands of people are dying in Rwanda, in view of the fact that African nations are looking on and the combatants in Rwanda have refused to accept a cease fire, are you advocating that the Europeans should also keep quiet and take no action because of our bad politics?

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, I am grateful to the information given by the Member -(Interjection)- Yes, by clarification.  (Interruption) Okay, I will take the information.

MR AGARD DIDI:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, in fact because there are so many related issues touching on Foreign Affairs, I was preparing to make a very brief reply to the issues raised and among them was to clarify on this question of the French involvement as far as we see it affecting our Foreign Affairs so I will probably come back to that later.

MR KARUHANGA:  Well, Mr Chairman, my answer to that is that as far as we have the United Nations Forces in Rwanda, then a country, which want to contribute, any assistance should do so under the United Nations Flag.  There is no need of somebody coming in and setting up a camp in one small corner where he is participating with people who have already been condemned in Geneva by Human Rights that there was genocide in Rwanda.  Rwanda has a very big border.  How come that they chose the area which was in Zaire and they came saying that they were going to be in Zaire and now they say they have some portion they have captured for themselves.  Why do they not do that under the auspices of the UN?

MR KANYOMOZI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I thought before the French troops moved in Rwanda the UN Security Council did sit and unanimously agreed that because of the nature of the problems, they agreed by majority that they should send in a force to help those people who are running away from the skirmishes caused by the combatants on both sides.  Do we not  think, would it not be better if we can save more lives in that area than getting everybody parish since the Africans, ourselves, are not going to do so?

MR KAJUBI:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, hon. Karuhanga’s point is that the French troops did not get the blessing of the United Nations so they came on their own, therefore, they are likely to be biased that is why we stand to condemn wholeheartedly the coming in of the French troops.  Why did they not wait for the United Nations and they are likely to be biased and take sides.  I think that is the onus of his talk.  Thank you.

MR KARUHANGA: Any way, Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA:  Point of procedure.  Mr Chairman, I think hon. Karuhanga is raising a very important and sensitive matter. A matter concerning our neighbours.  Neighbours who have lost a lot of people.  In a government we have a technical department responsible for these matter and that is the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Rather than this House brain storming an issue on the basis of the information taken from radios, picked from the press, picked here and there.   Is it not really necessary that at this stage in time the Government actually the Members can debate the issue having been informed properly by the Government rather than people picking up issues as if this is a matter which is of a light matter when in fact this matter is a very, very serious matter. Mr Chairman, I would propose that we deserve, that this House should get a proper statement on the subject so that Member can then react to it accordingly.

THE CHAIRMAN: He is perfectly in order.

MR KARUHANGA:  I am enriched by my colleague’s contribution and since I am already advised that the Minister in charge of foreign affairs is going to make a statement about that may be at this juncture I should just leave that.  I was only expressing my position as a Member of Parliament and what I feel about the situation and I think I am very much entitled to that.  Anybody is also entitled to side with Interahamwe or anybody like that or Enkontanyi or whatever but I hope and pray that peace does come to our neighbouring state Rwanda and now that there is no more fighting in Kigali and the next big town, I am encouraged that I hope that the whole situation will be completely at peace and we shall have a peaceful country next door to us.

Secondly, something about famine in our country.  I know many Members have talked about this and I am sure that the Leader of the Government Business and responsible ministers have been accordingly briefed if they were not here.  But what continues to amaze me and surprise me is the 17 districts in our country can get famine without this parliament being informed about it or being mobilised to go and attend to the situation or being warned that the three months is difficult.  This surprises me a lot.  

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  I am giving an information to the hon. member on the Floor that the Sectoral Committee of the Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources together with the Ministry of Relief have held meetings and we have already alarmed even the government about the famine situation in this country and we gave a report to the Prime Minister and we even requested for an appointment to meet him and explain the situation of famine within this country but unfortunately this we have never received any reply, it is over a month now.

MR KAYONDE: Supplementary.  Mr Chairman, Members will recall that the chairman of the Sectoral Committee on Agriculture moved a Resolution and this House passed it instructing the government to release 2 billion Uganda shillings to alleviate the situation in the east and I hope the Government has taken measures to correct this situation.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, just I think last week hon. Members were informed of how much money the Supplementary Estimates was now being spent, equivalent to the 2 billion which you directed to solve this problem.  It was just last week.  I think the Government is not only waiting but it has already taken corrective action to try to remedy the situation.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, I wish to inform the hon. Members that as hon. Karuhanga is saying about agriculture not informing us to the impending hunger, there is a department, in fact, there is a section in the Ministry of Agriculture which we normally give money here in the House which has failed to perform and that is called early warning.  So the early warning is in the Ministry of Agriculture and it is normally given a lot of money here but it has failed to give us the warning about the hunger in this country.  So, one wonders whether such a section should be given more money in the next Financial Year.

MR OLUMU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We are happy that the First Deputy Prime Minister is here and that we are now re-examining some of the issues that were raised during our debate.  I would like to inform this House that sometime last year in November the technical officials from both the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs did alert the government that was way back in November that we are expecting famine and that something should be done about it.  

I think it is really in the light of this information that I would like to inform hon. Karuhanga that all the relevant information including what hon. Kasaija is talking about, the early warning systems have been functioning but I think what is important is for the Rt. hon. First Deputy Prime Minister to co-ordinate the activities of many of these Ministries so that we can avoid what is happening today in Uganda and I am happy that the President has picked up this issue of famine and I think he is recommending a two-man commission to look into these affairs. I think it is very important for this country to be informed exactly what is going on because we are being fed on rumours, of newspaper reports.  We have given a technical report to the Prime Minister but as one Member has already reported it, we are still awaiting a reply to discuss this report with the Prime Minister.  

So, I think the information I want really to give here is that this is a matter of concern, we should all be concerned about people in Uganda starving to death and dying and we must come down to group with it, the government must come out with a statement in this House relating the exact position and what has happened, what has been done and how we can forge ahead to avoid the same sort of situation happening.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Karuhanga, please, wind up.

MR KARUHANGA: I will not take any more information in light of this. The last point I want to make about famine is that when the information from hon. Kafumbe Mukasa was that about 1.3 billion shillings was released to buy food, I would like the Commission of Inquiry which has been set up or which is going to be set up, as I saw in the heading today in the newspapers I have not read the contents but the information from Members that the two man commission is going to be set up to look into famine, the first place for them to look at is how the 1.3 billion shillings has been in the business.  In other countries when a situation like this the whole cabinet literary moves, they go to stores to see whether the food is there, they buy the food.  You do not just buy from briefcase people. (Interjection)  

Mr Chairman, I have no time to take information because there is another small matter I want to raise about my Constituency.  So, the point I am making is that I am not happy with the way the food is being bought if it is being bought and the manner in which it has been conducted and I would like the Commission of Inquiry to look into that and see how an emergency was handled by the government when the money was available. (Interruption)

MR KIRUNDA KIVEJJINJA: Point of information. I would like to inform the hon. Member and the House that in here we represent the people.  We represent specific constituencies.  If definitely you are a true representative of your area, you should be the first officer of Commission of Inquiry to inform us definitely what has happened to your people so that we can be able to talk directly.  (Interruptions)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order.

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, for me what I am saying, I am saying, it on behalf of my people in Uganda. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Your point has been taken hon. Member you go ahead. 

MR KARUHANGA: Yes, and for God and my Country and anybody who want to pursue it if a Commission of Inquiry is set up and they want to pursue the matter and they find there is a block somewhere they cannot unblock, let them come and they can get information. 

I want to talk about my Constituency.  There is a perpetual problem that I keep on bringing about my constituency in this House and this is about water.  I hoped that the Communication would come around April and I would talk about this situation and in the budget there would be consideration for water.  Fortunately, a certain part in my constituency did receive some rains around end of May-June and the other part is completely dry and children have left school, they have migrated, they are going to all sorts of places and this is again happening, and it happens every June, July, August, September and October and continuously there is no money available to do dams in our areas.  We have been promised for dams but we do not see these dams coming is it possible that the Minister responsible for live stock can say something and promise that now completely that there is a programme for our livestock.  

In 1989,1990,1991, 1992 and 1993, we were told that Uganda has 4 million heads of cattle, why don’t those cattle become 3 million or 5 million? This situation is very serious -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR KARUHANGA: I know that the areas affected include Bukanga, Isingiro, Nyabushozi, Rwemiyaga, Sembabule all the way to Kamuli and Kazo.  I hope this matter will be addressed one day by our Government.  It is a pity that about five years -(Interruption) 

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I want to inform the speaker that Government is responsible for entire country and in terms of things accomplished my Friend’s Constituency should have been - to the Government, because the whole national part has been reduced to the size to provide some grazing ground for these people in that area.  But, to me is more important if we considers Karamoja has no water and the president is saying day and night to put water dam in Karamoja so that they reduce the cattle raiding maybe.  So, I think the hon. Colleague should consider that Government has very little to share throughout, whatever, he has should be thankful and allow other people who do not have also to have.  Thank you.

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, I have had this discussion with hon. Moses Ali before in a Sector Committee where we had an exchange of words but I would like to get your views.  I would like to inform him now so that he can know it so that he cannot continue repeating this.  That when Lake Mburo National Park was carved out on that place called Sahara which was carved at the same time with the lake, the only water nature reserve available in that area is Lake Mburo and it was taken by the national park and we are not allowed to take our animals into the national park, therefore, the situation has become very serious to the extent that now we are threatening the part because we have to go and get this water in the dry season this is one of the reasons if you want to save that part it is very important that the cattle keepers in that area be provided for or be thought of and we are appealing. I know there is a very serious problem of water in Karamoja and hon. Naburi, I and other Members from Karamoja we have had a discussion about this.  But, the situation does not seem to get - at one time the Minister for Agriculture said, 72 dams are going to be built in that area, we went with the President to Sembabule and made this announcement, nothing. This is now about this because, we keep on going there and telling them that Government has promised us 72 dams and then they clap.  Then we go back after one month Government has promised us 72 they clap, now what shall we do about this?  Mr Chairman, my last -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order hon. Member, please, take your Seat, first. Hon. Karuhanga will you, please, finish.

MR KARUHANGA: I thought you going to inform me -(Laughter) okay. The last point, Mr Chairman, is the security point, the question of people who died in Gulu recently was very serious and recommended just that somebody can come to a wedding and start shooting people is a terrible mentality and it is a big shame on our country.

Secondly many people these days are being beaten up and they die in Police stations. This is a serious matter.  There is only one thing that I would like to inform our Members, that if you should find mysterious circumstances which might involve the Police the first person you must tell in the magistrate in your area, because yes, while you may have doubt about that.  The law is that the person who dies after he has been in a Police custody, the present law is that there should be a corona’s report and that can only be moved by a magistrate and that means that the circumstance surrounding must be investigated by the doctor.  But at the moment what happens is that, you receive information that the policemen met some one beaten up or they denied - the person died. (Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: Point of procedure.  Mr Chairman, hon. Karuhanga is raising rather serious point especially when it involves life of people dying in prisons.  I thought it would be Parliamentary procedure for a member to have a question the Minister responsible so that we have the specific names and where the person died so that eventually the Minister can come here and answer rather than you make such a statement and it might be received in bad taster as if people are dying in prisons, Mr Chairman.

MR KARUHANGA: My Colleague from Kazo and Deputy Minister of Works has been here with me in this House we entered together how many questions have been received by ministers here and answered.

Secondly, I want to take this opportunity to share this information because it was buffering me and I thought that, because I got information when I was in the commission of inquiry in the mismanagement of criminal cases and I thought it was important to share this information with colleagues during this contribution so that they know what to tell their people when they are brought in because for me I have been approached by many people and this is what I tell them how to go about solving this problem and it was really a question of sharing this information with colleagues about this.  But, I also appreciate the ministers concern; that question should resurface in this House and the ministers should start thinking about answering them, I appreciate that.

MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to take this opportunity to answer a few questions that were raised in the Debate.  I thought what Members were saying today was that they were angry that Ministers were not there to answer and the reason why we opened this old thing was for the ministers to answer and I am standing here to precisely do that. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Go ahead.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  Mr Chairman, let me -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Procedures? Okay, let us hear procedures.

MR WOGWAWABI GWAIVU: Point of procedure.  Mr Chairman, thank you very much indeed. I think you would agree with me and the hon. Members would equally agree but since you allowed time for hon. Members to make serious point from the Communication from the Chair it would be better that we finish those comment starting with the Minister responding to them.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, when you are debating a Communication from the Chair which we are doing we are all now equally to contribute to that Motion which the Government has brought or one of us has brought, there is no limit when the Minister intervenes to give his contribution to that Motion.  So, the Minister of State for Defence improperly doing his normal duty adding to those voices which are in the House, please give him a chance to do so -(Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member I think that is now clear.

MR ELYAU: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman, some of us have been standing here since that time when we caught your eye, please we also want to express our views before our Ministers come in.  You see, -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, hon. Members has I had said earlier, it is a blame as Members will be contributing so will the hon. Ministers be also contributing by way of replying.  So, hon. Minister for Defence now.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, I must say I am doing this in the absence of what hon. John Nasasira representing Kazo County said, and I would like to pledge to this House that the Ministry of Defence is ready to answer Members’ questions any time.  Since I went to the Minister for Defence I have not heard any single question from any Member of Parliament and I would like to encourage Members to ask me questions because, I am sure there are many questions in the minds of Members concerning the Ministry of Defence.  So, I will answer all the questions.

During the Debate there was a question about our troops in Liberia, there was a question of the position of the troops in Liberia and the impact I think the question was what impact do they have there.  Allow me, to briefly inform the House that, yes, we have, as we all of us know the contingent of troops in Liberia, we went to Liberia at a request of the OAU, at the request of ECOMOG in an effort to implement the cotton accord that was reached between the Liberian parties in July last year.  In this accord the warring parties in Liberian agreement to disarm their fighting fractions and to form a Government of national unity.  But some of the warring parties did not trust enough the existing ECOMOG force in Liberian to disarm to them.  

So, Uganda was chosen among the few other countries to send the contingent of troops, which were acceptable to these warring factions whom they trusted to give their arms to the other countries were Tanzania and Zimbabwe.  Zimbabwe in the - did not send anybody and at the moment the two East African contingent are from Tanzania and Uganda. According to the cotton agreement the interim Government was supposed to be formed six months after the agreement in July 1993.

MR ONGOM: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I would like some clarification on this issue of Uganda sending a contingent of troops to Liberia.  When the situation in Somalia went very bad and our Government was asked to send troops there, this Assembly was convened their approval was sort.  Now when they were requested according to the Minister, to send troops to Liberia, the Government went ahead and sent these troops without the approval of this House. Now, my question is, how does the Government decide when to ask for the approval of the Council and when can they act without approval of this Council in the matter to operate and involving our troops in the foreign countries?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think I can say that when we, NRC talked about principle as well, we talked specifically about Somalia but we also talked about the principle I do not think the precedent was set where Government has to come here which time it is to deploy troops to seek the approval of the House that is not the understanding of the Government.  

I hope now the hon. Member representing Rubabo can hear me, I will repeat what I have said that, when Government came to this House about the deploying troops in Somalia, we discussed the principle of deploying troops in Somalia, we discussed the principle of deploying troops.  It is true specifically at that time we wanted approval of deploying our troops to Somalia but our understanding was not that we were setting a precedent whereby each time Government will have to come back to seek the approval of the House. (Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Go ahead, please.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  Mr Chairman, anyhow, on Liberia we sent a contingent to Liberia - I was saying that the summit was supposed to start at 6.12.  Forming a Government of National Unity was supposed to take place 6 months after.  The Court on agreement that was in December.  But as you know, this was not done; there was a delay.  And consequently, the whole process of pacification of Liberia has delayed, our troops.  They are in an area, Miriabuhenan, and they are based in a town called Buhenon; this is a coastal town, and areas around it.  They are supposed to receive arms coming from Mr Charles Tailor’s National Patriotic Ground of Liberia.

I am Sorry to say, that this exercise has been slow, and we have only received something like 2,000 arms from MPEL at the moment.  Efforts are taking place and while in Tunis during the OAU Summit, the President held consultations with the President of Nigeria, the Chairman of ECOMOG, who is the President of Benin, President Hoblow, he held meetings with the interim President of Liberia and others, directly connected with the situation in Liberia.  And the question is whether there is need for revising the basis of cotton accord.  This was raised because it appears that the parties are not willing not to disarm.  

So, an effort is being made to find may be another formula where the parties can work together and join this government of national unity.  The Ugandan position is that we are willing to wait while these efforts are going on, but we shall not wait indefinitely.  If it appears that this problem is not likely to be resolved soon, it is government’s intention to withdraw our army.  

There was also a question of insurgency in the North.  Permit me, Mr Chairman, to say something about it. It is true that the insurgency in the North continues.  It is public knowledge that we have a group of people, operating under the name of ‘Lords Resistance Army’ let by one Kony, which is operating in the North.  I think Members know, that at one time, there were negotiations going on between -(Interruption) 

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Point of information. Thank you, Mr Chairman. May I inform hon. Minister of State for Defence that,  this can also mean Lira or Apac where we do not experience these sort of people. I think the hon. Member should point directly to which particular North is he talking about.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, I consider the point by hon. Rev. Atwai.  But these activities of the Lords Resistance Army are confined mainly to the districts of Gulu and Kitgum.  Mr Chairman -(Interruption) 

MR ONGOM:  Point of information.  It is not true Mr Chairman, that the activities of Kony Resistance Army are confined only to Gulu and Kitgum. It is true that part of Lira is definitely affected, kart of Apac.  I know this because my country is bordering two districts and I know where the problems are.  They definitely confined to Apac and Lira zone.

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  Further information.  Mr Chairman, I also want to inform the hon. Minister that he should not forget what I used to do the in CA, because we sat near each other.  But actually, my Constituency which borders Gulu - gombololas the people had to run away because of the activities of the Kony.  But this is now he is talking of the general North.  I think I also agree with Rev. that, if we would talk of operation, then we can afford to differentiate.  Let us refer to citizens Gulu, Apac and Lira as a true North.  All West Nile should be referred to as North West -(Laughter) - for the purpose of clarity, Mr Chairman.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  I thank the hon. Members for that information. And whereas I conceive that hon. Ongom might know better than me, about this insurgency and the movement, -(Interruption)- and that is why I said mainly.  I was talking about the areas where there is - Kony operates, and where we have operations, ourselves, in national Resistance Army.  So, it is mainly, in that area of Gulu, Kitgum District.  There may be incursions once in a while, into hon. Moses Ali’s area and into hon. Ongom’s area, but these are mere incursions and we have not had persistent operations there. 

Allow me to thank this House and the nation at large that the Kony group is obviously a nuisance.  They called us a few problems; the other day, they way laid a convoy of I think World Food Programme, as you saw in the papers.  They got some of the workers, drivers and passengers, and stopped them.  Of course, Government has expressed regret to this crime. But they are thieves, they are able to move about, they are very mobile, they are article, uses of the road, they really scourge. They scourge on road used, civilians, they have not attached any military establishment; not even one.  And this tells you, that really this is a bundle of criminals highly mobile, taking advantage of an expensive area that is scarcely populated to cause problems of law and order. They are obviously not a military place to the government of this Republic, but they are a nuisance in our body politic, and we are determined and totally committed to removing them.

MR MAYANJA MUHAMMED: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. With due respect to the Minister of State for Defence, I am seeking this clarification.  It is true the rebels have never attached any military place.  Can he clarify that because of not attaching any Military unit and taking advantage of scarce population and attach them, therefore, government can afford to deny all this?  He should clarify. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister did not say government is not doing anything about it.  So, give him time, may be you will learn more.

MRS OKER:  The deployment of government troops is triple the number of people who are in Gulu and Kitgum districts: the population.  Now, it should have been very easy and very simple because, every time and again, we are being promised that, this insurgency will take very short time to be wiped out.  And it seems it is just continuing and continuing.  But if you go to Gulu and Kitgum now, you see the military deployment.

DR MAGEZI: Thank you, very much, Mr Chairman.  I am already grateful because this is the first statement ever made in this House about the insurgency in the North.  So, we have quite a bit of points raised.  And my concern really is, I would like to know from the hon. Minister; the problems of Sudan, South Sudan; the problems of Zaire.  I beg him reflected in anyway with this insurgency in the North.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I thank you Mr Chairman and I thank the Members for the points raised.  As the whole country knows, we had really been pressing hard on the rebels; and at one time, they did indicate their willingness to abandon war and come out of the bush and the government engaged in negotiations with them. And up to the level where the Minister, hon. Betty Bigombe went and met them, up to the level where government gave them a particular zone as an area where they should stay and we would not attach them, and all of us did believe at that time, that a negotiated settlement appeared possible. All of you know, that of course this did not happen, and the reason was in case no one has ever said so, because these revels receive a new lease of life but getting support from outside.  They gained some support and encouragement from an outside power, and they got encouraged that may be, they could continue, this war.  That was one reason.  

The second reason; and the reason really why these talks failed, was because government failed to meet one of their demands.  One of their demands was that, we should provide immunity to all those rebels, against persecution for any possible crime, they may have committed in the cause of war.  Obviously, the National Resistance Movement Government could not - there was no way we could immunize any of those people from or against persecution, by laws - against whom crime was committed.  Those women, whose breasts were cut, those men and young girls whose limbs were cut, whose ears were cut; this government could never, never give immunity to any one that committed such a crime.  He, therefore, rejected that.  And when we did mainly because of the fare of the population in this area, Kitgum and Gulu, and because they were encouraged by this infusion of arms and ammunition which they received, they were encouraged to go on. 

But as I said, government is becoming determined and totally committed to wiping out this insurgency.  It is taking a bit of time, because government deliberately is executing this war carefully in order to minimize suffering of our people.  We would rather take time and we wipe it out with the little damaged, than going out all the way to wipe them out and wipe out our people who are innocent and for whom we are here to protect.  

So, I would like to assure Members that, this problem in the North as I said, is a law and order problem, and that Government is committed to wiping out.  We have been revisiting our programme and I am sure that, as soon as we are through with this programme, the public, the Members of this House will notice the difference.  I thank you, very much.

MR ELYAU (Kalaki County, Soroti): Mr Chairman, I remember about a year ago, I raised a point here regarding the compensation of the people affected, and I am happy to hear that government has done something.  But I am asking this.

Why can’t the government not or the Minister particularly, inform this House, in whatever they do to compensate our people so that they help to educate the people concerned.  Because we are reading it from papers, that the government is now compensating the widows and victims affected in the Mukura incident.  But he had not one time come here to tell us what steps he has taken so that we can all appreciate.  Can the Minister say more about this?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Because I had not got the question very well.  Yes, it is true that government is compensating all the victims of Mukura incident.  This matter is being handled under the Prime Minister’s Office as i think I stated last time, and it is directly being handled by the Minister for State in charge of the North - hon. Betty Bigombe.  And all the money - I talked about it, because the money was under Ministry of - the Vote of Ministry of Defence.  But actually, concerning actual payments - I am dealing with the people in the field - is under the Prime Minister’s Office and handled by hon. Bigombe.  So, if it is a question of payments, we have released all the money, and if you ask me a question I would - and I will give a notice, I will give you all the details.  But other details about who is paid, when and where? I think hon. Bigombe would be better to answer that. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Chebrot) Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I thought I could interject at this stage to inform the House about the implications of the wars in Sudan and Rwanda.  You see the war in Sudan started close to about 200,000 Sudanese refugees had moved in to Moyo and Arua.  I wish to inform the House that, the movement of these people has caused a number of social economic problems in the area, considering the fact that there are social services in Moyo and Arua. That is to say, in 1986 when the people from Arua and Moyo returned, there were hardly any schools in that area.  In fact there were no health centres even at that time.  So, the coming in of 200,000 refugees has added another burden to the people of Arua.  

On the other side, there have also been a number of problems affecting the environment, as refugees come in, they require firewood, they also need to build shelters; so there has been some degree of environmental degradation in that area.  We note that Arua grows mainly Tobacco, and they cut quite a number of their own trees.  So, with the coming in of the refugees, this has even compounded the matter further.  And there is a lot of environmental degradation.  But I would like to inform the Members that, some NGOs have started some programmes to plants some trees in that part of the world.  While the situation in the North is gloomy, on the Southern part -(Interruption)

MRS OKER:  Point of clarification.  I would like to request the Deputy Minister of Local Government to clarify to this House, the measures that they have put in place about the influx of the refugees.  At the moment he has only mentioned Arua and Moyo. But I can assure you that, if you go to these towns in Gulu and Kitgum, you will find that the number of people who are now there are refugees from Sudan and I do not know what measures they have taken to register these people and what precaution they are taking to safe guard the people of Gulu and Kitgum.  And may be this is one of the issues why the insurgency is not being wiped out.

MRS WEKIYA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would also like to inform the hon. Minister that he is putting in place a scheme for looking after refugees from other countries. We also have refugees from other parts of Uganda, who have moved from their places to others within Uganda.  If you go to Jinja, for instance; and Busia you find so many people from Karamoja and they are becoming a disgrace. At the taxi park, you cannot imagine, on a Friday, children, women, and so and so forth.  I wish the Minister could arrange either to properly to resettle these people where they are today or send them back to Karamoja.  Thank you very much. 

MR KAIJA: Point of information. I am glad to report again that we have a number of refugees in Kiryandongo, but the only issue that has made me stand here, they are not looked after properly by the Local Government and I do not think we have any Local Government Representative who is active enough to control these people.  Otherwise, all the small towns, Kigumba, Kiryandongo, and all these Buyale, Katurikiere and what have you, are flooded by these same people, the refugees from Sudan; and since their coming, this highway, from Karuma to around Kafu places, highway robbery has intensified.  So, I do support some Members who are alleging that maybe insurgency is being prolonged because of the mismanagement of these refugees.  It is not clear-cut in terms of administration. Thank you.

DR MAGEZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I am indeed closely associated with some part of the settlement of refuges, but I am increasingly worried and I seek some assurance from the Minister, whether these refuges will actually ever go back to where they came from, even if the conditions in their countries of origin, are acceptable; because first of all, intermarriage is now taking place and there is no sort of gate where to get out this refuge must have a gate pass or something.  They emigrate from the areas allocated to them, and they intermarry and they are black like we are; so being a Ugandan citizen, it is by affirmation.  So, the Ministry actually handling this, must now take on a very serious programme to reassure us of the case of refuges who are coming here and we are giving them land can venture to go back.

MR CHEBROT: Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  First of all, I would like to inform the hon. Lady form Jinja that the Karimojong who are in Jinja are not by the pressure of refuges; those are displaced persons and those come udder the Ministry of Labour.  On the question of refuges who are in Gulu currently, the Ministry and Government are aware that some Sudanese refuges have moved into that area because of the present war in Southern Sudan and already efforts have been made by Government and UHCR to register most of those refuges.  In fact, a team went to Gulu about one month ago to register most of those refuges in that area.  We should not forget that not long ago we had crossed to 500,000 Ugandans who are outside and they were living as refuges.  So, we should not condemn refuges wholly; it is a problem, which must be solved by the leaders of Africa themselves.

On the question of the problems in Kiryandongo, we are aware of the problems of refuges in that area.  The problem arose initially because the leaders in that area wanted the refuges to go and work for them for money; because as you know in Kiryandongo, labour is very difficult to get.  so, they moved out of the settlements to go and work, maybe, to cultivate on the plantations and they got out of the settlements.  Otherwise, by law, normally, they are not allowed to get out of their settlements; but they can be allowed to go to the market and return when they get the permit from the Commandant in the settlement.  So, it is not true that there is no body in that settlement, we have a Commander who is in the settlement of Kiryandongo and I myself has been there on more than two occasions.  So, it is not true that there in no administration; the administration is there and it is working.

On the southern sector, I would like to report that we had close to about 80,000 Rwandese refuges in the settlements of Orukinga, Nakivale, and I am glad to report that many of them have now spontaneously moved out of those settlements and according to the OAU Convention, we encourage spontaneous return of every refuge; we are not going to act like a prison to keep refuges in this country.  So most of the settlements now in Mbarara are empty, there are no Rwandese we hope that the environmental degradation -(Interruption)

MR NYAKATURA: Point of clarification.  Whereas we are encouraging spontaneous return of refuges to their homes, may I have some clarification as to what precautions Government is taking to safeguard our cattle; because, Mr Chairman, lots of cattle are being moved towards Rwanda and we do not know whether they are not spreading any disease, whether there is any organised movement of these herds or not and whether these fellows are not stealing our cattle.

MR CHEBROT: Mr Chairman, my office has not any reports from Kabarole regarding cattle rustling from those areas.  I am not aware that some refuges have taken some cattle from Kabarole area; if they are, we would be very glad to follow it up.  I am aware of course that when they are moving they are likely to cause disease, but for the time being, there is very little we can do at the moment.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of information.  I wish to inform the hon. Minister and the hon. Member from Kabarole, that the Rwandese refugees moving away from Uganda, actually do pass through my Constituency, particularly in Kamwezi and in fact, they are not stealing any cows, if anything, they are selling their own cows cheaply this way; and it is not possible for them to have cows which are causing disease, because they are  not bringing cows from Rwanda, they are actually going to Rwanda.

MR CHEBROT: I thank the hon. Member for that clarification information.  On the other hand, Mr Chairman, I would like to caution Members of the public who have actually encroached on some of these settlements.  In Kabarole and in Mbarara, the nationals have begun to move in those areas.  I would like to inform them that those are gazetted areas for Government and that they should not move in, until Government comes out with a clear policy on what to do with those settlements; because those settlements are our properties and we have signed tripartite agreements with the international organisations on what to do with those gazetted areas.  So, it is not proper for people to move in, remove iron sheets, desks and other things from those settlements. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I now adjourn the House to tomorrow 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 5.10 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 6 July 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)




 




