Tuesday, 4th July 1995


The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliamentary Building, Kampala.


(The Vice Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).


PRAYERS

(The Assembly was called to order.)


COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I welcome you back from the recess into this last session of our sitting.  For the past nine years, we have accomplished outstanding achievements not only for the stability of this country, but for its economic development too.  It is in light of this that I look forward to greater dedication to the conducting of business in this House so that we do not end on a bad note.  We must finish our assignments.  In this regard, therefore, let us all ensure punctuality and regular attendance so that our last sitting ends honourably. (Applause)

On my part, let me use this opportunity to express my sincere gratitude to all of you hon. Members for the respect and cooperation that you have extended to the Chair and more so to me personally. (Applause)  

Your good cooperation has made my work easier and enjoyable.  I have as a matter of fact made friends to all of you and even to those whom I did not know before.  I hope our cooperation will not end here in this House, but we have to strengthen our cooperation as brothers and sisters even outside this House.  I am sure that we are now friends for life.  

Hon. Members, we have very few months before the end of this sitting; my appeal to you is not to change from the spirit of consensus that has enabled us to achieve landmarks results.  I am very grateful to this spirit and it is my sincere hope that we end peacefully if we keep the spirit of being more tolerant to each other.  

On a sad note, hon. Members, I regret to announce the death of our Colleague, hon. Moses Kintu, who passed away during our recess.  Let us also stand up and observe one-minute silence.  May his soul rest in eternal peace.  I wish you the best of luck and happy deliberations.  I thank you.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE CAPITAL MARKETS AUTHORITY BILL, 1994

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled ‘The Capital Markets Authority Bill, 1994,’ be read for the First Time. (Applause)


THE INSURANCE BILL, 1995

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that ‘The Insurance Bill, 1995’ be read for the First Time.  I beg to move.

THE FINANCE BILL, 1995

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled ‘The Finance Bill, 1995’ be read the First Time.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE (Mr J. Nasasira):  Mr Chairman, I would like through you to inform this House and the general public that swarms of red locusts crossed from Northern Tanzania into Southern Uganda on the 27th of June 1995 and landed in Isingiro County, in Mbarara District.  As soon as they were cited, they were reported to my Ministry Officials in Mbarara.  Following this information, my Ministry organised a team to assess the situation and immediately embarked on the destruction of these invaders.  It was on established, however, that a swarm of about half a square kilometre had settled in Kashumba sub-county by the 28th of June 1995.  

My ministry mobilised chemicals, land spray teams were also mobilised and spraying with motorised pumps started on the Saturday of 1st July, 1995; but by Sunday the 2nd July, 1995, two swarms of about one square kilometre each were cited six kilometres around Lake Nakivale and motorised hand pumps which were few at that time were not able to contain the situation.  

Furthermore, according to the information received from the international Red Locust Organisation, Red Locust Control Organisation for Central and Southern Africa, more swarms are expected to cross from Northern Tanzania, especially from Malagalasi outbreak area.  So far, we have been lucky because these locusts are still in some of the areas with few livestocks and no crops; but should these swarms increase and move further inland, the crops and pasture are threatened.  

Just to give hon. Members an idea of the danger ahead, each swarm is made up of between 50 and 100 million locusts.  Thirty swarms have been cited in Northern Tanzania, whatever number of swarms crossed into Uganda with the onset of the second rains, the locusts will be able to establish themselves, multiply a hundred fold and start a plague.  Such a scenario will be disastrous as it will seriously affect national food security and prove extremely expensive to eliminate in future.  We therefore have to take action now.

In order to handle the situation, we have held discussions with the officials of the International Red Locusts Control Organisation of Central and Southern Africa and desert locust control organisation of the East African, the two organisations responsible for the control of the spread of locusts.  These officials have also visited the invaded areas; both organisations’ capacity to deal with the problem is hampered by severe shortage of financial resources, because of failure by some members to remit their annual contributions, and I am sorry, these members also include ourselves.  My ministry, therefore, feels that this severe situation can be brought under control if the following is done:  

One, my ministry is ready to tackle the present swarms by ground spraying and this will involve the use of personnel, vehicle, more pumps, insecticides and the initial operation is expected to cost Shs. 25 million.  

The next step will require the use of spray aircraft since the ground spraying is chancy and cannot be relied upon for effective and timely control of locusts, especially if the swarms increase and also become highly mobile due to winds.  The Desert Locusts Control of Eastern Africa has an aircraft and it is standing in Nairobi, ready to fly to Uganda if funds are available.  The organisation has proposed that we make available 50,000 dollars towards out standing contributions to enable them to carry this work.  

The third step is to provide funds for the International Red Locusts Organisation of Central and Southern African currently working in Tanzania to enable this organisation air spray the many swarms in Tanzania moving towards Uganda.  This organisation will require about 200,000 dollars which will also reduce on arrears of Uganda’s contribution.  The above steps will require emergency funds which can only be authorised by this House.  

I would like to urge at this stage that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has put the Disaster Management Committee on standby for any eventualities.  I have also discussed the measures my ministry intends to take with the Chairman of the NRC Sectoral Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, hon. Zakary Olum.

Finally, I would like to use this opportunity in addition to our earlier press release to advise the public to be on the lookout for these locusts and report there presence to government authorities as soon as these locust swarms are cited.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. (Applause)

MOTION FOR RESOLUTION OF THE NATIONAL RESISTANCE COUNCIL TO AUTHORISE THE MINISTER OF FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING TO RELEASE FUNDS FOR EMERGENCY PURPOSES

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa):  Mr chairman, I beg to move the Motion to authorise the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning to release the funds for emergency purposes.  The Motion goes as follows:  Whereas the contingencies funds established under Section 3 of the Contingencies Fund Act, 1962, empower the Minister when an urgent and unforeseen need for expenditure arises, and it is in this public interest that funds should be provided to meet that need; now, therefore, may it be resolved by the National Resistance Council that a sum of Shs. 300 million be released by the Minister for Finance for the purpose of eradication of locusts now in Uganda.  

The Government is aware of the Act which authorises the Minister to release some funds, but as we talk, we have closed the Financial Year and secondly as Members may be aware, we have not even moved the Vote on Account, leave along the Appropriation Bill for the new Financial Year.  Therefore, there are no funds as such to spend by the government as of now.  

Secondly, even by that law, we could only spend Shs. 5 million and we require now Shs. 300 million.  However, we are - there is a provision that a Minister could spend that money and report to this House or could seek approval prior to spending that money.  It is in that spirit that I move that Motion to allow the Minister of Finance to release Shs. 300 million as an emergency fund to facilitate the eradication of locusts as you have just heard the statement made by the Minister.  We hope that when we start the next Financial Year, we shall be able to revive this emergency fund and we continue with it, because it has spent quite a long time without being utilised, though the law stands in place.  I beg to move.

MR SIBO (Nominated):  Mr Chairman, I rise to second the Motion.  The Motion is extremely necessary, it treats a very serious situation we find ourselves in.  We are attacked by a ruthless insect which can cause tremendous disaster in this country.  For those who have seen locusts work, will appreciate exactly what I am trying to say.,  They will destroy expanses of land, greenland or crops, leaving it absolutely bear.  When you get this kind of situation, it becomes extremely serious; it is not only the animals and insects that become threatened, but the human being will also be threatened by famine.  We have had famines previously here in this country caused by locusts in the 1940s and 50s.  So, it is a threat that we have got to treat with seriousness.  So, the request that the minister is putting to this House must be treated with the seriousness it deserves, and with the urgency that it deserves.  

As you have heard, there is a law on our Statute books namely the Emergency contingency Fund Act which was enacted in 1962, Chapter 150, and subsequently amended by a decree of 1973.  This law provides for the amount of the money to be on that fund, it is today supposed to be 5 million.  Unfortunately, the last time this fund was used was 1973.  Since then this fund has not been used; it has been misused; it is dead.  Normally, the minister would have used those funds - today with this threat, but the fund is not there.  

The second method the Minister has mentioned is that he would have needed to come to this Parliament to amend the law to seek the amount he requires; that would require publishing the Amendment Bill and to take the necessary time required to get this Bill passed in Parliament, meanwhile the locusts would be carrying out their own disaster in this country, and we cannot, obviously, wait until then.  However, this is not to say that the Bill must not be amended; the Bill must be amended - the Act must be amended; the Bill must be brought to this House in order to establish the emergency fund.  This fund is absolutely required!  

You may recall, Mr Chairman, last year we had the earthquake problem in Kabarole, we should have used that fund to treat the case in Kabarole.  Unfortunately, we did not do this and we used normal critical methods, we use when we have a problem like this.  

I would like to suggest, we do not have to make our affairs by management by crisis, it is a shame that we have got to do this.  I, therefore, request the minister to come to this House at an early date to get this Act amended so that we can have fund for that purpose so that we do not have to be desperate and manage our affairs by crisis.  

I would also like to suggest here that we have not been properly treated by our systems  We have a warning system in this country and an early warning system should have warned us that locusts are coming; unfortunately this early warning system is not working; if it is working, it is not effective; and we have had to be told, I am told that the whole Director of the Locust Organisation - whatever they call it, has had to move all the way from Lusaka to come here and tell us that the locusts are coming.  He has arrived here just too late -(Interjections)- I realise, of course, that modern technology of the aircraft, with jet - flight from Lusaka would definitely be here before the locusts are, but I think we would have known this before; the locusts were in Tanzania and we should have been told, but we only knew when the locusts were in the country, and I think really we should try and be better efficient.  

The second misgiving I have is the use of the funds that we are giving to the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Agriculture is not the most efficient Ministry; I only feel I have the responsibility to warn the Minister of Agriculture who has taken over, inherited, I think, an unfortunate state of affairs in that ministry.  The Ministry has squandered funds beyond imagination (Interruption)

MR NASAASIRA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, realising that we are discussing only one issue of national importance, to deal with how to handle this disaster that did not start from the Ministry of Agriculture, but is coming across our borders, and rallying that we are about to start communication from the Chair to debate on the budget, is it in order for hon. Sibo to start the problems with the ministry on this Motion, when he could have waited for a few more days and he could have more time to do it?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Sibo, is quite in order because you want to get money.

MR SIBO:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I am being extremely kind to the hon. Minister; I am just giving him some tips to see how he could use the funds he is looking for more effectively and ensure that the funds are being used for the best cause that is being sought.  Thank you -(Interruption)- I will have an occasion to think about the Ministry, but I want to tell the Minister, -(Interruption)

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  The information I want to give hon. Sib who is holding the Floor and through him to the Ministry of Agriculture - I think the worry in this House is not that we should not provide Shs. 300 million for agriculture, but it is realising that whereas Japan for instance, gives us about 3 million dollars a year, agriculture cannot account, in the last six years for even one million dollars.  Agriculture has failed to account for CIDA.  Would it not be a disaster if we gave this money to Agriculture and then the locusts keep going on and we cannot have the money, they cannot account for it.  Could we not be better off to have another ministry doing the job?

MR SIBO:  I thank the hon. Member for the information.  Mr Chairman, this Ministry has purchased expiring drugs we know that; they have imported defective tractors and machinery; they have diverted ranch funds into their own allowances and imprest for cash.  There are cases in court we know for embezzlement; they even re-allocate development budget funds into recurrent expenditure!  In that Ministry, there is no -(Interjection)- in that Ministry there is no regard at all for financial regulations and for accounting instructions. The Sectoral Committee on Agriculture has complained; the Public Accounts Committee has called for accountability on lots of funds but unfortunately this accountability has not been forthcoming.  The Ministry is said to have been restructured, but unfortunately, again the restructured ministry has left lots of dead wood and thieves -

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Sibo, please can you wind up?

MR SIBO:  I am wondering, Mr Chairman, I am only worried if I may wind up; I am only worried, that these funds will be put to the use they are applied for.  So, I request the Minister when he gets these funds to make sure that these funds are properly deployed.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR OLUM (Nwoya County, Gulu):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman for giving me the opportunity to speak on this Resolution of the NRC.  I think one of the most important thing that is happening with this resolution is that it is awakening this Parliament to the laws in our books.  It took a bit of time of consultation between the Minister of Agriculture, the Minister of Finance and the committee of this House to dig out the laws which can deal with this kind of emergencies.  I think, it is very important for us as Parliament to spend a bit more time to look into our books, and that will give us an orderly way of dealing with issues that pertain to this House.  Last year, we had an unfortunate incident of famine in the North and North Eastern part of Uganda.  It took a resolution of this House to request Government to take action; even then, we had a lot of contradictions between two Ministers of Government, the Minister dealing with Agriculture and the Minister dealing with social welfare.  I think we all remember the unfortunate incident that took place, and some of the exchanges were in this very House as to who was responsible for handling those disasters.  These are issues of national importance and of public concern, and I think, our fore-fathers, like the hon. Mzee here and others who were in that House at that time, did foresee that the Minister of Finance should be given some lee way to handle some of these emergences especially when Parliament was not in session.  So, I am really happy that Parliament is now invoking one of the Statutes which were passed away back in 1962.  This will enable us to deal with emergencies in a much more orderly manner so that government can act in a coordinated manner.  All issues of finance in this country is handled by the Minister of Finance, and I think, it is only in order that we should support the Minister of Finance who has brought this resolution to this House to deal with these emergencies.  

I also like to support the views that have been expressed by hon. Sibo that this law should be up-dated to meet some of the new eventualities that are now arising, especially in currency reforms and value of our currency.  I wholly support this Motion and I would like Members in this House to look at this as an important resolution in legislation.  

I would like to commend briefly on the importance of our regional organisations.  Way back in the 40’s we had invasion of red locusts in this country and other parts of Africa.  Famine struck this area and many people died out of starvation and the colonial government in their own wisdom set up these organisations to deal with such occurrences of locusts which have no boundary of origin.  We have been told that these are originating from Tanzania, tomorrow they could come from Sudan, they could come from other areas of this region.  So, these regional organisations play a very important role in trying to combat these menaces to our people; that is why the Locust Control Organisations were formed for these people in this region to deal with this problem especially where they are breeding.  If you let these locusts leave their breeding places, it becomes more difficult for us to control them!  These organisations have worked very well in the past and we almost came to the point when we would feel the locusts have been controlled completely; but I think we all become complacement in this region and allow these insects to breed over and over and they have become a menace.  

We should now go back and re-organise, and fund these organisations so that they are able to be equipped with the planes, with the spraying equipment, with all the organisational structure which will combat these locusts where they are breeding.  I would like to appeal to this House to support part of this fund to go towards payment of our dues to these international organisations; it is very, very important -(Applause)- that is where we should start so that we show that we are really committed.  

Secondly, I would also like to appeal to our neighbours and all those who belong to these organisations to pay up, because today it is Uganda, tomorrow it will be Rwanda and next time, it will be Kenya.  I think the Minister responsible especially foreign affairs, they should work out a way of really reactivating these organisations to function properly, funded properly so that we can avoid some of these occurrences happening.  What is happening today in Western Uganda, is only a tip of the iceberg; the Minister has already made a statement that there are many more swarms waiting to move Northwards.  We have only got two swarms as of yesterday; we may have more to come.  I think it is important that we really mobilise our neighbours to pay up and to strengthen the control of these insects, especially, where hey are breeding.  

Hon. Sibo talked about early warning systems; I think, it would be wrong for us in this House to say that the Ministry did not know that these insects were coming.  It is true they knew and they were fully aware of the fact that these insects had crossed into Uganda and here I would like to congratulate the Minister of Agriculture who physically -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, it was yesterday when I received the information from the District Agricultural Officer, Lira, that these locusts swarms have appeared in Dokolo County, Lira District.

MR OLUM:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to correct the impression that the technical officers in the Ministry of Agriculture were not aware of these occurrences; they were duly informed by the central office in Lusaka; a fax is available, I think, the Minister could read it to this House and that is why they immediately mobilised themselves to take immediate action; and I would like to congratulate the Minister here who physically went to the region where these things have invaded this place, and he informed me as Chairman of the Committee of this House what action he has taken and we have been working on this issue for the last two days together.  I think it will be good for us to acknowledge the action taken by the Minister and his team to try and avert the threat of these swarms even before he has come to this House; we thank you very much for that. (Applause)  

I also like to echo the warning - I mean the advice given by the Minister of Agriculture that the public must be fully aware that there is that person that can help in identifying whether they are really locusts or grasshoppers are our technical officers in the field.  So, while we may say that, they are in Dokolo, you may find that they may not be the same type of locusts or insects now invading the South Western part of Uganda.  I think it is important -(Interruption)

DR MIYINGO KEZIMBIRA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the speaker on the Floor that, we are aware of the insects that are in Lira, our technical staff have informed us and they have even brought the insect back here, and we have taken it to Kawanda for identification; it is feared it could be a red locust, but we are still doubtful because we have had grasshoppers in the Northern Region which have behaved the same way.  But let me add that the ones that we have cited in Lira are still in a stage that we call an nymph; they cannot fly and we have mobilised our spray pumps to go- they are going to be destroyed whatever they are, because they have destroyed crops, but we are not yet certain whether they are red locusts or not.  Thank you very much.

MR OLUM:  Thank you for that information.  Mr Chairman, this goes further to illustrate my point that the public must be fully alert and report any suspicious insect which they find around so that the technical officers can go out and verify what type of insects they are, and if they are the type that they - we are looking for, we can destroy them before they become very dangerous.  

I would like to end here by saying that we have had a lot of complaints the way government departments handle funds.  It is true that this can be said of Agriculture, but I believe that this fund is of such great importance that we can only advise the Minister to be very vigilant to ensure that this fund goes for the intended purpose for which we are voting this money.  I think, the rest of the complaints and other irregularities - I think we shall deal with that issue when we come to the budget.  I thank you very much and I support this Resolution.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I have two points only about this Resolution.  The first one is that the Minister is asking for Shs. 300 million.  But I thought the Minister in convincing us should have given us the breakdown of this Shs. 300 million and how he arrived at this figure of Shs. 300 million.  For somebody to come to this House and just said he wants Shs. 300 million and not Shs. 200 million and not 1 million shillings, I think it is a matter of common sense to this House that the Minister should give us what are the elements which are required and how he arrived at this figure of Shs. 300 million. (Applause)  

The second point is that the issue of locusts is not a new matter in Africa and indeed in this region, and African countries find it really a very serious matter for the survival of this region and they had these headquarters somewhere in the Southern Region.  But I am reliably told that Uganda has completely defaulted in paying for its contribution to this regional organisation.  This is possibly the reason why either we have not had full assistance from the regional body or because of that we are not likely to have the necessary assistance that will come from them, and therefore, Uganda is being forced to remit some of these costs from its own national budget, which if we were up-to-date subscribers to this body, we would have had a lot of assistance.  So, the Minister may wish to clarify to this House as way of information our status with this regional organisation and how we stand with our subscriptions.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KARUHANGA (Nyabushozi County, Mbarara):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I wish to first of all bring apologies from hon. Kigyagi who is not feeling so well, who is representing Isingiro County where this menace is.  I was in Isingiro over the weekend and the people are extremely worried about this menace.  However, at the outset I must mention and probably this is the main reason why I really wanted to make a contribution.  I must mention how happy I was when I found hon. Kezimbira the Minister of State in the Ministry of Agriculture in boots and in combat gear with the Locusts Controllers in Isingiro and later on very late in the evening in Mbarara arriving or coming from the operations during the spray.  I must also join hon. Zachary Olum in thanking hon. Nasaasira for the presence and great impact they have made in the area as Ministers.  

For me, knowing what has been going on in that Ministry, this was a great sigh of relief and I really felt assure; in fact, I did promise that when we come - I did not know they were coming up with this, I said, I would still find an opportunity to mention that things are going to change in the Ministry of Agriculture from what I had seen, and we really hope that these changes will be much more apparent than we have been having hitherto in this House.  The only thing I really wanted to know from the statement is how they were able to find out that there are 100 million locusts; how did they count them?  It would be interesting to us if they can let us know how they get this information; the method of counting them.  

I was also surprised to learn that we have not been paying our share to that organisation controlling locusts when we are in a danger zone of these locusts.  To me, that surprised me, to find that we are now rushing here - now supposing Parliament was not in session and this thing had not taken place last week, what would have actually happened?  Because the issue raised by hon. Sibo are, I think, if we deal with this problem the way it has been brought and stop there.  We are opening ourselves to even more disasters.  I think we hope that the Minister of Finance will put in this budget a vote which goes towards paying for this emergency relief.  I know that in the CA, we have provided for the Disaster Management Commission to be formed - details of which will be formed by the Parliament.  But from what I have gathered, because I was not in the know of this, is that there is in fact, an emergency Act in the books where there should be an account at the Bank of Uganda with funds already available.  If that is the case, then I would really ask the Minister of Finance to make sure that in the budget on that vote, using that Act, money is put to take care of such a situation.  Because there is no point is us not providing to kill the locusts in Isingiro and then the ones in Lira come after we have passed the Resolution, and then we hear that some have gone now to Masindi, then we come back here to make emergency, and then we hear there is an earthquake in Fort Portal and then we come back here to make another emergency; then we hear there is a famine in Teso then we are back here to look for another money.  I think this situation now has alerted us and, I think, we should take it very seriously.  

I am only very happy to represent the people of Mbarara and hon. Kigyagi - on hon. Kigyagi’s account to thank the Minister of Finance for bringing this in this House now and I have no hesitation that we should not waste a lot of time in approving this Resolution and all the anger we have to express to the Minister of Agriculture we can keep this until the time comes.  But I think they have put on notice.  Thank you.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA (Army Representative):  Mine, I am just only standing to add to what hon. Members have been talking about, regarding the menace which these locusts are likely to cause to our country especially, the famine effect.  Mr Chairman, hon. Sibo has already warned us that we used to have the early warning mechanism and I am also adding my own early warning mechanism that government seem to be in a terrible danger of its organisation, because as you have heard from the Minister, they are only guessing, they do not have the entomologists to prove or identify a locust whether it is a locust or a grasshopper; this is already dangerous.  

Now, regarding the regional cooperation, I also want to warn that hon. Members have been expressing their concerns that we have not contributed, but it is to the contrary.  Even if you had contributed, we have also realised the mismanagement in those regions which has also been a result of suffering to receive some of their mismanaged items coming and being imported to this country.  For instance, we have had a water hyacinth problem; it emanates from neighbours and passes through our waters and we have a problem.  

Similarly, locusts are coming down South and they are being imported to us - even if we have not contributed, I do not believe that these people are actually exporting them to us so as to indicate to us that we have not contributed.  So, it is just the irresponsibility of our own ministry to be prepared for these problems  

Regarding the money, I have also a problem; this Shs. 300 million, as you might also have seen, the ministry itself might not be having a clear policy of who is in charge of what!  Because even this Vector Control Department is being contested; does it belong to the Ministry of Health or does it belong to the Ministry of Agriculture?  Now, by the time they sort out those confusion we shall end up being invaded by these locusts with nobody responsible.  Therefore, only we pray to the Bunyoro who will give us our lake which we call Rwitanzigye, maybe, it will help us to kill these Nziges.  Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE (Dr Miyingo Kezimbira):  Mr Chairman, I thank you very much.  Mr Chairman, the seriousness of the issue that we have at hand probably requires one to have seen what is in Isingiro to take this as a very serious matter.  Hon. Karuhanga was asking as to how we managed to judge where we have a hundred million locusts in one of the swarms or not; this was not an exact figure, that is why we put it between 50 and 100 million; but a swarm where you have a range of figures similar to what my Colleague has mentioned.  I have some two photographs here which can pass around later on, for people to be able to assess.  

Mr Chairman, you would have expected that we would have been able to control the locusts by using our spray pumps but the locusts, are very mobile, especially when it gets to about 11.00 O’clock when the sun shines, they are like grasshoppers and they move very higher that our pumps are not able to reach them, and this is the dilemma we are in that although we can be able to kill some of them very early in the morning, we cannot be able to eradicate the mass that now exists in the area. (Interruption)
  
DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Minister and maybe, also to inform the people whose areas have never been invaded by the locusts, that one method that can help in the control of locusts is a biological method; they are edible. (Laughter)  These red locusts which invaded Uganda somewhere about 1950 - those locusts, I remember were being eaten by people and their test is close to that one of grasshoppers.  So, people who can eat grasshoppers should also have a try at the locusts; and with 17 million people in Uganda, these 50 million can actually be destroyed.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. (Laughter)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  The additional information is that actually they are very nutritious and the protein content is very high.  But I wanted to add that or seeking clarification from the Minister, we want to know the chemicals being used in spraying. Because the chemicals being used in spraying are contestable, and we could have a disaster, where we are trying to eradicate locusts.  But then have an advance effect on our environment.  So, we want the hon. Minister to clarify to us the chemicals being used in the spray.  Thank you.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, may be I will start with the comment on the information given by hon. Tiberondwa that already people in their area, were gathering the locusts for eating a few of them.  But then, we have to go further, that we have warned through the RC system of the area that, because we are spraying the insects, if people continue eating them, could land on some of those which have already been sprayed and this could cause death to the people.  So, we have discouraged anybody trying to eat the locusts.  

Now, as to what chemical we are using, we are using a chemical called phenothiotin which - is a chemical which we have in the ministry continual used to handle both pests like army worms, even grasshoppers which sometimes have become a menace in some areas and it seems to be very effective with locusts too.  

I wanted also to comment on the fact that, the locusts must be taken serious because unlike the grasshoppers, their life span is much longer than that of a grasshopper.  The experts who came from Addis Ababa, informed us that some of them can live up to a year.  And those that are on the ground right now, are rather young ones.  Because they seem to change colours and as they grow old.  And it was possible by looking at the individual locusts to tell that these were very young and would live for quite sometime, if left an attended to or attached.  

So, it is very vital that we should attach them to the Ministry of Agriculture; here we intend to use whatever funds will be available to us to avert the plague that is already in our house.  And we want also not to stop there, but be able to be supportive to the organisation so that it can stop the locusts before it can reach this country.  As a practice, it has been that locusts are locked out at the breeding ground.  But if they are not locked out in the breeding ground, then the problem of locking them out becomes even more difficult.  

Tomorrow, I am going for a council of ministers meeting for the Desert Locusts Control Organisation in Addis Ababa.  And some of things which are going to be discussed is exactly contribution to these organisations and how these have been hampered.  And if this House could approve this fund, which the Minister has requested for, then, I will take assurance to the organisation that we are going to meet our arrears and contribution and a plane probably would be dispatched as soon as I get into, Addis Ababa.  

To further clarify on the insects that we have in Lira, someone has remarked that we do not know how to differentiate between grasshoppers and locusts.  Indeed, our entomologists know that.  But Uganda has not been known to be a breeding ground for locusts at all.  Locusts have got a preference.  And we have never become a breeding ground.  So when these were sighted, scientists do not just rush into conclusions, they first you know, do tests and find out.  and we have dispatched a team to Lira to pick more of the insects.  Because this one insect which was brought was brought by an individual farmer.  and it was brought by a staff, and we have sent a team with the spraying of the farms so that they can be able - if they find they are positive, they will be able to spray them.  

Another warning probably is a warning to animals and people who keep animals that the chemical we use is poisonous to the animals.  The grass that we spray is likely to carry the chemical for quite sometime.  Probably seven days and we have warned the people that those who are grazing animals should not graze where we have sprayed.  We have no choice, the best thing we could do is to lock out the locusts, whereby breed and that, will mean that we pay our arrears and we contribute more to the organisation so that the locusts do not reach us.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR NASASIRA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I rise to support the Motion moved by my Colleague the Minister of State for Finance.  But I just want to respond to a few queries that were raised.  First and fore most, I want to clarify one point - who is responsible for controlling the spread of locusts?  I want the hon. Members to understand this.  The responsibility of controlling of locusts is not on the shoulders of any Member state.  these locusts have been a menace for a long time.  That during the colonial time in 1949, we formed the International Red Locusts Control Organisation of Central and Southern Africa in 1949.  To control the red locusts - from Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania down to Zambia, Malawi and so on.  

Similarly, the colonial organisation from 1952 formed the Desert Locust Control Organisation of Eastern Africa.  To control Desert Locusts, that are mainly in the desert - the dry land - in the Sahara Desert and so on.  And these were given the mandate to monitor to kill and control the locusts.  The responsibility of Member States, is only to contribute the money to those organisations.  And it is only when we make them ineffective that, then we get the attacks.  

Secondly, there are no breeding grounds in Uganda.  The breeding grounds for the red locusts are in Tanzania, they are in Malawi and Zambia, those three countries.  But because they fly and they affect us, what the International Red Locusts Organisation does, I am informed, they lay eggs between November and December.  Then you have hoppers from January up to April.  Now, it is during that time when they have the hoppers that, these organisations come in and kill the hoppers before they are able to fly.  

Before these organisations were paralysed because of financial problems, that in the Tanzania area which is breeding ground, the hoppers stage was over by April and these locusts now were able to move as swarms, and that is why we are having the problems  So, the medicine is actually to sustain the organisations and then countries will have no problems  

So, I just wanted Members to understand that.  It is from that background that I would want to allay the fears of the Members who do not trust our Ministry very much.  But I will look for another opportunity to defend our Ministry and say what we have put in place to ensure accountability.  But I will look for that time later.  That this money we are asking for, is not going to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.  The 200 million is going directly to International Red Locusts Organisation of Central and Southern Africa.  And as I said in my statement, it is directly going to help the team that is in Tanzania, who are now also grounded financially.  To control the serious danger that we are trying to stop from coming across into Uganda.  So, that money, we will not need to account for it as long as we can justify that it has been paid.  And I am sure, it is going to be paid through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which is responsible.  

Secondly, the 50,000 dollars that we have asked for is also going to the Desert Locusts Control Organisation of Eastern Africa, which headquarters is in Addis Ababa; specifically to let the plane that is now on standby in Nairobi come even tomorrow, if money is passed and start the spraying.  S, I think we have already accounted for the 250.  Finally, let us talk about the 50.  Now, the 25 will be in reserve with the Ministry of Finance.  The 25 we have already put in our estimates for the team that is going to be used for emergency measures for this week and next week, until we are able to fly.  

Thirdly, you can realise that nobody can predict how many swarms we might get.  I was talking about two swarms that is what we saw last Sunday.  But now, they might be more - and these things as they fly, they might have been in Isingiro, we might be here, God forbid that they are in Kashari or Sheema Constituency.  Or may be further to Iganga Constituency.  I do not know what the hon. Member will advise his constituency to do?  Now, having clarified that, the only money that is coming to us will be accounted for, we have made estimates and I think I have answered hon. Omara Atubo’s query and other Members.  I think most of the details have been given.  It is to allow these organisations to be able to move and do what their work is.  And if that is done, then that is finished.  

The last two points on early warning - now, even if we are warned, we are warned that the hopper stage is over and these are about to fly.  So, even if you are warned, if you do not have the capacity for they have not reached your country, you cannot fly over to Tanzania the breeding ground or Malawi and start killing these ones from there.  

So, the early warning system is there.  It is only killing these insects in time.  As for the estimates of the 50 million and so on, I wanted to answer this hon. Karuhanga to give him even a more worrying situation.  A swarm of between 50 and 100 million, if it is given an opportunity in a rainy season to lay eggs, it will multiply 100 times.  So, if we have got two swarms and has already been 100 and 200 million, if we allow them to lay eggs, we shall have 100 times to what we have now.  And that is why I call it a plague.  So, with those clarifications, Mr Chairman, I support the Motion.  Thank you very much.   
 	
THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question, with those in favour of the Motion moved by hon. Kisamba Mugerwa say, aye to the contrary nay.

(Question put and agreed to.)



MOTION


THAT THANKS OF THE NATIONAL RESISTANCE COUNCIL BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EX-POSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN A COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR MADE BY 
HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO THIS COUNCIL 
ON TUESDAY, 13TH JUNE, 1995

MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Kiyonga):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I beg to move that, thanks of the National Resistance Council be recorded for the clear and precise ex-position of Government Policy contained in the Communication from the Chair by His Excellency the President to this Council on Tuesday, the 13th June 1995.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Kadaga please, second the Motion.

DR KIYONGA:  Mr Chairman and the hon. Members of the NRC, we all recall that, His Excellency the President on 13th of June, in a very concise and precise way, captured the successes, the failures and challenges that the country has witnessed over the period that the NRM has been running the affairs of this country. And I am moving this Motion to ask my Colleagues hon. Members of NRC so that we collectively express our thanks to the very clear ex-position by his Excellency the President.  I have no doubt that hon. Members will find no difficulty in unanimously approving of this Motion.  As we all know, this is the last session of our council.  Of this current NRC, the current Parliament after about 8 to 9 years of very hard work.  

As the President did state, there is a lot of work awaiting us in forms of Bills and Resolutions.  But I would like to take this opportunity to request my Colleagues that while we get rid of that work, we dispose that work, we should also review our past performance sot hat we can highlight the very useful lessons that have been learn by us, by our country, during this period that we have been in-charge of making laws for our dear country.  

As you well know, initially; the NRC consisted of a mere 38 revolutionaries - political revolutionaries who guided the protracted war between 1981 to 1986.  later on, the council got expanded to nearly 280 honourable Uganda, who are ourselves here.  In this way, the 38 revolutionaries demonstrated in a very clear way that, they were handing over peacefully the revolution of the people of Uganda back to the people themselves.  Some people may say that these 38 people lost power to the bigger group.  This would be a misunderstanding.  The 38 people were only actualizing the mission they had been given.  The war was executed precisely to hand over power peacefully to the people of Uganda.  And so, the 38 people had no option but to execute that mission and hand power to a larger group of Ugandans to continue the struggle.  And I would like to call upon Colleagues to congratulate and thank these 38 revolutionaries for having handed to us - we the bigger group this job of legislating to our country. (Applause)  

Subsequent to receiving this power, the NRC followed very well in my view the clear terms of reference that we were given i.e. to hand over power in turn to the rest of Ugandans and in laws and in resolutions that we have passed here, we have been steadily and gradually been doing this.  We enacted a law to legalise the RC system.  This was one step that we took.  Later on, we decided to give financial power to the people at the lower levels.  We decided that the money collected at the RC III level should remain there - this 50 percent of that money to be managed by our people at that level.  And as most Colleagues will witness this decentralisation in financial terms, even at the Gombolola level, has caused very positive changes.  In some areas this money has been used very well to build administrative centres to build healthy units to maintain roads, to rebuild schools, to mention but a few positive things.  And if one could just project - cast his mind back, suppose when we took power from the colonialists in 1962, this kind of initiative had been implemented, our country would have made very, very massive development and growth.  

We did not stop there by merely giving power to RC III people, financial power, we later decided in a law to decentralise power to the districts.  And I think this year, beginning this financial year, we are going to see all districts finally decentralised so that people can manage their financial matters right at the districts and down to the RC III level.  This has been a fundamental change which we do hope will be upheld in the future.  Besides giving political and financial power to our people in fulfilling our mandate, this NRC has also witnessed a number of very, very positive developments.  

First we were the first to demonstrate that people can be elected on a personal merit to come to Parliament rather than being elected along a political party, along an idealogy.  That an individual can be elected, you come and join many others and you actually make very useful deliberation for our country, even without belonging to a political party.  

While here, hon. Chairman, we have caused a lot of changes in the economy - the exchange rate system has finally been fully reformed, we have started on the privatisation programme, and the problems of marketing that used to disturb our people are all gone.  The cheats that we used to complain about in this House are no more.  And this is a good job that has been done by people elected on the principle of personal merit.  As opposed to when, would be elected along parties and we were not able to solve these basic problems  

In this House, we have also demonstrated that, you can have a Parliament which has no sides in terms of opposition and government side.  And yet being able to hold government accountable.  Bills have come here, some have been passed, some have been amended, some have been rejected out right in Parliament where you have no position or government side. (Applause)  

It is this House that has made a further step forward democratisation in this country.  We sat here under your chairmanship for many days, debating the question of the next step.  How do we make the Constitution for our people?  Some of our Colleagues said, let us make it here, we as NRC other Colleagues said no.  Let us hand over power to the people just as we received it, so that the people can decide who should make this Constitution for them.  And I would like to say that, this House also deserves to be congratulated for the step they took to deny themselves the opportunity to go down in history that they are the ones who made the Constitution.  They handed over this job to other people and formed the CA.  

In our very innovative way in this House, we have not insisted on the very strict division of power.  We have not insisted that as Parliamentarians, we should merely pass laws and sit down and keep telling the executive you go and do this, you go and do this.  Knowing the problems of our country, Members of Parliament have come here, made laws and when they have time they have gone back in the villages and worked along side the people to fundraise for schools for healthy centres, and even to take part in the activities of the people in form of cultivation.  Because our country cannot afford the luxury to have the intelligence of about 200 people to come here and merely sit, talk on the microphone and pass laws, and then go to sleep.  We realise this and we thought w should go out there and demonstrate to our people the way that peace can be kept, the way that development can come about in our poor country.  

So, without giving more examples, one could say in a conclusion that there is now enough evidence.  There is enough evidence first and foremost to our people.  And secondly, to our external friends that Uganda has basic problems of survival which can be ameliorated by fragmentism.  Two, that the Parliament that is non partisan.  Two, that the Parliament that is non-partisan provided its nationalistic and patriotic, can hold the executive accountable and get it to irk democratically.  

I am making this point because some people, as we make the Constitution are saying, you people have made so much progress in Uganda.  It appears as if you are going to arrest your own progress.  And when you ask them why, they say, you see, when you do not have multi-party, if you do not have opposition or who is going to keep who in check.  And they are the ones, Europeans they say that, the test of the food is in the easting.  We the people of Uganda have been eating for 9 years, and we have appreciated that, it is possible to have a democratic and accountable government without having to go to multi-parties or without having to form opposition in the Parliament. (Applause)  

Having said that, I would like to take this opportunity to make a brief report on what is going on in the Constituent Assembly.  The House that the NRC set up to do the very important document - the Constitution for our country.  Hon. Chairman, and hon. Members of the NRC, substantial progress has been made in the CA.  Fundamental decisions have been taken.  We have decided and written down in the document that power belongs to the people.  That the people are sovereign.  That from now on, the people of Uganda will elect the President themselves.  The days, when a party would go and pick a President and give the Ugandans are finished. (Applause)  The day when one would come to power through military means are finished. (Applause)  

Mr Chairman and hon. Members of NRC, we did not think that that was sufficient.  Just to say that, you people, you can elect your own President.  We thought wisely all of us in the CA that, much as we can empower the executive to do certain things, that is the President and the Cabinet much as we can empower the Parliament to do certain jobs and also the judiciary.  But since ultimately the people are the ones sovereign, we have provided that on certain political matters, that people should directly decide through referenda. (Applause) 

 This progress, Sir, we have made but on 20th of last month, we got a bit of a big surprise.  Because for us here in the NRC, we are used to democracy - you discuss, if you are defeated, you sit down.  So, we went to another House which we did not quite understand.  There we discussed for four days, then we voted.  Not even like we vote here, yes and no; even by counting.  We were 268, 199 opposed a certain Motion, 69 supported it, and the Chairman said, the 199 have won.  Which obviously was the obvious.  And behold, we saw some of our colleagues streaming out from the meeting.  This was a challenge because it is still demonstrated that really, we are yet to learn more lessons.  We are yet to conceive and appreciate what democracy says.  I think it is much easier to say, I am democratic, I want multi-party.  But the practice of democracy obviously is not easy.  Because even when people have participated in a Motion, they have voted in a free election, they are not even petitioning, but they leave the meeting that they are demonstrating against the very decision that they themselves have taken.  Fortunately, Mr Chairman, and hon. Members of NRC, I am informed today, I did not go to the CA, that our Colleagues have returned to the House.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is the hon. Member in order to bring the matters which are being discussed in the Constituent Assembly to this House?  In the President’s Speech, there was no remark about the walk out, and I think that these matters of walk out are the logistics of CA, should be discussed in the CA, Mr Chairman, is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Although it may appear painful to you, but he is quite in order. (Laughter)  

DR KIYONGA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman for that protection.  But just to complete the story, for those who may think that hon. Tiberondwa had a point, the Communication from the Chair was on 13th of June and the walkout was on 20th of June.  Now, two points; one the President did make a reference to the Constitutional making exercise, that is very clear.  Secondly, he did hold that, even at this very late hour, if we are not careful, some people may sabotage the Constitutional making exercise.  So, one could say that actually the President had predicted that this hitch we had, was likely to come by.  So, I think briefly, that is what is going on in the CA, we are happy that we are moving very well, most of the work has been done.  And we do hope that, if we should need a little more time, our brothers here will allow us complete the work.  

I would now like to turn to the question of poverty.  The question of poverty in our country which His Excellency the President also went to great length to talk about.  We have spent a lot of time in the NRC analysing this question of poverty.  And one would say that, really the question of whether or not, there is poverty, is no longer a debate.  Both Parliament and the executive do accept that there is poverty in our country.  The indicators are there for anybody to see.  First, Uganda is a least developed country, that itself means poverty.  Secondly, since we got independence, we have not been stable.  We have been wars in and out, destroying the little investment that we had.  

While fighting, we have not stopped, we did not stop, we did not go on holiday as far as making children was concerned.  So, we destroyed wealth while we were creating more people who were demanding wealth in order to be able to survive.  So, as the President said around 1962, about 9 million, but current figures indicate that we are 20 million.  The fact that, now we have less wealth but more people, is really another way of saying we are poor, because there is less food to go around for many more people.  These many more people now are demanding food.  They are demanding more jobs; they are demanding more water, more roads, and more classrooms etc.  And this is not really a simple problem to solve.  

As I begin to see as they say, political temperature goes up.  Some people even beginning as usual to make false promises that if they are elected, there will be more jobs, that if they are elected, poverty will go.  But for us who have been here for 8 years, know only too well the difficulty of fighting poverty.  And in my view, hon. Members, I think we need to have full commitment in the part of all of us leaders to fight poverty.  We need to ensure that peace and stability continues to regain throughout our country.  We need to continue to be innovative in approaching our problems rather than just adopting systems abroad, adopting slogans and we hope that by merely transplanting those, we are going to solve major problems like poverty.  We need maximum unity of our people, if we are going to fight poverty.  

In the view of some of us, we think that the way the NRC has operated over the past, is a good indicator that if we continue operating in this fashion, we are likely to get out of poverty much faster than again going backward sub-dividing ourselves and beginning -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like the hon. Minister on the Floor to indicate to us how we are going to fight poverty while at the same time, so much money is lost and we do not want to talk of corruption.  There is a lot of money whereby people just steal it.  It is published in Newspapers, but nobody ever has the interest to make sure that this matter is tackled right from the ranks of government.  I thank you.

DR KIYONGA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to thank hon. Wanendeya for that intervention.  But also I would like to inform him that later on, I would say something little about corruption. (Applause)  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  

Secondly, we have to ensure as managers of this country that high rates of economic growth are maintained.  It is pleasing that since the financial year ended, the country witnesses 10 percent of the growth of the GDP.  The only way for us to remove poverty is to maintain very high rates of growth.  

But lastly on this question of poverty, I want to emphasize the orientation of government that while we follow a market economy which we have chosen, it is very important that we continue to target specific programme at the grass root so at to alleviate and remove poverty and cause development there.  And this explains as His Excellency said, why the initiatives like the ‘Entandiikwa’ like PAPSCA, like the Northern Uganda Rehabilitation Project etc.  But obviously, much more will be required.  In order to quickly respond to what hon. Wanendeya raised, let me now make a few comments on the question of corruption.  

Mr Chairman, and hon. Members, the question of corruption is yet unresolved.  The Ten Point Programme of the NRM does indicate that corruption is one of the seven ills in this country that has to be fought.  And since the NRM came to power, every effort has been made to try and fight corruption beginning again in this House.  The Public Accounts Committee which had long been buried by Amin and Obote II was revived by this very House.  And as we know, the Public Accounts Committee has done a lot of work as indicated that, in the Auditor General’s report, there are indications of money being embezzled, money being lost.  So, we have been able to lift this from the books and inform the whole country that money us getting lost here and there.  And arising out of work of Public Accounts Committee, some prosecutions have taken place and a number of them have been successful.  

This House put in place the institution of the Inspector General of Government.  This House only recently recognised the freedom of press and made a law to ensure that this freedom will remain.  And as hon. Wanendeya has just said, the press has also been helping in exposing the problem of corruption.  And very soon as His Excellency said, we are going to be called upon as Members of NRC to approve or say something about a Committee that is going to implement our leadership code, so that that institution also is complete.  And I can only say that Colleagues should take this exercise seriously, it is a small committee, we should use purely to ensure that we further our work against corruption.  We should not fall into the temptation of one saying since that man on the proposal is my relative; let me support him, even when you know that he is not a good person.  Or you know that so and so who has been proposed is a bad man, but you keep quiet say, if I am the one who reveals him, I am going to have problems at home.  I think if we remain firm as we have always been and make sure that we appointed tested people, we appoint an appropriate committee, then we are sure that the work we have started to fight corruption will go a step further.  

But I would like to emphasise that the matter of corruption is not just here in the headquarters.  It is not just in the Ministry headquarters, it is also own in the districts where come from.  At the Gombolola level at the district, we all know this.  Therefore, our net has to be cast wide in the population.  We have even today, children who still believe that to pass an examination, they should cheat.  We still have today, people going to school leaders and getting forged certificates.  So, that shows us the extent of the problem.  While we fight here, while the IGG is there, while there is Public Accounts Committee; we have to be aware that even down in the district, at the Gombolola headquarters, the cancer has reached there.  And we have also to keep our eyes open at that level.  So, I would like to assure hon. Wanendeya that for as long as we keep together as a country, we remain principled, we remain vigilant even these ills of corruption will definitely be fought and successful.  Since I believe other Colleagues would also like to add their voice, to this Motion, I, I will omit some of the points and just jump to last one.  

The question of security.  I think all of us are convinced now that, the strategy of the NRM on matters of security is correct.  First, as we came into power, we realised that with our weakness on technology and funding, it was necessary for us to have many men and women in the army, and this was implemented based by criticism from certain quarters.  Because of these large numbers of patriotic Ugandans, we have been able to weigh the many challenges that tried to destabilise this country.  So that the strategy that has worked and when time came, and we thought that it was nolonger necessary to keep so many boys and girls, men and women in the army; we hear in the NRC accepted that we should reduce the army to an appropriate size which as you know, is being successfully implemented.  

The other strategy of the NRM was on the issue of reserve force.  Right from the beginning, we realised that it was important to train Ugandans how to be here in the villages and make them local defence units as a form of reserve forces.  In some areas, the RCs themselves, were militarily trained.  Some people kept complaining why are you training people in arms, you are making the situation dangerous, you are wasting money.  But if at least, what has happened in Kasese and in Buganda is to go by, one would again appreciate that this strategy was correct.  Our brother Itongwa thought that he could jump into the bush here and disturb people.  And because his foresight was already there, we just called our friends the LDUs who supported the army and the police and as you know, the situation is long solved apart from finding Mr Itongwa and taking him to the court of law.  So, this strategy on security is definitely correct.  Of course, we still have residual problem like in the North.  

In the North as you all know, the situation has been further compounded by the fact that a neighbouring country has taken pleasure and interest in training our own people and throwing them across the border, to kill their fellow Ugandans.  If it was not for that sanctuary that these brothers and sisters get in that neighbouring country, that problem itself, would be long solved.  And I do believe that part of the country - the NRC here, in the CA and other leaders in that part of the country, are giving maximum corporation to the security forces so that we can bring total security to that part of the country as well.  We also have the problem in Karamoja which has denied the people of Karamoja peace and development, has denied the majority of the people of Uganda to exploit the resources that exist in that part of the world.  Very rich resources; Gold, national Park, people, cattle, goats and sheep.  Now, again our strategy has been that, use the people themselves to solve the problem.  

As I speak now, we estimate that, in the hands of the ordinary Karimojong, there are about 35 thousand guns in the hands of the Karimojong.  These guns they took from the irresponsible governments that were there before us.  So, the strategy is party that, we should cooperate with these fellow Ugandans to bring peace to that part of the country. And already the army has convinced more than 8,000 Karimojong who have come forward with their guns, registered them, and they are out trying to persuade more to come forward and cooperate with the state to bring security.  But we would like to strengthen this process funds allowing and NRC allowing, to put a special arm of the police with superior technology in that area, to cooperate with the population so that we can end cattle rustling, protect the people of Karamoja against external aggression and bring peace and stability in that area, so that the process of development can start in the honest.  I would like at this stage hon. Members to commend hon. Pulkol for a work he has started very well. (Applause)  As I speak now, valley dams are being sank, a lot of elders, a lot of community leaders in Karamoja are coming forward to cooperate in this programme.  

Finally, on the side of Foreign Affairs, our thanks here again could not be doubted.  We have left no stone unturned, to talk to neighbours, to talk to those beyond to illustrate the interests of Uganda.  To illustrate that Uganda wants cooperation.  To illustrate that Uganda means well for everybody.  It is incorrect for anybody from any quarter to go around and spread the message that Uganda is expansionist; that Uganda wants to annex other territories.  

Indeed, because of our approach on the diplomatic front, Uganda, which has been long forgotten by the community of nations, now stands high in the world.  In most of the fora that take place at the OAU, and other meetings where Africans meet to solve their problems, many countries do look forward to Uganda for leadership.  This can be refuted by many members who have been privileged to go and attend those meetings.  

So, just as the President said, I would like to assure hon. Members that there is no policy to annex other territories.  Our interest is cooperation and more peace and security to everybody in the region.  For the sake of completion, I would like to mention that the measures we are putting in place in Karamoja are also intended to ensure that the neighbours to -Karamoja, like Teso, like Kitgum, like Lira, like Mbale and Kapchorwa are equally protected from those who are interested in riding.

In conclusion, I would like to inform Members that the road to development and full democracy is a long one and full of pain.  The last 10 years have demonstrated that there is a way Uganda can move forward.  Great achievements have been made, this country should build on that.  Political leaders, should develop more trust in Ugandans.  It was sad to hear some of our Colleagues in the CA appealing to the UN and OAU to come here and solve domestic problems  With that, I beg to move and request my Colleagues to support the Motion.  Thank you very much. (Applause)

MISS KADAGA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to second the Motion as moved by the Minister of Internal Affairs.  And I would like to begin Sir, by thanking you for the manner in which you have conducted the business of this House for the last 9 years, and the patience you have had to conduct it in that manner. (Applause)  

I also wish to take the opportunity to congratulate all the NRC Members upon their performance.  It was quite gratifying to hear the Head of State recognise our contribution.  For sometime, we have been hearing that we are not quite up to it, but it was very gratifying that Head of State recognised it in public.  Sir, in this last session, I would like to begin by commending the NRM Government first on the emancipation of women.  The example set by this government is one that should be emulated by all civic and political leaders everywhere in Africa and I am glad that a Presidential hopeful who had walked out has come back because I am keen awaiting to hear his manifesto and especially what he intends to do about the women folk.  And I would like to assure all those Presidential hopefuls that the emancipation of women in Uganda cannot be reversed any more.  So anybody who wants to come to power will have to contend with the women folk.  

Mr Chairman and hon. Members, we are happy that for the first time, we have a Vice President who is a woman.  I went to attend a conference recently and when I informed them that our Vice President is a woman, they had to ask me to clarify whether I meant a Vice President of a club or an organisation of the Republic.  So, when I said the Vice President of the Republic, they said well, your work is finished.  You do not need anything more.  That is where our work begins from.  The appointment of the Vice President is important to the women of this country because she is a role model.  Today in the primary schools, in the secondary schools, in the universities, girls are working hard to emulate the Vice President.  They are working hard to complete their studies and be able to participate in the political life of this country.  So, we are very happy about that.  

On the question of children, Uganda has not adopted the convention to the rights of children.  This is an area which had been forgotten and which we have to address very, very seriously.  There are children in this country who not for reasons of their own making are victims of conflicts.  Not for reasons of them making are in situations of slavery and so on.  So, it is up to us as leaders here to find solutions to how our children will be brought up and specifically in relation to the situation in the North, I would like to call upon all the leaders here.  First of all, to realise that the situation in Acholi affects all of us.  The children in Acholi may be dying but the Musoga soldier, the Muganda soldier and Munyankole soldier who is trying to put down the rebellion.  

So, nobody is winning in this war.  It is a matter which all of us must sit down and address together and I want to commend the government for having made efforts in Eastern Uganda to strive to find ways of putting down the rebellion.  I think if all of us sat down, not just Acholi people in their Acholi pacification committee, but all of us here as Ugandans, we could sit down and work out a strategy of how to end that rebellion.  The was has been expensive for us.  We are the ones who pay the taxes and we bear the burden of sustaining that part of the country which is at war.  So, I really urge my Colleagues here to come out with a quick solution so that by the end of the year, let the Acholi also have peaceful elections.  

I would like to commend the credit scheme put by the government.  They have not tricked down as well as one would expect but it is a starting point because poverty is something that has hindered and until we can find ways of permitting funds into the population, it is not going to be alleviated and it is on that note that I would like to remind the government that ever since we came to this House, we have been asking for the institution of a farmer’s bank.  The farmers of this country have serious struggle with the commercial bank.  So, I hope that during this remaining period the government would look into this matter so that we leave this House having laid the foundation for the farmers of this country.  

On the constitution making process, it is good that we Ugandans have had an opportunity to sit down and discuss our problems together.  I think we here have to be commended for allowing the Constituency Assembly to be elected and allowing it to proceed with its work.  I would like to urge those of us who are in the Constituent Assembly really to be statesmen.  It has been said that politicians think of today, statesmen think of tomorrow.  Some politicians do not even at present think of the whole day.  They only seem to think of the moment, live for the moment, and talk about yesterday.  So, I therefore like to disassociate Members of this House from this kind of conduct.  When we came to this House, we took two oaths.  One, pledged allegiance to the Republic and the Constitution; we pledged allegiance to the NRC.  We should behave honourably as our titles suggest.  

I am, therefore, appealing to Members that in the remaining period, we put our country first before anything else, before our own considerations.  We put our future before everything else.  We forget about our own personal interests and work towards peace.  The bullets we use are paid for by us, the combatants who die are all Ugandans.  Therefore, it is up to us all to work together for the development of this country.  

I, therefore, move Mr Chairman,  sorry! I, therefore, would like to conclude, by urging our Colleagues in he Constituent Assembly to conduct themselves honourably.  Thank you very much.  I beg to move. (Applause)

DR BYARUHANGA PHILIP (Buruli County, Masindi):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I wish to join the Chairman in welcoming back my Colleagues from the recess and also thanking you personally Mr Chairman, for the warm visit you paid to us in Masindi last weekend on Saturday on the day of the youth. (Applause)  By the time you left us, we were on warm, the whole of Masindi was very warm and the whole of Bunyoro indeed was very warm and the message which you left with us. I would in my wisdom say was really a summary of what His Excellency said on the 13th when he was communicating to us and I request the Minister of Information to recast your message to the people of Masindi on Uganda Television for all the people of Uganda to hear what you said in Masindi.  Mr Chairman, Sir -(Interruption)

MR ADAM IMAGA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the Member holding the floor that he has just said the President’s message should be broadcasted on Television so that all the people see it.  But in Arua, we do not have televisions.  To make matters worse, there is a rumour circulating that the satellite in Arua will be removed to a certain place.  So, on his speech, I think television is very, very important and we in Arua are missing a lot of things.  So, if there is a plan to remove that satellite away from Arua, it will be a disaster to Arua.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

DR BYARUHANGA:  Thank you.  I think that piece of information is useful.  Mr Chairman, in my opinion, the communication to this august House by His Excellency had three or four major points.  The first one, His Excellency passed a clear verdict of excellent performance by this august House over the last six or seven years.  Secondly, there was an element in his communication which talked about consensus politics and the third one touched on the economy and measures that had been taken by the NRM administration in reversing economic decline.  

Beginning with performance of this august House, I think this is the opportune time Mr Chairman to congratulate ourselves on the performance in this august House.  This has been exemplary, we have worked together as a team and may be while hon. Kiyonga was moving this Motion, he talked of the expansion of the Council through elections on personal merit.  

I humbly beg to request Members to accept that elections based on personal merit were able to tap some Member who otherwise would not have had a chance to participate in the party election we have been used to in this country.  Hon. Members are aware that despite attempts very many citizens of this country have failed to get a chance to compete and be elected into this Parliamentary House.  Therefore, percola merit system of an ideology can be cut across.  Of course there are merits and demerits to either side of the system but I feel that this all conclusive atmosphere through personal merit has been able to keep us together.  

That leads me to the second point on the performance of the NRC and that is the issue of consensus and I think this has been our greatest success.  We have been able to deliberate, we have been able to analyse, we have been able to disagree, we have been able to reject motions and we have been able to constructively criticize government, the executive branch of government.  At the end of the day, we have achieved consensus and there is no doubt in my opinion that the generation of this consensus has been the bedrock of the success of the innovative legislation which is being referred to by His Excellency in this communication.  

The third point I would like to come to it, the issue of the economy.  His Excellency’s communication, hon. Kiyonga’s presentation have laboured to outline the achievements in the economy.  There is no doubt that as we speak today, there are thousands and thousands of Ugandans who are still reeling in dire poverty.  We as representatives of the population are aware of this.  What we are talking about in this communication is that attempts have been made and we should be able to acknowledge that attempts have been made and are being made.  I think this is the most important thing and in the communication the President is talking about the reversal of the economic decline.  

What are the implications of the reversal of economic decline?  It means there was a very significant economic decline.  Now, we are moving uphill again on this slope of decline to reach a plateau and hopefully once we reach that plateau, we shall now take off again.  To me, this is my simple interpretation of reversal decline.  It does not mean that we have not achieved 100 percent economic development.  It does not mean everything is okay.  What this acknowledges in this communication is that there is an attempt and a very significant attempt to come out of the pit.  However, I would like to point out some inadequacies particularly in the Poverty Alleviation Programmes.  Poverty Alleviation Programmes, have been very well conceived.  There is no doubt that the Minister of Finance has taken a proper survey of the requirements of our people country wide but some of the poverty alleviation programmes in various parts of the country for example, in Northern Uganda, we have the Northern Uganda Rehabilitation and also PAPSCA.  In others like Mid-West, we have got IFAD, we have got PAP, some areas have got different programmes.  

I would like to point out that the synchronisation of the Ministry of Finance with the implementers on the ground with executing agencies leaves a lot to be done.  The will, the conception of the projects is there but the execution, the modalities are totally incompatible, poorly related and not synchronised.  Why do I say this, Mr Chairman?  

We have had problems we as elected representatives in this House.  We go to the people, we try show the programme to the people, we sensitize the people, they get ready, they register in big numbers, they form their associations, now we wait for the money indefinitely.  But everyday on radio, on television, we are singing Poverty Alleviation Programme.  As a result, we are even killing that sensitivity, that eagerness by the population.  Sometimes by the time the money comes, people have given up.  Now, what is the result of that?  the result of that is loss of credibility to an otherwise very well conceived programme.  

MR ELYAU:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  The Member is raising a very important point in as far as poverty is concerned.  May I inform him that especially ‘Entandiikwa’ which is a song of everyday everywhere, Mr Chairman, if the government is not very clear about it, Entandiikwa will fail us.  A place like my county where I come from Kalaki, we have a county chief, whereas from here we passed the law stating that the county chief would be the chairman of the steering committee, now in Soroti district, these people are denied, the county chief is denied, somebody from the DEs Office comes, he sits in Kalaki, allocates Entandiikwa, he goes to Kaberamaido to Ekemu’s place, he does the same and there are several complaints.  The people who would be knowing their own people like a county chief is denied that because they do not have degrees.  Mr Chairman, you can imagine that kind of thing!  Just a mere Entandikwa you want a person of the degree.  These are the people who are letting the government down.  So, he is raising a very important point.  If the government is not very wise especially with the issue of Entandiikwa, that thing will let us down.  I thank you very much.

DR BYARUHANGA:  Thank you very much for that information.  So, Mr Chairman, I am just referring to otherwise very well conceived programmes of Poverty Alleviation to the majority of our people but which could be frustrated by poor implementing mechanisms and we have to look at this seriously.  And of course, there is the other problem, the target of these programmes are mainly the youth and the women and again this is the majority sector of the population which we are always talking about in this august House.  A very keen group of people, the youth and women.  So, we should be able to empower them through these programmes to improve on their lot so that we do not also lose their good will.  

Dear Comrades, I do not have much to say.  I would like to end on another one and that is regional cooperation.  I will end on that one.  It is clear and it is said everyday by our Ministry of Foreign Affairs that we have no intentions; our policy is straight regarding our neighbours.  I find it incomprehensible that all our neighbours should converge on Uganda to destabilise Uganda.  We are the leaders in the NRC.  I have had this question asked by my own chairman of RC V, his councillors, other leaders in the district, RC IIIs and downwards.  I have not satisfied my fellow leaders in the district.  Why is that Sudan, Kenya, Zaire would want to destabilise Uganda?  Why should they keep rebels?  Why should they keep our people?  

I would like the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Foreign Affairs through its mechanisms externally and internally to keep us the leaders of Uganda informed of developments along all our borders.  Because, there are some people who believe that maybe Uganda is also guilty in destabilising the other countries.  We need a clear categorical statement from time to time from our Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  We cannot say we have got peace here internally.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that the role of Foreign Affairs is not only to keep us political leaders and others informed of what is going on but also to do the utmost to ensure that friendly relations exist between Uganda and all its neighbours and other countries.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, just to inform the hon. Member that it is not unusual even within a family that the better off brother or sister attracts envy of his own brethren.  Therefore, the stability in Uganda is not unlikely that our neighbours would envy us.  In any case, to look at the stability in Sudan, in Zaire and the like.  Why should they not envy you so united here from all parts of Uganda talking whereas in Zaire, in Sudan and other neighbours, cannot get along to that extent without the tribal warfare among themselves.  Thank you.

DR BYARUHANGA:  Okay, thank you for that piece of information.  Yes, okay, they may envy us but my worry is with our Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  We are the leaders who explain government policy to the people in the countryside.  If it is necessary, we can have a brief, if necessary on closed session.  What I am now saying is, we the leaders of Uganda must know what is going on, we must be well briefed so that we are in touch with our people in the countryside.  This is what I am talking about.  So lastly, this communication was to our last session of the NRC and hopefully, at the end of this session, we shall be dissolved and go back to our people.  

I hope 9 years of accountable leadership, 9 years of transparent leadership, 9 years in which we have been able to make our people politically aware 9 years in which significant economic recovery is taking place will not go down the drain simply because we cannot at the eleventh hour, come to consensus constitution by our CA.  I, therefore, on behalf of the people of Masindi and on my own behalf call upon our Colleagues in the CA to rise above short-term parochial narrow interest and make a Constitution for the people of Uganda. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  And with that we have come to the end of today’s session, we adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.


(The Council rose at 4.50 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 5 July 1995 at 2.30 p.m.)
  

