Thursday 1st July, 1999

Parliament met at 10.30 a.m at Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE
THE REFERENDUM AND OTHER PROVISIONS BILL, 1999.

Clause 10.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, before I call upon you to finally pronounce yourselves on Clause 10, I would like to remind you that when we adjourned last evening, we were informed by hon. Karuhanga that after dealing with individual Amendments of that Clause, we did not finally pronounce ourselves on the Clause to be part of the Bill, and this is what we are going to do.  I therefore, propose the question that Clause 10 as amended, stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 11 (2).

THE CHAIRMAN: We are now looking at the Minister's Amendment as amended by the hon. Wapakhabulo, together with his Colleagues who are working on that Amendment.

MR. WAPAKABULO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, the Amendment which came out of our consultations - hon. Ongom and myself - I read it out, but for the benefit of Members, I will read it again.  I have held further consultations with hon. Ongom and we agreed on the text as we agreed yesterday.  

Last night I spoke to hon. Karuhanga concerning the text and he told me that he was now comfortable with the wording and that he would be going to Nyabushozi so, could I proceed to move the amendment as we agreed yesterday?  

As I did indicate, Sir, when you look at the Minister's amendment, we are amending sub-clause (2) and that sentence will form Clause (3) when the drafting is done by the experts.  That is why I am making references to (2) in this text I am going to read.  It reads: "The individuals and groups subscribing to the political systems referred to in sub-section (2) shall, in respect of each political system to which they subscribe, establish a National Referendum Committee consisting of not more than twenty Members and submit details of the Committee to the Electoral Commission by such date as the Commission shall prescribe".  That is the amendment.  Thank you, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, we debated this amendment exhaustively and the idea was to synchronise the various views, hence, this amendment.  But this amendment, as the Mover has said, should be considered in relation to the Minister's (2) as it is because the Minister had no problem with his own amendment up to the word 'maybe'.  This amendment is to take care of the sentence which starts:  "The Electoral Commission shall supervise formation of National Referendum Committee ..."   So, once the first part is accepted as the Minister has put it there, it will remain (2).  The second part which the hon. Wapakhabulo has moved now becomes (3) as he has explained.  

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Mr. Chairman, I had some thoughts last night about this amendment and I wanted to be clarified on what would happen if a side does not present its Committee to the Electoral Commission within the given time?  What would happen? I thought that we could perhaps think of putting a provision where the Commission could intervene or put in place arrangements so that at least the whole process of the Referendum is not affected by one side not presenting their Committee in time.  So, I was seeking clarification as to whether we cannot put a provision to take care of that, and if it is agreed, then I could propose that we add: "in the event that one side does not present its Committee in time, the Electoral Commission proceeds and makes arrangements for one."

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, should that not be left in the Rules, because here it is emphatically saying that the details of the Committee are to be submitted to the Electoral Commission by such a date as the Commission shall prescribe?  Remember, the Commission has got powers under this proposed law to make regulations and I am sure the Committee will be mindful and state by which date these submissions should be made.  Your problem is, supposing they do not do so?  Yet, as prescribed by the Commission, would that not be in their regulations?  

MR. WAPAKABULO: Yes, Sir, I agree with you fully but let me also point out that this will be one stage in a long process.  There will have to be a timetable for the updating of registers, the display of registers and all of them have time frames - the receiving of the details of the Committee, the starting of canvassing so that each one follows the other.  So, we do not have to tell them that if this one does not happen, you must do the next stage, because they will have to follow some timetable as it is required by the whole process. There is no need.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Mr. Chairman, if I may express my worry,  What I was thinking about was a situation specifically for the side of the multi-partyists where you are bound to have different interest groups, old ones and new ones possibly wanting to form one side Committee and they disagree on the Committee as has been the case in some of the parties which was even explained here that you find there is a UPC of so and so, and UPC of so and so; there is a DP of so and so and you find the new groups or the old one not agreeing.  Since this amendment is in effect giving powers to the sides to be the ones to organise themselves which is okay and I subscribed to that, but in the event that for one reason or another, either out of disagreement or lack of  consensus they do not present their side, and in the event where we have two sides as of now - the Movement side and the Multi-party side - and the Multi-party side does not bring its Committee to the Commission in the prescribed time, what happens?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir, the way I see it is that this Bill does not make it illegal for a group of persons to campaign.  That is one point. Secondly, if any one at all who is free to form a national committee does not do so, then it is really quite clear to me that he or she does not want to participate in the national provisions.  So, just leave with him.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support the compromised amendment but the clarification I am seeking is that it has not taken care of the last sentence in the Minister's amendment.  At a later stage, will you allow me or any other person to propose an amendment to the last sentence because it has not taken care of that one.  That is the clarification I am seeking.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, I am hoping that the hon. Wapakhabulo's amendment and hon. Ongom's replaces the sentence "The Electoral Commission..."  up to the word "side", that is, leaving two sentences of the original there.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  Mr. Chairman, I am getting also interested in the proposal of hon. Elly Tumwiine, concerning the impasse that could easily be created by a situation where these interest groups fail to agree.  Supposing they totally disagree and there is no other group, what would happen in our Referendum?  Do we say there is no Referendum or there is going to be a Referendum?  

THE CHAIRMAN: I am not so sure whether the Minister made himself clear to you.  Maybe I will ask him to explain it again.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Thank you, Sir.  This Bill is intended to facilitate those who are interested in participating in the Referendum.  We give them all the facilities by law.  If someone says, however, I do not like it - I will not participate, we are not forcing him or her.  So, this is what is going to happen.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, hon. Members, let us proceed this way.  We deal with the first part of the Minister's Clause 11(2) up to the word "may be".  
MR. WAPAKABULO: I did move that we put the word, "organised" just before the word "groups". It was a proposal from hon. Ben Wacha so that it reads: "individuals and organised groups who subscribe to the Multi-party ..." and so on and so forth.

THE CHAIRMAN: I will now put the question that the first part of the Minister's amendment be replaced with the following: "For purposes of the Referendum and Article 271 (3) of the Constitution, a side shall consist of individuals and organised groups who subscribe to the Multi-party System or the Movement System or to any other political system as the case may be".

(Question put and agreed to)

Sub-clause (2) as amended, agreed to.

Sub-clause (3).

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the second part of Sub-clause (2) of Clause 11 be numbered as Sub-clause (3), Clause 11, to read as follows: "The individuals and groups subscribing to the political systems referred to in Sub-section (2) shall, in respect of each political system to which they subscribe, establish a National Referendum Committee consisting of not more than 20 Members and submit the details of the Committee to the Electoral Commission by such date as the Commission shall prescribe" -(Interruptions).

MR. ONGOM: Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to point out that we do not stop there, we should continue to the last two sentences.

THE CHAIRMAN: We shall pronounce ourselves on that.  I put the question on the above.

(Question put and agreed to)

Sub-clause (3) of Clause 11 as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let me explain this.  We now have (1), (2), (3) of Clause 11.  Now after that, we have the following sentences: "It shall be the duty of a Referendum Committee to organise the canvassing for its side and to appoint agents for the purposes of canvassing and voting.  A Referendum Committee shall be free to organise at national and local levels until the Referendum is held." (Interruption).

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to raise an amendment with regard to the last sentence which begins with " A referendum committee -".  If you will allow me to read, Mr. Chairman - "A referendum committee referred to under this section of this Act shall be free to organise at national and local levels until a referendum is held, and thereafter cease to exist."  Mr. Chairman, the import of my amendment is that the part of the sentence which reads "referred to under this section of this Act" is really drafting -  

THE CHAIRMAN:  So, we leave that to draftsmanship?

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  - but I have mentioned it so that it should be noted.  The last part, I am prepared to withdraw.  So my amendment only refers to "under this section of this Act."  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  It has to be referred to in some Clause I think.  You see, the problem, hon. Okumu Ringa, we have not yet given a label or a number for the last two parts but they will be numbered so let us leave it to the draftsman really to do it.  Is that okay?

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Mr. Chairman, the portion I have pointed out is important so that the draftsman notes it and in the process, they will include it.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Yes, I think he has noted.  It is referred to in that we will add - (interruption) - is it the same thing?

MR. RUZINDANA:  It is the same thing, Mr. Chairman.  We are talking about a referendum committee.  Should it not be better to point out which referendum committee we are talking about and say "a national referendum committee" because there will be quite a number of others and we are giving power to the national referendum committee to organise and so on.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  I was going to suggest that those are consequential.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I thought so.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  We are just going to put 'national' to the other two but if it must be mentioned for record purposes, I suggest that we put "national referendum committee".

THE CHAIRMAN:  Is that alright? I now put the question on adding "national" - (Interjection) Hon. Minister, it is too late.   Hon. Okumu Ringa, I hope you are happy now - very happy. I am advised you are extremely happy. 

Now the Last part of Clause (3), those sentences that have been read as amended. I now propose the question that the sentences reading: "It shall be the duty of a referendum committee to organise canvassing for its side and to appoint agents for the purposes of canvassing and voting" followed by "A national referendum committee shall be free to organise at national and local levels until the referendum is held" do form part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 12.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: If you look at the next page there, 11 (a) says: "Any person who contravenes..."

THE CHAIRMAN:  It was finished.  Anything else under 11 was disposed of. 

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 12 sub-clause (2) be amended by deleting the words "or insulting." Mr. Chairman, the Bill seeks to punish using insulting language  however, "insulting" is not defined and "insulting" really is subjective.  I could, for example, in the course of canvassing say that hon. Basoga who is canvassing for the Movement is fit to go and look after ducks.  He may take that as an insult and drag me into court over that. Mr. Chairman, under Article 28 Clause 12 of the Constitution, such offence ought to be defined.  I therefore beg to move that the words "or insulting" be deleted.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman, what was sort of intriguing to me when the hon. chairman was talking about the Minister there being fit to go and look after ducks, I could see he was saying this with his tongue in the cheek.  He knew even that expression was actually insulting.  So, if we take the word "insulting" in the ordinary meaning of this word, everybody will know they have been insulted.  So, what we are really looking for is orderly canvassing.  We do not want people saying things which may create a breach of peace.  To insult someone, you easily recognise words which insult.  Now, why do you want a special definition of that in the law?  We take the word to mean insult in the ordinary meaning of the word.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  I do not know.  If you are talking of  maintaining order, why can you not achieve that without "insulting" and you achieve it under "a language which is defamatory, or which constitutes incitement to public disorder"? It is here, it is already there.  It can be any language.  It is either defamatory or which causes incitement to public disorder. That seems to be your major thrust.  So, that is the point of the chairperson.  I now put the question that Clause 12 be amended by deleting the expression: "or insulting" appearing in line two.

(Question put and agreed to)

Sub- Clause (1) of Clause 12 as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now propose the question that sub-clause  (1) of Clause 12 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to) 

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that Clause (2) be amended to substitute "150 currency points" with "25 currency points" and "two years" with "six months".  Mr. Chairman, the offenses created are those of defamation or inciting the public to disorder or hatred or violence.  All this is possible while  politicking during canvassing.  Now, Mr. Chairman, 150 currency points is 3 million shillings.  This amount in a fine plus two years imprisonment is, in the view of the committee, excessive. Such a harsh sentence, Mr. Chairman, might discourage the very essence of canvassing for either side with people fearing to speak out because of having prescribed such heavy penalties. It is for that reason, Mr. Chairman, that we propose that we reduce it to 25 currency points or six months or both such sentence and fine. I beg to move.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman, I think I understand the hon. chairperson to be saying people should be deterred from speaking in a way which is defamatory or inciting because, if they are going to be defamatory or inciting, what is the determent for?  You see, if you gave me, for instance for rape a very harsh punishment, it will not affect me because I will not rape. So similarly, you see here in fact it is only those people inclined to behave in a way the law seeks to prevent who are worried.  

Two; the operative word here is "not exceeding". It says "up to"  and this is important because it lets the court decide in each case what punishment to be given but not exceeding so that it is up to a certain limit or maximum.   What he was saying, let us fix it now here and it is going to be that and nothing else!  It seems to me as a deterrent really.  Now having really seen how campaigns go on, I think we should leave it there.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to support the position which is in the Bill and oppose the proposal by the chairperson of the committee to reduce the punishment. Mr. Chairman, what is proposed in the Bill and also expanded on by the Minister acts as a deterrent so that those who may want to play malicious games  in whatever manner may feel the pinch.  And in any case, what is proposed here is really the maximum limit of not exceeding 150 currency points.  So, I would like to support the position in the Bill because it will act as a deterrent.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  The submission of the chairperson is that this penalty proposed is excessive, alright.  It is excessive but the Minister and hon. Okumu Ringa are saying it is not excessive, that it  merely gives the court a wider gap to play with.  Now,  let us get that one very clear.

DR. NKUUHE:  Mr. Chairman, I thank you very much.  Even if it says "not exceeding", I still think it is very, very excessive because you may look at it legally but the politics of it is going to be, "you see, we told you that this referendum is being rigged, even the punishment is very severe" and so on.  For me, I want a punishment that is reasonable. A punishment that is 500,000 shillings is still deterrent, it is big.  So, I support the view of the committee that the punishment should be reduced to 20 currency points.  I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  This is a very simple matter, hon. Members, of  excessiveness as against reasonableness and reasonableness is being argued on this basis that what is given to the court is a bigger latitude.  It does not say "not less than", if it was "not less than", it would be worrying.  So that is the position. I thought it was a simple matter. 

MR. RUZINDANA:  Mr. Chairman, that is true to that extent but we also know that even magistrates will be knowing the sides of the people who are appearing before them.  If the Magistrate has a side and I appear before him well knowing my side, he is obviously going to give me the 3 million and the other term of imprisonment.  That is one.  Two;  most of the people who will be affected will be peasants, they will even be ignorant of this law and suddenly they are dragged before a Magistrate and they find an abnormal amount of 3 million including - because it can be both.  In fact, even the committee's figure is relatively high considering the income of the peasant, but I would like to support the committee's proposal.

MISS KADAGA:  Mr. Chairman and hon. Colleagues in this House.  I would like to support the position of the Minister for Constitutional Affairs.  Now, to say that we should fix the limit to 500,000 shillings is to presume that all cases of slander are the same.  I think there is a question of difference in gravity; there are those which are minor and those which are grave.  So, the position of the Minister is that you can be fined from 100 shillings to 3 million shillings. Also, Mr. Chairman, I think this is part of democracy, we are trying to improve on the way we conduct our business.  If we are going to say that you are free to insult people because they are just excited about elections, I think it is not right.  

I do not agree with what hon. Ruzindana has said, he is presuming that all the magistrates and all the judges in this country have taken a side.  Mr. Chairman, it is a very, very serious situation because this is not the case. I do not think we should legislate in anticipation that the judges and magistrates are biased.  So, I would like to appeal to this House, let us set the standards, let us set the latitude the courts will determine.  Thank you.

MR. KYEMBA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a serious problem with this excessiveness.  We know what our country is like.  Fortunately we have got a commission of inquiry going on involving the Police.  I feel very strongly that we should not give this kind of excessiveness for an offence that is going to apply to so many people all over the country.  All we are going to have is people saying "I am going to charge you for this" and it is going to put our Judiciary into a lot of problems.  I therefore strongly suggest, Mr. Chairman, that we take the recommendation of the committee on this matter.  Thank you.

MR. ETIANG: Mr. Chairman, I have listened very attentively to judgements for the committee's proposals and those by the Minister.  I think perhaps the House could be wise in taking a decision on this matter. When you closely look at the consequences of a public disorder, the public incited to a hatred or public violence, there are variations of this which can be just a group of people in the streets up to almost a region or regions in terms of the effect of such incitement.  I would like to believe, Mr. Chairman, that our judges or those administering the law have the wisdom and discretion to exercise this in accordance with the offence at any given time.  I therefore intend to go along with those who would give the courts wider latitude rather than confining it.  

Secondly, Mr. Chairman, I have a feeling that perhaps the House, not only in this respect but in respect of similar situations, should authorise or instruct the Clerk that after  a Bill of this type has been signed into law, some accompanying explanatory notes to the Judiciary be made that these were the feelings of the Legislature on this matter in respect of which they have been given latitude to exercise their judgement.  I think this will be very healthy because, Mr. Chairman, if we are straight‑jacketed in tailoring any law, that is a prescription actually to break that law because the moment you say I can actually utter this and pay 20 currency points and get away with it regardless of the size of the disturbance in public, we may be actually prescribing a violence.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, I want to put the question.  The question is very clear.  It is to do with whether there is excessiveness or not. 
MR. PINTO:  I seek clarification.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Pinto, hon. Etiang is still on the Floor.

MR. ETYANG: Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for your defence. I had almost completed my points, Mr. Chairman, that I go along with the advice you appear to be giving that latitude be given to the Judiciary for their proven discretion on this matter and that perhaps in future, the Clerk to the Assembly should take note of the concerns expressed on both sides of the House on an issue - which views are very strong indeed - in submitting a law to the Judiciary by giving explanatory notes as to the issues that the Legislature has given.  Mr. Chairman, I go along with the Minister's views on this matter.  Thank you.

MR. PINTO: Mr. Chairman, hon. Etyang in his submission has given rise to a question whether in a law after it has been passed, the Clerk should write some explanatory notes that should be appended to this law so that the judges may use this interpretation to express the opinion of the House.  In your experience as a member of the legal profession, have you ever seen such where explanatory notes from the clerk will override the law and guide? I think what he is submitting with reservations is that there will be cases where the judges will be straight‑jacketed and the expressions given by the chairman is to remove such if this is where we are going to give people freedom to express themselves. They should be guided that they shall not insult, they shall not incite but to give excessive impunity and then you come out and say give some explanatory notes, Mr. Chairman, would you guide this House whether this is applicable in law or it is some new invasion?

THE CHAIRMAN: Since you have asked me as a lawyer, I am aware that judges or judicial staff are armed with material for interpreting the law.  There is a particular branch of the law which deals with the interpretation of statutes and I believe that the judges and the magistrates are armed with that. They also are allowed to go and find out what the intention of the legislature was.  They have that and they use all kinds of materials to get there. I think we do not really have to belabour this point so I will now put the question.  We have exhausted this matter.  I do not think we should continue. 

I now put the question that in sub-clause (2) of clause 12, the expression "150 currency points" be substituted with the expression "25 currency points" and "two years" also be substituted with "six months".

(Question put and negatived)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose the question that sub-clause (2) of clause 12 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Clause 12 as amended agreed to)

Clause 13:

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the word "the" in the second line of clause 13 sub-clause (4) be deleted.  This was just  a drafting error.  When you read it, it does not make sense.  It says: "Where the Commission has received a request for a referendum made in accordance with paragraph (c) of the clause (1) of Article 74..." It should be just "...of clause (1)".

(Question on the amendment put and agreed to)

(Sub-clause (4) of Clause 13 as amended agreed to)

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment that in clause 13 sub-clause (4), we substitute "ten days" with "21 days". The ten days is in the fourth line, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, the justification for this is that for the Electoral Commission to certify whether one tenth of the registered voters in at least two thirds of the constituencies have requested for a referendum is not an easy task to be done within ten days. It would involve Returning Officers in districts going around all the constituencies, checking registers for the names and voters' card numbers, certifying them and sending them to the Electoral Commission.  The Electoral Commission then, Mr. Chairman, will have to verify with its own records.  The records of 122 constituencies is not easy to deal with.  It is for that reason, Mr. Chairman, that we think that we should give the Electoral Commission 21 days instead of ten days.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: The Minister has accepted the amendment.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, whereas I support the principle behind the time frame, I am not sure of the date, the 21 days proposed by the committee.  Did they have some empirical method of arriving at the 21 days? Because it would have been maybe 30 days. To cover a whole country is not a small task.  This is the clarification I am seeking from the committee even though the Minister has already conceded. Could he give us the rationale?  Otherwise I would wish to drive it to 30 days.  Thank you.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, in the first place, I would have thought that if the hon. Member is of the view that these days are too few, he would move an amendment giving reasons why he thinks they are few because the committee considered the ten days of the Minister and thought that those were few and then they came up with this view that 21 days could actually be sufficient for the work.  I would think that if the hon. Member begs to differ, he ought to advance reasons by amendment as to why he thinks 21 days is not enough.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, looking at the coverage of the whole country to be able to achieve the task under this provision, I am proposing that 21 days will not be sufficient and that for the purpose of legislation, we give the latitude of 30 days so that this will be sufficient to achieve the task.  In my view, Mr. Chairman, this proposal, if accepted, will be able to give us a good piece of legislation in tackling provisions under this Act. Thank you.

MR. OBIGA KANIA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The clause 74(1)(c) of the constitution we are talking about reads: "A referendum shall be held for the purpose of changing the political system if requested through a petition to the Electoral Commission by at least one tenth of the registered voters from each of at least two thirds of the constituencies for which representatives are required to be directly elected under paragraph (a) of clause 1 of article 78 of this constitution."  In other words, directly elected Members of Parliament.  Now, if you take our constituencies to be counties, we are talking of a minimum of 214 directly elected Members of Parliament under the present Parliament. Two-thirds of that will be 142 constituencies and in each of those, you will want to verify that actually one tenth of them have signed and correctly so. 

I think the argument of hon. Okumu Ringa has some truth in that if you give 21 days, first of all the verification, submission and compilation and checking right up to the Electoral Commission cannot be done within 21 days. Subject to whether hon. Okumu Ringa will accept, I would propose that we set a ceiling of a period within which this function can be done by stating the maximum period within which it can be done rather than stating a static period like ten days or 21 days. If we said something like within 30 or 45 days, then we are giving a flexible period within which the Electoral Commission can actually verify because it is not a small job if you look at the provision in the Constitution.

THE CHAIRMAN: My understanding of this provision is really  giving the maximum, the latest time the certification can be done when you say within so many days.  That is my understanding.  If within ten days is not enough, is within 21 days enough?  It can be even beyond the last day.  Within 30 days, is that what you are talking about hon. Obiga Kania?

MR. OBIGA KANIA: Mr. Chairman, I want to amend the chairman's amendment of 21 to 45 days; within 45 days.  I beg to move.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, in the first place, it is not that the Electoral Commission is going to move around the 145 constituencies on its own.  It has returning officers in the districts; it has district registrars.  These will be acting on behalf of the Electoral Commission and they are the ones who will submit to the Electoral Commission.  So, this exercise will be going on at the same time throughout the whole of Uganda. So I really still think that 21 days is enough.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that sub-clause (4) of Clause 13 be amended by substituting by "10 days" with "21 days".

(Question put and agreed to)

(Sub- clause (4) of Clause 13 as amended, agreed to).

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 13, sub-Clause 5(b) be amended by inserting the word 'under' after the word 'certificate'.  This is really just a drafting error.  (5) reads: "The Commission shall, within thirty days after issuing a certificate sub-section (3)..." It should be "- issuing a certificate under sub-section (3) of this sections".

(Question put and agreed to)

(Sub-Clause (b) of Clause 13 as amended, agreed to)

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that Clause 13(6) be re-drafted to read: "Any speaker of a district council who in recording or communicating any information under this Section makes any statement which he or she knows to be false in any material particular -"   By re-drafting it we are removing the word 'recording'. 

The justification for this, Mr. Chairman, is that speakers of district councils do not record but only communicate recorded information.  There are Clerks in the councils who do the recording.  So, to place a criminal liability on the speaker when he is not responsible for recording, in the view of the Committee, would be unfair. Mr. Chairman, that is the justification and I therefore beg to move.  

(Question on amendment put and agreed to)

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that in Clause 13(6) we add a new (b) to read: "Any speaker of a district council who in communicating any information under this section wilfully or knowingly omits to make a statement that is relevant, commits _"   then the rest follows as it is.  What we have done here is to include 'knowingly omits'.  

The justification for this, Mr. Chairman, is to ensure that there is no deliberate omission of what has been recorded by the Clerk when the speaker is communicating that information because the Clerk could record something, pass it to the speaker but the speaker in the process of communicating could deliberately omit certain things. That should be punishable.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I support the amendment but my concern is about the reference  because it talks of 6(a) and 6(b) and it does not say that the existing 6(a) and 6(b) be deleted.  The way it is, for record purposes it may cause a bit of a problem.  That is the clarification I am seeking from the Chairman.  Otherwise, I second his amendment.  

MR.OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, it is such that 6(a) and (b) become one because we come out with another (b) later.  So what hon. Okumu Ringa is saying is correct.

THE CHAIRMAN: I did not quite get his complaint.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Mr. Chairman, I do support the amendment of the Chairman of the Committee but the clarification I was seeking and I am still seeking is that in terms of numbering, he has introduced 6(a) and 6(b), but in the process he has not stated whether he has deleted the existing 6(a) and 6(b).  That is the clarification I am seeking from him.

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, as you will note from the next page, 13(6)(b) will be calling for its deletion. So, the present 13(6)(b) really will not be there.  The record should not reflect it being there.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Are you satisfied with that explanation? He is going to delete the current (b) in the Bill.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Yes, I had wanted him to say it himself, Sir.  Thank you. 

MR. OWINY DOLLO:  Mr. Chairman, I have difficulty with the provision of the intended amendment to sub-clause (b) of 6 of 13.  My difficulty, Mr. Chairman, is with the determination of the word 'relevant'.  I am seeking clarification from the Chairman of the Committee where the district speaker communicates information and wilfully or knowingly omits part of the information which he considers not relevant but which the would-be recipients consider relevant. He puts us in a tricky situation.  Who determines relevancy because 'relevant' is in this circumstances both subjective and relative?  So, we have a situation where the speaker actually wilfully and knowingly omits because he believes it is not relevant, but the recipient thinks it is relevant.  How do you resolve this conflict?  

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I do not see any conflict here. As hon. Owiny Dollo himself has said, in the first place the mensurare is there in the Clause. The issue would be determined by the courts whether the omission by the speaker in leaving out what was actually recorded by the clerk or omitted matters which were relevant to the Electoral Commission.  If for example there is information which could be necessary for the Electoral Commission to determine the issues and the council has said so but the clerk leaves it out knowingly or wilfully, then the determination will be for the courts when he is being charged really.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Are you satisfied hon. Owiny Dollo?

MR. OWINY DOLLO:  Mr. Chairman, I am satisfied with the explanation but now, I would like to rise up to say that then we are introducing a new concept in the intended paragraph 6(b) because relevance is not associated with the earlier intention. You are bringing in a new complication, that is a matter of fact  because if you look at the (a) which we have amended which deals with false information, in that one, its mensurare clearly  comes in.  You are giving false information. 

Now, in the earlier paragraph (b) also, recklessness as you understand it in  criminal law is clearly from the speaker himself but now we are talking about a situation of judgement.  In the judgement of the speaker, he thinks it is not important information, it is not relevant to the matter at hand but  in the mind of the recipient of the information, it is so important that it does not matter whether in the minds of the speaker it was important, he must be prosecuted.  I do not think it flows well with the general intention of the provision of paragraph 13 or the entire Bill. 

I would, for this reason, Mr. Chairman, propose that that amendment does not stand because we are bringing in new things that change the very intention.  The role of the speaker of the district should play.  We are now bringing in a punitive provision on matters of judgement, on matters of - not discretion but judgement.  I think there is a difficulty there really.  

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, it is true that a new concept is being brought in because the original of the Bill does not talk about omitting.  The omission is what is the mensurare now but if it satisfies hon. Dollo that we remove 'relevant', well we would have no problem but what we want to avoid is for the speaker to omit giving information.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Dollo, are you satisfied with that?  Because I think your problem is, if he is talking about the mensurare you think there is too much burden being put on the speaker if you start talking about irrelevancy.  Who decides whether it is relevant, is it the court?  In which case it will be objective.  But if you maintain it that way, it would mean that you are also putting the burden on the speaker to decide whether it is relevant or not. That is your objection.  So, if relevant is deleted, will you be happy?

MR. OWINY DOLLO:  Mr. Chairman, I would be very happy because now we are not subjecting somebody to the exercise of their discretion or judgement but just for bare facts.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Chairperson, are you happy with the deletion of the word 'relevant'?  

MR. OGALO:  Yes, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  So, how would your amendment read? 

MR. OGALO:  It would read: "Any speaker of a district council who, in communicating any information under this Section wilfully or knowingly omits to make a statement commits..." then the rest follow the statement from the clerk because we are talking about the recording by the clerk and the communicating by the speaker.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Okumu, you do not seem to be comfortable? Hon. Members, some of these amendments if they do not change the principle and the character of the Clause intended, they can be looked after in a certain way by the draughtsman so that we really progress. It is even provided for in our Rules.  Hon.Okumu Ringa.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The moment you remove the word 'relevant', the statement becomes naked.  It does not stand, it will not stand.  So, we must qualify the statement.  If you may allow me, by stating that any speaker of the district council who in communicating any information under the instruction wilfully or knowingly omits to make a statement that is required commits -  at least we should qualify the word 'statement'.

THE CHAIRMAN:  That is required.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Yes, either required or whatever information which is being sought because when we just say 'statement' and you leave it like that, it is naked.  So I am requesting the Chairman -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Let me propose this, I think there is one word which is causing problems.  Let us have hon. Owiny Dollo, hon. Okumu Ringa and the hon. Chairperson to get us the right word and we proceed.  So we stand that one over.  Alright, let us move to the next one, hon. Chairperson. Subject to that standing over, have you finished the amendments?

MR. OGALO:  No, there is one left.

THE CHAIRMAN:  One left, okay proceed.

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, Clause 13(6)(b) in the respect of the sentence it provides that the speaker on conviction - what we have been saying, communicating or recording - is liable to a fine not exceeding 100 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding one year or both.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that 'one year' be substituted with 'four months' and '100' be substituted with '20'.  

Mr. Chairman, the speaker when he is doing this work, he is doing it as an officer of the council and the sentence of one year is really excessive.  Such a sentence can make the speaker take extreme care on everything and this might clog down the work.  It can even lead to indecision in certain serious matters.  We think, Mr. Chairman, that we should reduce this sentence.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: The amendment is that in the penal provision of sub-clause (6), substitute 'one year' with 'four months' and '100' with '20'.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.  OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Speaker, is it in order for us to pronounce ourselves on these important provisions when we have no quorum?

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, we are short of the required quorum. Hon. Minister, you want to say something?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  I was saying, after we have pronounced ourselves on this one, I intend to raise another point of order.

THE SPEAKER:  We do not have the quorum.  Hon. Minister, I have ruled on a matter of quorum.  That means we cannot transact any other business, except this.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS  (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi):   Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee reports thereto.

Question put and agreed to

The House resumed, the Speaker presiding

THE SPEAKER:  I am suspending the proceedings for 15 minutes.
     
             The House was suspended for 15 minutes

(On resumption_)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, we have failed to raise a quorum, and before I adjourn the House, I would like to remind you that if we proceed this way, we are likely to have a serious constitutional problem with regards to this law and I will leave it to your conscious and judgement.  The House is adjourned until 2 o'clock.  I will endeavour to be here on time.

(The House was adjourned and resumed at 2.00 p.m the same day)

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the chair)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE REFERENDUM AND OTHER PROVISIONS BILL, 1999.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, we stood over when we were at 13(6) (b) because we had wanted the terminology to be harmonised. That was in relation to whether we should include or delete the word 'relevant' and the time we adjourned, I think hon. Okumu Ringa had an amendment. I do not see him around so we move to the chairman's amendment. 

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Without prejudice, we are discussing one of the most important Bills in this country, and with reference to our Rules of Procedure number 17, even if I do not read it verbatim, I find it difficult for us as representatives of the people to proceed when we lack quorum.  Is it in order for us to go ahead discussing this important Bill without a quorum? 

THE CHAIRMAN: I have to rule on that one first. He has raised a point of order, I have to rule on that.  Now, our Rules of Procedure prescribe a quorum, I think that one is well known. Before I rule on that, I would like to look at the registers and find out how many people have registered, that they are here within Parliament, before I make my ruling.  May I have the registers here, please?

(The Attendance Registers were brought)

THE CHAIRMAN: These are the figures I have ascertained from the two registers.  In one register, 105 MPs registered as being present in this Parliament, and in the second register there are 52 MPs, giving a total of 157 MPs. This is for the day - for both morning and afternoon.  Now, hon. Members, I take it that the people who have registered are within the precincts of Parliament and some of them are within the lobby. So, we shall proceed.  

MR. WANDERA  OGALO:   Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 13 sub-clause (6)(b) be deleted.  This Clause reads: "Any speaker of a district council who, in recording or communicating any information under this Section, makes any statement in respect of where he or she is reckless, whether it is true or false ... commits an offense."  

In the first place, we should not punish truth by saying that you have made a true statement recklessly and therefore you are punishable. This does not really make much sense.  Truth is truth and we should not punish truth.  In the second place, Section 17 of the Penal Code provides that criminal responsibility for reckless acts shall be determined according to the principles of English law. Now, English law punishes reckless acts which cause death or endanger human rights, it does not extend to statements.  Mr. Chairman, I therefore beg to move that this be deleted.  I beg to move.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:   Mr. Chairman, I oppose this very strongly because of the reason for deletion.  First of all, if you look at 6(a): "a statement which he or she knows to be false in any material particular"  means the maker knows that the statement is false.  So, the guilty intention is clear.  The second one which the hon. chairman seeks to delete reads as follows: "A statement in respect of where in which he or she is reckless, whether it is true or false."  The drafting is bad.  Let me take the principle first.  

Recklessness here refers to the manner of making a statement.  In the case one, you know it is false and you do not care.  The second one, it is false but he made it not caring whether it is true or not; that is recklessly.  So, there is a case for the court to say, this statement is false.  But then he says 'Judge or Magistrate, I did not intend to make that statement'. That is recklessness.  It refers to the manner in which a statement has been made. Although in fact it turns out to be false, you are punished for it because you did not take care.  This is the sense of recklessness in this particular case.  

Now, I will be prepared, Sir, to rephrase this Bill to say: "A statement which is false but is made recklessly", so that the manner of making it is the one we are thinking about.  That is what we want to bring out.  Furthermore, the hon. chairman is saying that under criminal law, the principles of talking about recklessness should be followed. Yes, but the principles we are talking about pertain to the intention of the person in the dock.  So, principles of proving guilty intentions, principles of proving beyond reasonable doubt, this is what we have actually got to say. The only acts which are being treated under the Penal Code section we have been quoting are the only ones where the word 'reckless' may be used.  This is why, Sir, I am saying it should remain but re-phrase it so that we say: "a statement which is false - therefore taking out the element of truth - but is made recklessly."

MR.  OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, if the Minister is conceding removing punishing truth, I am ready to concede it.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  In other words, when the statement is true, why should it be reckless? If it is true, it is true. The question of it being made recklessly does not arise.  So, the hon. Minister conceded. Can you read the amendment. 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Sir, (b) should read:  "which is false but is made recklessly."

THE CHAIRMAN:  There are two things; the statement is false, whether you make it recklessly or not, it is false.  What are you punishing?   Are you punishing the fact that it was false or are you punishing the fact that it was false but recklessly made? I do not know. 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  You see, Sir, one should not be able to have to say in court, "Yes it is false, Sir, but I did not intend to make it."  This is to distinguish between (a) and (b). (a) says he knows it is false and cares not and in (b) we say it is false, then he says, "But Sir, I did not - but you made it recklessly.  In other words, it is calling for care on the part of the one making the statement.  It will not be a defence to this sort of this to simply say, "I made it, though it is false,  I did not care whether it was false or not."  It is reckless in the manner in which it is made.

THE CHAIRMAN:  So it reads -

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  It is false referring to the statement that is made recklessly.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister, I would like you to confirm whether it is in respect of a statement which is false but made recklessly.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Exactly! You see, I was trying to distinguish between (a) and (b).  Under (a), it says a statement which he or she knows to be false and under (b), he or she may not know that it is false but it is in fact, false and it has been made recklessly.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Can we read it out?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  What I am saying is that this statement is in fact false but is made without caring about its truth or its falsehood.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  That is (b).

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Statement - (b) which is in fact false but is made recklessly.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I will now put the question on that one.  

               (Question put and agreed to)

(Sub-clause (6)(b) of Clause 13 as amended, agreed to)

(Clause 13 as amended, agreed to)

Clause 14.

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 14 sub-clause (6) be re-drafted to read: "Any speaker of a district council who in communicating any information under this section or makes any statement which he or she knows to be false in any material particular ... " and then the rest follows. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Then hon. Minister concedes.
       
(Question put and agreed to)

(Sub-clause (6) of Clause 14 as amended, agreed to)

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I would request that (b) be stood over because there was a similar one earlier on which we sought to harmonise with hon. Dollo and hon. Okumu Ringa.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Which one is that?

MR. OGALO:  This one was Clause 13(6)(b).

THE CHAIRMAN:  But now the one you are referring to is?

MR. OGALO: The one I am referring to is on page 8. It is now Clause 14 (6) where we seek to add the new (b).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay, that is stood over.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, we had proposed to delete 14(6)(b) but in respect of what we have just been able to finalise with here,  we will leave out the question of 'truth'. It is the same phrase

THE CHAIRMAN: It is consequential?

MR. OGALO: Yes, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: Alright.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that in Clause 14 sub-clause (8), we do delete the word 'Commission' and insert 'a panel of three judges appointed by the Chief Justice.'  The reason for this was already advanced.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is consequential again?

MR. OGALO: Yes it is, Mr. Chairman.

Clause 14 as amended agreed to.

Clause 15

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 15 be deleted. Mr. Chairman, this is dealing with Parliament approving new democratic and other representative political systems and we submit, Mr. Chairman, that this should be the subject of a different law, that it should not be in a referendum law. Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, you may recall that under Article 69(2)(c), there are three systems in respect of which a referendum should be held and they are as follows: The Movement political system, the multiparty political system and any other democratic and representative political system.  This Clause 15 sought to deal with a situation where someone, maybe in July or August comes up and says "this system should also go on  whatever the question because it is democratic, it is represented.  I want its people to have a vote on it in the referendum."  Of course,  he should be entitled to do so. So, I agree with what the chairman said. I intend to bring a separate law under this Article and article 76 of the Constitution to address specifically based cases of the new systems, however ingenious they maybe. We have got to be able to say how they are going to be passed  for the purposes of a referendum.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Okumu Ringa, we are talking about deleting Clause 15 as recommended by the Committee - (Interjection).

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I oppose the proposed deletion.  I am proposing that because it is provided for -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: The Minister has conceded.  He says he is going to bring another law - (Interruptions) - Order, please! I am explaining to him, I am reminding him that the Minister has conceded and the reason is that he is going to bring another law in that respect.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Well, in that case, Mr. Chairman, I go by the proposal of the Minister and I concede, thank you. 
   
THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 15 be deleted from the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 15 as deleted agreed to.

Clause 16 agreed to.

Clause 17 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, I beg to be allowed to amend the Clause wholly by deleting it and replacing it with a new Clause 17, the text of which I have circulated and what I have circulated reads as follows:  "Where the result of a referendum held under this Act, or a resolution of Parliament passed in accordance with Clause (2) of article 74 of the Constitution determines that a change shall be made in the existing political system, then subject to the Constitution, subsequent presidential, parliamentary, local government and other public elections shall be held under the new political system adopted."  
Now, Sir, as the Clause now stands, towards the end it says: "...unless Parliament by law appoints another date for the adoption of the new political system to come into force, that system shall come into force on the date of the next dissolution  of Parliament."  Now this raises a problem, Sir, because our Constitution in article 81(1) provides as follows:  "A general election of Members of Parliament shall be held within 30 days before the expiration of the term of Parliament."  Now this makes it a bit difficult for the Bill that is in hand because it says Members of Parliament will still be Members of Parliament for the next 30 days and they will at the same time still be preparing to be new members of Parliament or for new members to come.  

If, as the Bill stands now it says the new system shall start on the date of dissolution, this means that the moment the President of this country dissolves this Parliament, then the new system starts.  I think that is a bit difficult.  So, I am proposing under the new formulation that once the new system has been adopted, the coming elections will be held under the principles or rules of the new system and consequentially, the new government will, of course, have to follow the new system. 

The last little bit here, Sir, is that 17 (2) In this section does not apply to a by-election held before the expiration of the term of Parliament under article 77 of the Constitution because since the Parliament has not expired, the old system has not expired, it still goes on.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 17 of the Bill be amended in the manner that is contained in the Minister's amendment.

(Question put and agreed)

Clause 17 as amended agreed to.

Clause 18

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 18 be amended to read: "In case of any referendum, each side shall, within such time as the Commission may determine, identify its agents for every polling station for purposes of Clause (4) of article 68 of the Constitution."  
The Constitution requires having agents for either side. Now the way it is in the Bill, it is proposed that the Electoral Commission is the one which will bring together voters for them to identify the agents for the sides.  The justification for our amendment is that it is not really the business of the Electoral Commission to choose agents for purposes of polling for any of the sides.  It is an internal matter, the sides and the sides themselves should choose their own agents. Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 18 be amended to read as follows: "In case of any referendum, each side shall, within such a time as the Commission may determine, identify its agents for every polling station for purposes of Clause (4) of Article 68 of the Constitution."

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 18 as amended agreed to.

Clause 19

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, this is a minor matter; it is the marginal note.  The marginal note says, 'Protection and immunity of agents'  but really, that does not reflect what is in the Clause. The Clause reads: "During the period of canvassing in respect of a referendum, every public officer, public authority and public institution shall give equal treatment to all sides of the sides contesting in a referendum."  There is no way this really relates to immunity of agents.  That is why we propose that we change the marginal note to read: 'Equal treatment to all sides.' Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.
   
MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: I concede, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 19 as amended  do stand part of the Bill agreed to.

Clause 20

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, yesterday I circulated an amendment intending to delete 19 (2) consequentially because it now has been provided for under 11 which we have just done.  I just want this one, 19 (2) to be deleted, leaving only 19.

THE CHAIRMAN: The chairperson, he is deleting the sub-clause (2) of Clause 19, do you have any objection?

MR. OGALO: No, objection, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that sub-clause (2) of Clause 19 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to)


Clause 19 as amended agreed to.
 
MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that we combine sub-clause (1) and sub-clause (2) to redraft it to read: "The agents of each side shall be given equal access and opportunity to use state owned media."  Mr. Chairman, this would in effect be making it possible to remove the subjectiveness which is in the Bill as it stands so that we remove the possibility of whoever is responsible to be able to determine on his own and to be able to force him to be able to apportion the time fairly to both sides.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support this amendment but I heard the chairman omitting the word 'communication' on record. Does he mean he has also amended this amendment?  He only mentioned 'state owned media', he left out the word 'communication'.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, do you have the chairman's  report? I see the word 'communications' on mine.  Hon. Obiga Kania, can you assist him?  It is on page 10, the last sentence.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  I have the text, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: The report?

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Yes.  My only worry is that the record did not contain 'communication'.

THE CHAIRMAN: Which record? Can you read it?

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Yes, that is the only problem I have with the text and what he said.

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, it should read this way: "Each agent of each side shall be given equal access and opportunity to use state owned communication media."

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you okay?

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Yes!

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 20 as amended agreed to.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 20(6) be amended as to substitute the words: "An agent of a side" with "no person" and the whole clause be redrafted to read: "No person shall, during canvassing, use electronic media to do any of the following acts against another side or their agent".  The justification for this would be that this would cover both the agents and any person who is not an agent.  Left as it is, it is as if the agent is the only one who is restricted from committing these offenses but any other person may be able to do it.  That is why I want to change it to say "no other persons" so that nobody can commit these offenses.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that sub-clause (6) of Clause 20 be amended as proposed by the Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to)

Sub-clause 6 of Clause 20 as amended, agreed to.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 20, Sub-clause (7) be deleted. Sub-clause (7) as it is says: "A person other than an agent shall not do any of the acts prohibited by sub-section (6)".  The implication is that some other person may be able to do so.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that in Clause 20 sub-clause (8), we delete the word "private".  The justification for this is that for equality before the law, the restrictions which have been imposed on a private media should also apply to state-owned media.  I beg to move.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, this really was an omission.  We never intended to shield hon. Nsadhu's apparatus.  So it is proper that it simply reads: "Operator of electronic media" rather than private because those should be able to cover even the Government electronic media.  We never intended to load it over the private sector only.  It was a mistake in drafting.

THE CHAIRMAN: The Minister has conceded that the restriction should cover both private and public.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I agree but I am proposing that instead of deleting "private", the Article 'a' should also be deleted because the 'a' will not make sense in that text.  

THE CHAIRMAN: The proprietor or operator of 'an' electronic?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Either 'an' electronic or you delete it.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 20 sub-clause (9) be amended to substitute "150" with "25" and "two years" with "six months".  Mr. Chairman, this sub-clause is the penalty clause and it is the one which is prescribing the sentence.  Now, if you take an example of sub-clause (6) which is punishable under here, there is an offence such as making malicious statements;  there is an offence mudslinging.  Now, the sentence which is prescribed here is 150 currency points which is three million or two years or both such imprisonment and fine.  

For such small offenses, this maximum is really excessive; this is harsh and there is a need during this canvassing really for flow of information.  If the sentences are so harsh, it will be deterrent that even people who want to speak fairly will fear to speak what they ought to speak, thinking that they may in the process commit an offence.  The argument is that you need to be deterrent so that they do not do so.  
When somebody is going to canvass, he does not always think that when he is going to do so, he intends to commit offenses.  He may go out in good faith, he may go out thinking that he is actually doing the best then he finds himself caught in an offence when really he may not have gone out intending that he commits an offence.  Now, you having prescribed such harsh sentences, he will find himself with three million and this will really make it impossible for flow of debate.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, the hon. Chairperson happens to be my learned Friend.  He is telling me about principles of criminality. Now he tells you someone who goes out to speak does not intend? If he does not intend, then he will not be convicted or she will not be convicted.  Secondly, we have gone through a list of penalties this morning and we said whether it is 'not exceeding', let us give courts leeway.  So, the hon. Chairperson should, I think, concede in my favour this time.

MR. KAGGWA : Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would want to distinguish the situation of the morning and the present one as the Minister wants to content.  In the morning we conceded because an issue of inciting the public came in and I think one would really go along with what the Minister had argued but here, we are talking of electronic media.  Supposing somebody calls, are you going to have control over that person?  He says something, and you are punishing the electronic media because somebody has called and has said something which is among those offenses? Surely, I think in a bid to let as much debate as possible, the penalties or the punishment here should be seen to be more administrative than  criminal.  If I had an option, I would not even have wanted to have as big a sentence as this one.  So, I would ask the Minister on this particular one, as I have said there is a distinction between the one of the morning, that he leaves it to be as it is.  I beg to move and I ask the Members to support the Committee's proposal.  I thank you.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, why is CBS being punished because I use CBS and I make a statement?  Who has committed the offence, CBS or me?  Precisely, it is me making the statement, not CBS, so I should be the one to be punished, not CBS.  Therefore, it is not a question of the media being punished, it is the person making the statement, and I think we should leave the statement as it is.  

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, Clause (8) reads: "The proprietor or operator of a private electronic media shall not use the media or allow it to be used to do any of the acts prohibited in sub-section (6) of this Section."  In other words, you are actually punishing the owner of the media because you are saying he has allowed the use.  Now, this brings in what hon. Kaggwa has talked about.  Somebody rings and he says something and that is allowing him to mudsling.  So, he is also going to be punished - he has to pay the three million or two years imprisonment.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is the media which is being punished in the first instance.  

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, I think I am going to ask the Attorney General to come in here.  I do not see this being - it is the question of the punishment, it is a criminal act.  I do not see this being an issue of strict liability.  It is a question of again showing that although I allowed someone to  speak on my CBS - if CBS is an example - I did not know that he or she was going to do such a thing.  So, the question of intention must come in because somebody was punished.  

MR. RUZINDANA: Mr. Chairman, I think the Minister should concede this point that here, actually the law is going to punish two parties; the operator and the one who sings his songs or poems and so on, on the radio or TV of this operator.  Both parties can actually be punished.  Now, this one is a bit too harsh, Mr. Chairman, and I think the Minister should concede that it is going to be very difficult for a proprietor of a radio to know who is ringing from some place.  

When I say I am so and so and my telephone number is this, there is no way the operator can know that that is correct.  Really, this is designed to make it impossible for operators to have radio talk-shows and also for the ordinary people to sing  songs, poems and images.  Now, a villager is going to sing songs everywhere or okwevuga somewhere, and then he can be fined three million shillings and imprisoned for two years?  I think, Mr. Minister, this is going to be a bit too harsh.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Let us decide democratically.  I now put the question that in Clause 20 sub-clause (9), the following be done:  Substitute the expression "150" with "25" and "two years" with "six months".

(Question put and agreed to)

Sub-clause (9) of Clause 20 as amended, agreed to.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, Clause 20 sub-clause (10) reads: "In this section, 'electronic media' includes Television, Radio, Internet and E-mail, and any other similar media."  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that we delete the words "Internet" and "E-mail" because this clause deals with offenses and prescribes punishment.  Now, there is no way you are really going to have control over E-mail or the Internet as such.  Somebody can do it from somewhere, you may not even know how to get to him and it is really redundant here.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

DR. NKUUHE: Mr. Chairman, I thank you very much.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to dispel the rumours that I sleep in the library.  I sleep in my home, and my wife can testify to this.  The question is whether Internet and E-mail are not part of electronic media.  If they are not, then what are they?  Because by the time this law comes to be operational, there will be a lot of Internet and E-mail use even in Uganda.  Right now as we talk, a lot of campaigns in America, Europe and what have you are conducted almost purely on the Internet.  In fact, from the point of view of those of us who use the Internet and E-mail, I would like to assure everybody that it is a normal way of electronic  communication and you can conduct commerce, pornography, copy-write - all those are controlled as they would be controlled under normal laws.  

So, the saying that you can not know where it has originated is not true because every E-mail or Internet goes through an internet service provider and these are registered and every user of Internet and E-mail has an account and a password and these are known and they can be traced.  In fact, it is much easier to trace that than a normal letter.  Therefore, it should stay as part so that they can treat us as part and parcel of normal laws - the normal laws can apply to E-mail and Internet.  Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN: The hon. Member is saying Internet and E-mail should not be deleted.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, hearing those words from a man of hon. Nkuuhe's standing in this field, I will concede it. (Applause).  

Clause 21.

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that in Clause 21(1) and (2) where 'registered voters' appears, we substitute with 'votes cast'.  Mr. Chairman, this deals with bringing a petition in the High Court challenging the results of a referendum.  As it is in the Bill: "Any registered voter supported by signatures of not less than 2 per cent of the total number of registered voters may petition in the High Court".  

It is the view of the committee that if this is left to stand as it is, it will amount to letting those who are not interested in voting in the referendum making it impossible for somebody to bring a petition, somebody who voted,somebody who is interested.  If you do this, you will make it impossible for them.  If, for example, there are 1 million voters in Uganda, you would only need 20,000 registered voters to bring a petition.  The referendum would never be challenged if only 15,000 voter turned up.  So, to peg this to registered voters in the whole country is, in the view of the committee, not fair and hence the amendment to recognise those who have cast votes as the legitimate people on which we can base the percentage of those who can bring a petition in the high court.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: I have difficulties in conceding this  because first of all, we do not want feverous repeats of a referendum. This is why they are saying 'all the registered voters'. For me, for anyone to vote is an entitlement.  Supposing I have missed out this time, I am still entitled to determine the fate of my area or of my country. So, someone saying let us have a repeat simply on the basis of the votes cast and involving the country in such an expense, I think a certain percentage of those entitled to decide the issues named on the register should really be involved rather than simply those who may have voted this time -(Interruption)

MRS. EGUNYU: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am seeking clarification from the hon. Minister as to what the position would be if two per cent of the registered voters decided to boycott and then turn around and bring the petition, would it still be in his interest? Thank you.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  It would be in my interest as a citizen of this country to determine issues which affect me and I am saying, if you are entitled to vote on anything at all, if I miss out this time, I should be entitled to decide whether in fact next time I should vote or not vote. If you take this last election of Mayor here of Kampala, I understand those who voted were a very, very small number.  If someone raised an issue that let us vote again and we say alright, the number of those who cast their votes, I think, should be higher than that.  Shouldn't those people be entitled to take a decision whichever it is?  That is why I am saying, let the electorate be involved.

DR. MAKUBUYA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I seek some guidance from the chairman on article 17 of the Constitution.  Article 17 clause (1)(h) says: "It is the duty of every citizen of Uganda  to register for  electoral and other lawful purposes."  History shows, Mr. Chairman,  that there was an attempt in the CA to make voting a compulsory duty and this was rejected.  Now, if you come to Clause (21) and you say you are not going to talk about the registered voters but you are going to talk about people who  actually voted, are you not raising the standard much higher than the Constitutional standard?  I just seek some guidance from the Chair.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Which chair are you talking about, there are two chairmen?

DR. MAKUBUYA:  Mr. Chairman, from you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let me first give an opportunity to the chairperson because I think he is the one making this distinction. He should first of all give the clarification.

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, it is true there is a duty to register,  but what we have here is making it impossible to bring a petition whatsoever.  I gave a scenario of how you can actually fail to bring a petition.  If you have 1 million registered voters, it means that if you go with the percentage prescribed, you need 20,000 voters in order to bring a petition.  Now that is the principle, we are saying, has a problem because, suppose 15,000 voters actually turn up to vote and yet you need 20,000 people to bring a petition, you would never bring a petition.  So, the principle is, if you peg it on registered voters, you can actually make it impossible for anybody to ever bring a petition.  

MR. NASASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I am seeking clarification from the chairperson of the committee based on his argument but let us see it the other way.  Suppose the petition is about the number who voted, which number do you use for the percentage?  If you are contesting the figure that voted, which figure will you use to decide the percentage of those who should bring the petition?  

MR. OGALO:  Well, in our amendment we have left 2 per cent still, you would still use 2 per cent of the actual number of votes cast, that is what you would peg your figure on in order to bring the petition.

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  Mr. Chairman, a referendum is a process and in that process, people who take part include those who have registered but who may not necessarily vote and one of the reasons for not voting may actually be a condition for those who have registered to petition the results, and to say they have no right to petition because they did not actually vote, I think, is denying them a right to which they are entitled.  So, my view is that you should base yourself on the registered voters because somebody may decline after he has registered; he is a voter on the register but somewhere in the process, he may actually refuse to vote for a reason which becomes a cause for a petition in court.  So, the proper figure should be the registered voters.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Let us decide democratically.  I now put the question that sub-clause 21, (1) and (2) be amended in the following manner by substituting 'registered voters' with 'votes cast'.

                (Question put and negatived)

THE CHAIRMAN:  The amendment was rejected.

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 21 sub-clause (5) be amended by substituting '14 days' with '30 days'.  The original in the Bill reads:  "A petition under sub-section (1) shall be in the prescribed form and shall be logged in the High Court registry within 14 days after the referendum results are published in the gazette."  Mr. Chairman 14 days are not adequate. The business of preparing a petition, compiling evidence and filing really takes some time.  In Parliamentary elections for example, the law provides 30 days for a constituency; you are given 30 days within which to file a petition and yet here we are dealing with the whole country.  Hence, the committee is of the view that 14 days is not enough and it ought to be 30 days.  Further, other laws normally give the right to extend the period within which you can bring the petition if you are out of time, but this Bill is quiet about it. For those reasons, Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that we substitute 14 days with 30 days.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  May I accept that.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 21 sub-clause (5) be amended in the manner proposed by the chairperson.

                    (Question put and agreed to)
 
  Clause 22.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 22 sub-clause (1) be amended in such a manner as to substitute 'trial' with 'hearing'.  Mr. Chairman, trials or petitions are heard but they are not tried. It is the party to sue who is tried.  So we propose that we have hearing rather than trial.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Conceded Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that sub-clause (1) of clause 22 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 22 sub-clause (2) be amended so as to delete the word "true" in the fifth line.  Mr. Chairman, it reads: "A witness who, in the course of the trial of a petition, wailfully makes a statement of fact material to the proceedings which he or she knows to be false or does not know or believes to be true, or in respect of which he or she is reckless whether it is true or false..."  Mr. Chairman, this is the same argument we had earlier on that if a witness is in court and is making a true statement, even if he makes it recklessly, really, you can not punish him for that.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

Clause 23.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Mr. Chairman, on Clause 23 sub-clause (1) on the first line, I would like to propose an amendment to read: "A petition under this part -  here the amendment I am proposing is to read - of this act may be withdrawn after giving written notice to the court and to other parties to be sued."

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Okumu Ringa, this is drafting technic.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Mr. Chairman, this is brought before us and as legislators, we are supposed to pronounce ourselves over them.  If we point them out, it helps the draftsmen to put it in a better way.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Okumu, I have an idea of legislative drafting, I am not an expert, but this form of drafting is acceptable in modern legislative drafting.  But there is an expert in the person of the First Parliamentary Counsel, I am sure he will take care of that but your point is noted.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Most obliged Sir.

Clause 23.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now propose the question that Clause 23 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 24.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now propose the question that Clause 24 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 25.

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that in clause 25 sub-clause (1) we insert sub-clause (3) after 271 to provide for the specific law under which the date shall be appointed because 271 being general, provides for other matters other than the date to be appointed for the holding of the referendum.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  I agree Sir.
                  
THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 25(1) be amended in the manner proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that 25(5) be deleted.  It is consequential since we have deleted section 15 of the Act.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: I agree Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose the question that clause 25 as amended do stand part of the Bill

(Question put and agreed to)

Clayuse 26.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that in sub-clause (2), we replace 'one hundred' with 'ten' and 'one year' with 'three months'.  The justification for this is that the sentence as proposed is too harsh compared to the offenses prescribed.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, we have all experienced in our various electoral experiences what can be used to arouse division in society and that division, in fact, will even constitute a breach of the peace and, therefore, for the hon. chairman to think that this is a very harsh punishment where the words are there, not exceeding from one to the maximum - we have gone through this over and over again.  I think that the hon. chairman should concede this and we move on.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, it is true that you have a latitude for the court but you are giving the maximum and the court may even choose one hundred but it is also necessary to have a reasonable limit. The offenses here created - he is using the words 'which may arouse division on the basis of ethnicity, sex or religion, the use of those words attracting two million shillings of fine and a year of imprisonment or both. It is true the court can use any but there is also a necessity to have a limit as to how far you can also be able to limit the court not to go beyond, taking into account really the offenses committed.  So, Mr. Chairman, I would rather leave it to the House.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that in sub-clause (2) the following amendment be effected by replacing 'one hundred' with 'ten' and 'one year' with 'three months'.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 26(1).

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, clause 26 sub-clause (1), I want to move that the word 'symbols' which appears in the second line should be deleted and be replaced by the following words: 'political party symbols or other symbols'. The reason Sir, is that - (Interruption) -

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order please! Can we stop the conversation which is taking place on my extreme left near the door and let us concentrate on the Minister's amendment.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: The reason, Sir, is that we are just here covering symbols but we have left out political symbols and it has been presented to me that use of political symbols on the basis of sex, race, colour and whatever, these too could cause problems, particularly in some areas. This is why I am asking that we also include use of political party symbols here so that we do not exclude them.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, have you got that? That instead of the word 'symbols'  - if you look at the text of the Bill in sub-clause (1) line two, there is a word 'symbols' and that that word 'symbols' be deleted and substituted with the following expression: "political party symbols or other symbols". Now, my problem is if you say 'symbols', the sky is the limit but when you say 'political party symbols' so far so good and then you go to say 'or other symbols'. Again it is taking us to the sky. Not so?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Now that the symbols are objectionable here, we then will have to leave only 'political party symbols' and delete the 'other symbols'.

THE CHAIRMAN: So the Minister is now proposing, if I understood him right, that we delete 'other symbols' and replace it with 'political party symbols'. Are we clear of the amendment?

HON.MEMBERS: No!

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like clarification from the Minister. He wants to remove 'other symbols' but we know that there can be other symbols other than political party symbols which are divisive. Supposing one uses the crescent and the star, those also will be divisive. So I think the exclusion of 'other symbols',  according to that description, covers such symbols if they are used in the campaigns.

MS KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, this law that we are trying to pass is about politics so I am not comfortable saying 'political party symbols' because if we talk about symbols in this law, we will be talking about symbols pertaining to political groupings and when you say 'political party symbols', then it means the Movement, since it is not a political party, may operate  using symbols. I would rather we omit the 'political party' and we leave 'symbols' as it is.

MR. BAKU: Mr. Chairman, I also agree that introducing 'political party symbols' is not necessary because the objective of this particular provision is to prohibit any act which can result into division on the basis of sex, race, colour or ethnic origin; tribe, birth, creed or religion. It does not talk about political division.  So there is no need to introduce 'political party symbols' while that matter is not being addressed in this portion of the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Kaggwa, you differ that we stick to what is in the original text of the Bill?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, I am particularly indebted to hon. Kiraso's explanation. On that basis, I withdraw my amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose that clause 26 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 27.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, honourable Members who got this Bill will note that as this Bill stands, it is only the expenses of the Electoral Commission which are being covered.  We have, however, already decided in this Parliament that the sides also  should be facilitated.  I am proposing that 27 which is there now becomes 27(1) and then we have 27(2) which should read as follows: "The Commission shall give equal facilitation to all sides for the purposes of a referendum out of monies approved by Parliament."

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 27 be amended in the manner proposed by the Minister.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 27 as amended agreed to)

Clause 28.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, we had an amendment on this but the Minister also has an amendment which, if we dealt with, we would cover what we have proposed.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, in view of what the committee has just decided on that clause 27, I propose that the present clause 28 be deleted and the following be inserted: "Except as authorised by section 27 or any other law, no person shall use public resources for the purpose of canvassing for any side in a referendum."

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 28 of the Bill be amended in the manner proposed by the Minister.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 28 as amended agreed to)

Clause 29.

MR OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that clause 29 sub-clause 2(d) be deleted. Mr. Chairman, this reads: "Without prejudice to the general effect of sub-section (1) of this section, regulations may be made under it prescribing the number of agents representing the sides contesting in a referendum and their functions."  Mr. Chairman, this means that the Minister could be able to make regulations determining how many agents the side should have while canvassing.  The Committee is of the view that this really is an internal matter for the side, and the side should be able to determine whom to use without the Minister limiting the campaign agents or people canvassing.  It would really be interfering with the conduct of the business of canvassing.  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I beg to move.

MR. NKANGI:  We have actually dealt with this under Clause 11, those amendments we made this morning, Sir.  So, I concede. 

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I am coming back again with a question of currency fines and imprisonment but this time it is on a different principle.  Clause 29 (2)(g) empowers the Minister under the regulations he has made to prescribe penalties not exceeding a fine of 150 currency points or imprisonment of 2 years or both such imprisonment and a fine for any one contravening the regulations he has made.  

These regulations are made under the parent Act and they normally contain minor matters, minor transgressions of the law which have not been specifically addressed in the Act and normally they should attract minor sentences.  Now here what happens is that, what Parliament has passed, the sentences Parliament has imposed, that power of having to pass a law for the same sentences the Parliament has passed is being given to the Minister.  

The Committee is of the view that regulations being made under the parent Act, offenses and sentences prescribed under those regulations ought really not to be at par with the parent Act.  They ought to be really minor, minor things which would be about a caution, a fine - small things.  So this time, we are proposing that Parliament having imposed sentences of 150 currency points or imprisonment of two years or both for certain offenses in the Act to again allow the same sentences to be imposed by the Minister under the regulations is not really proper.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that we delete  "one hundred and fifty" and substitute it with "two" and delete "imprisonment for two years"    

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman, an hon. Doctor of Medicine  has been saying lawyers are really bad and I felt that much interest being a lawyer.  Now, Sir, the Clause says the Minister may, with the approval of Parliament.  So any rules made by the Minister must be made, can only take effect with the approval of Parliament.  And (g) says: "Without prejudice to the penalties prescribed in the Parliamentary Elections (Interim Provisions) Statute 1996 - there is that generality of "with the approval of Parliament.  And then again you go down to the penalties not exceeding. These regulations will be made, will be proposed, they will not have any effect at all until Parliament has passed them.  So, I do not see why the hon. Chairman distrusts Parliament.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Honourable, I hope you got him.  

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, this is different really.  You would already have given power for the Minister - it is not a question of distrusting Parliament.  You would have already empowered him to be able to prescribe a fine of one hundred and fifty currency points.  That is in the parent Act, there is no way you would come in the regulations and refuse it. The parent Act would have given that power.  So as Parliament, you would have to be bound by what we have already passed here.  So when the Minister comes here and says, for this I am prescribing so much, you will still have to come up and although it will be with your approval, you would have given him the power in the parent Act.  So really, I do not think that it can be argued that after all, it will come here and then Parliament may refuse it. He will be exercising the powers under this.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Honourable Chairperson, my understanding of the situation is this that the enabling Act having given power to the Minister to make regulations, the Minister goes there and makes regulations to prescribe penalties and the parent Act says before your regulations become operational, bring them here.  Not so?  And then Parliament can say, no, no, this punishment here which is being proposed, we reduce it to this and the other.  I think this is what the Minister is trying to argue but still, even if the Minister has that power, he makes his regulations, you will have opportunity to look at them including the penalty. You can say, no, no, no, this penalty is excessive or this regulation is anti-people. We can throw it out.  That is what he is saying.  I do not know whether I understood you correctly, Mr. Minister.

MR. KAGGWA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to seek clarification from the Minister why he deems it necessary to even think of making other penalties when they are already existing.  What is the justification for that?  

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman, i am envisaging a non static situation.  When laws are being applied, circumstances sometimes change which need new regulations to come in and these are the ones which I am thinking of.  

MR. RUZINDANA:  I am a little troubled by this bit of power to the Minister. Earlier when discussing this Bill, we had, for example, deleted insulting as an offence.  Can not this one now allow the Minister to bring back insulting as an offence and then prescribe this penalty and other offenses which we may have refused to put in the Bill?  I want to be sure that we are not giving the Minister powers to create offenses which we may have refused here in Parliament.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Let us have the benefit of the learned Attorney General, the hon. Katureebe.  

MR. KATUREEBE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think Clause (2) must be seen to arise following from Clause (1).  Clause (1) is already giving the Minister real conditional power because of a condition 'to be approved by Parliament'.  So he does not really have a discretion of his own.  He must come here and Parliament approves for him to make regulations for the expedient carrying into effect the provisions of the Act but then Clause (2) qualifies it further and says notwithstanding the generality of Clause (1), regulations made may cover the following subjects.  It does not mean that the regulations made will necessarily have each one of these.  It merely gives you what may be covered.  But even having done so, the Minister must still come here and Parliament approves.  So, I really do not see any problem there, Mr. Chairman.  

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, in view of what I have heard on the Floor and also what the hon. Attorney General has advised, I wish to concede this point.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Do I understand, Mr. Chairman, that you have withdrawn your amendment? So, the amendment is withdrawn, any objection?  There is no objection. Proceed.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 29, sub-Clause (4) be deleted. This Clause reads: "Without prejudice to the general effect of sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) of this section, regulations made under this section may modify the provisions of the Parliamentary Elections(Interim Provisions) Statute, 1996, for the purpose of achieving a more practical application of those provisions to a referendum."  The effect of this would therefore be that the regulations made by the Minister under Section 29 which we have been discussing would in effect amend a statute of Parliament.  It is the view of the committee that regulations cannot amend  a statute.   Mr. Chairman, I therefore beg to move that this be deleted.  

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. Chairman  misquoted me here but speaking of hard examples, I think, Sir, that where regulations are a part of a law, they are part of a law  because if regulations have been passed by Parliament as part of a law, then it is Parliament to change the law.  You see, we are talking about regulations affecting a referendum;  affecting how they should be conducted.  We are saying, regulations made under these sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) approved by Parliament may be made so as to modify the Parliamentary Elections (Interim Provisions) Statute 1996 in so far as those there affect the conduct of a referendum.  We are having this one law here to qualify laws affecting the conduct of a referendum.  This is why I am saying that under this law, regulations may be made by the Minister modifying the other regulations under the other law in so far as they affect the conduct of referendum.  And those regulations must be approved by this Parliament before they take effect.  

MR. KIVEJINJA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would want to get clarification from the Minister. Why does he refer to the Interim Provisions Statute and not only to the regulations so that it becomes clear that these regulations can outlive other regulations but not the statute itself? 

THE CHAIRMAN: I do not see the Attorney General - I think he is still organising himself.   

MR. BAITERA MAITEKI:  I just want to seek clarification from the Minister of Justice. Really in principle, is it possible for a subsidiary legislation to modify a principle legislation?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Subsidiary in relation to what?  Because you see, I take subsidiary in relation to an Act, a Bill, a Law.  We are saying here we have got two laws; one, laws affecting the referendum, the other one elections generally and we are saying, where issues of referenda are concerned, the Minister may, with the approval of this Parliament, make changes in those other laws as much as those laws affect the conduct of a referendum.  So, the question of being subsidiary, I do not really see the point.

THE CHAIRMAN:  You see, hon. Minister, the way this thing reads, it gives a bit of discomfort - "Without prejudice to the general effect of sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) of this section, regulations made under this section may modify the provisions of the Parliamentary Elections (Interim Provisions) Statute, 1996 for the purpose of achieving a more practical application of those provisions to a referendum."  The first question is whether a Statutory Instrument which is likely to be the legal document containing these regulations can amend the other law, the Parliamentary Elections Statute, that is the first one.  The second one is whether it is going to make a difference legally if that Statutory Instrument containing those regulations which are intended to modify that statute is going to come back here and Parliament gives the yes.  Will that make any difference?  And supposing at that time Parliament says, no, no, we cannot amend? You see, I have that problem. I do not know whether the Attorney General wishes to assist in this matter?

MR. KATUREEBE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have already advised the Minister that I think it would make life much easier for us if we simply concede to delete this. 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman, I think the Minister should be able to bring the other provisions under the Parliamentary Elections (Interim Provisions) Statute, 1996 under the regulations here to make them apply to referenda.  So, I leave this out.

THE CHAIRMAN:  The chairman's amendment is that sub-clause (4)
of Clause 29 be deleted.
  
(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 29 as amended, agreed to.

MR.  RWABITA:  Mr. Chairman, I would like the Minister of Constitutional Affairs to clarify to me whether civic education could not be put in this Bill because from past experience during the Parliamentary elections and the Presidential elections, the Electoral Commission did not do a good job regarding civic education.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, you seem to be bringing in a new Clause?  Which one are you referring to? Are you referring to a particular Clause here or?

MR. RWABITA:  No, but I saw that we were going to conclude the Bill.  I wanted to bring a new idea in this 'Miscellaneous' section about civic education. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed.

MR. RWABITA:  Thank you very much.  From past experience, we found out that sometimes the Electoral Commission starts very late to carry out civic education and it is not done properly.  Now, with any referendum coming in future, I think the subject of a referendum should be explained to the people so that they know what they are going to vote for.  So, to that end, I would request that we include a clause which would go this way, Mr. Chairman, that the Electoral Commission shall carry out proper civic education for each referendum and not later than six months before voting for that referendum so that people get to know what they are going to choose between (a) and (b) or (b) and (c) but they should get a proper education.  In the past, we did not get this one.  If the Minister can confirm that this will be in the regulations of every referendum, I would accept but I thought it is an important area which we should not leave in a lacuna, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: What the hon. Member is proposing is that there must be some provision for educating people about a referendum, particularly before they are called upon to cast their votes.  I do not know whether this cannot be taken care of, if the Minister agrees, under Clause (29) where the Minister is supposed to make regulations which may be expedient for carrying into effect the provisions of this Act and where you have, under (2) which you have approved, the regulations would cover the following areas including this thing he is proposing. I do not know whether it is slotted somewhere.
 
MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  I think, Sir, instead of having a new Clause here, the Minister responsible will do that and secondly, I shall remind the Electoral Commission of the sentiments of my honourable Friend  and also, I would like to remind Parliament of Article 61 which reads: "The Electoral Commission shall have the following functions - (b)  to organise, conduct and supervise elections or referenda in accordance with this Constitution."  So, there is this general Constitutional duty on the Commission. Hon. Rwabiita was saying okay, we have done this in the past, but not done it effectively.  So, what I am going to do is to remind them that Parliament is concerned about their past performance so they should pull up their socks, but I do not think we need a special clause to that effect.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister, I did not hear you very well.  Did you refer to paragraph (g) of that Article you are reading of the Constitution?  I am talking of 61 (g) which reads: "The Electoral Commission shall have the following functions- and makes a list of them.  When it gets to (g) - to formulate and implement civic education programmes relating to elections."  So, the power is already given there to the Electoral Commission. I do not know whether the hon. Member is comfortable with that or whether he wants this to be reflected in the law to be made.

MR. RWABITA:  Mr. Chairman, in order to be sure that this civic education will be done properly, it could be put in the law so that the Electoral Commission must do it rather than taking its time and doing it the wrong way.  

MISS. KIRASO: Mr. Chairman, Clause (4) of this Bill says: "For the avoidance of doubt, the Commission shall organise, conduct and supervise all referenda held under this Act or any other written law."  I wanted to propose that we could add something referring to the Chapter which the Minister has read to us from the Constitution so that it is specific and it covers hon. Rwabiita's fears of civic education - if we could add something to Clause (4) from Article 61.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Along the lines of -

MISS. KIRASO:  Along the lines of the Constitution 61 (g) we add to 4 (1).

MR.  KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to get clarified because I am not quite sure whether hon. Deo Rwabiita, the civic education  he is talking about is the same civic education being talked about in the Constitution.  My understanding of the (g) in the Constitution relates to civic education in as far as conducting of elections are concerned.  I imagine for him, and this is where I want a clarification, he is referring to educating people about the referendum before they vote and I think the two are different. I do not think the one he is seeking is a Constitutional duty of the Electoral Commission.

CAPT. BABU:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to get a clarification.  The Electoral Commission has an Act and in that Act, this whole 61 is actually repeated in there and it does give the Electoral Commission certain powers and their powers are to have civic education and if you read 61 (b) which is in this case to do with referenda, I do not see why we should make another insertion on this when it is already included in two different areas in the Constitution and in the Act that governs the Electoral Commission. I would like to request that the Members accept this and we give the Electoral Commission the power they deserve to organise and run these elections.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Rwabiita, are you still uncomfortable?  Under the Constitution, if I hear what he is saying, one of the functions of the Electoral Commission is to organise elections and referenda.

MR. RWABITA:  Mr. Chairman, what 61 is talking about is the normal elections but we are talking about referenda in this country which will be of different aspects: Now we are going to talk about change of political systems, next time it could be another subject but the people should be educated about each referendum so that they have a right to decide on what they think is right rather than bundle it under elections and if it is not done properly, then the referendum results will not be helping the country.  

MR. RUZINDANA: Section (4) of the current Bill is actually lifted from Article 61 of the Constitution.  61 (b) says: "To organise, conduct and supervise elections and referenda"  and section (4) (1) says: "For the avoidance of doubt, the Commission shall organise, conduct and supervise..."   and this is lifted from the Constitution.  Why can't this bit on civic education similarly be lifted from the Constitution and then we put it in the Bill?  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I think the principle is good but  what we are trying to do is look for where to insert it.  We could, for example say: "Regulations may be made under this section prescribing forms to be used for the purposes of this Act to ensure the secrecy of voting, applying with or without modification the provisions of any enactment relating to elections,including any provisions relating to election offenses."  You could say "providing for civic education for A, B, C, for purposes of referendum."  What is wrong with that?   Can you not come up with something like that, hon. Minister? It is not my Bill, I am just thinking aloud.

MR. RWABITA:  I accept that arrangement.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I am just guiding, I do not want to appear as if I am contributing. I propose: "Without prejudice to the general effect of Section (1) of this section, regulations made under it prescribing to ensure the secrecy of this - applying, prescribing, all these things you can say - providing for civic education for the purposes of a referendum."  Have you captured that?  It is not mine.  You just say it, let it be decided, the draftsman will put it somewhere.

MR. RWABITA:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the proposed amendment be carried as advised.

THE CHAIRMAN:  You say this for example:  "I move that sub-clause (2) of Clause 29 be amended by inserting the following sentence  - and then you read whatever you captured there.

MR. RWABITA:  Mr. Chairman, I do move that under Section 29 sub-section (2), we insert a sentence which reads as follows: "Providing for civic education that will be done six months before the referendum" - (Interruptions).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please! Can you read it out again?

MR. RWABIITA: "Providing for civic education before the referendum", I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Babu is not happy.

CAPT. BABU:  I accept the principle of putting the civic education in the Act but I do not accept the time.  The civic education we had last year -

THE CHAIRMAN:  He has amended that one, he has changed.

CAPT. BABU:  He has changed that?  Accepted.

THE CHAIRMAN:  "Civic education before the referendum", that is what he has said.

MISS. KIRASO:   Mr. Chairman, I would like to amend it by adding before the phrase 'civic education' the word 'exhaustive'.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Let us do this, hon. Members. We have already pronounced ourselves on that clause but upon further reflection, I think let us talk about the addition of this provision and where it will find a home should really be for the draftsman but let us agree that it is necessary, that it should be a part of this, alright? So, let us get the formulation now.  Hon. Obiga Kania, you want to amend hon. Rwabiita's proposal.

MR. OBIGA KANIA: Yes, Mr. Chairman, the amendment I would like to propose is that instead of limiting the education to civic, we should also add voter education.  Mr. Chairman, the two are not the same, the two are different. Civic education is generally educating people about  what the referendum is about, why people should go and vote in it but voter education refers to the actual voting process during that referendum and I beg to move that that should be included.

CAPT BABU:  Mr. Chairman, the phrase 'civic education' is very wide. It includes voter education. There is no need for us to repeat ourselves. When civic education is defined, it does include voter education and any other form of education, democracy and so on and so forth. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Baku can you help us?  

MR. BAKU:  Mr. Chairman, after having followed the argument and the phraseology of hon. Rwabiita, I would like to summarise it and put it in this form.  This should be Clause 29(2)(h), following (g) to say: "Providing for civic education for purposes of a referendum" - (Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, we have now two amendments; hon. Rwabiita's amendment as amended by hon. Obiga Kania by the addition of 'civic and voter education'.  

(Question put and negatived)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, now we pronounce ourselves on hon. Rwabiita's proposal that we insert somewhere that the regulations provide for civic education before the referendum.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 30

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that in Clause 30, we substitute 'cabinet' with 'parliament'.  The Schedule is part of the law, it is part of the Act.  In fact in this case you can even notice, Mr. Chairman, that the schedule cites section (2) of the Act.  In other words, it is finding its beginnings in section (2) of the Act.  So this law having been made by Parliament, it is only logical that it cannot be amended outside Parliament and this should have the blessings of Parliament during these amendments.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman, that process would be cumbersome but in view of what has actually been expressed so far about your fear of punishments, I think the Cabinet is likely to be very co-operative to concede your amendment.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 30 be amended by substituting  the word 'cabinet' with the word 'parliament.'
 
(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 30 as amended agreed to.

Clause 31 agreed to.

MR. RUZINDANA: Mr. Chairman, I do not know whether I should introduce this one here but section (27) which we have approved seems to be in contradiction with Article 66 of the Constitution with regard to the expenses of the Electoral Commission for referenda. Here we are saying in the approved section the expenses incurred by the Commission in the holding of any referendum shall be paid out of monies voted by Parliament but then the Constitution says in Article 66(2) that the Commission shall be a self accounting institution and shall deal directly  with the Ministry responsible for finance on matters of its finances.  I want to be sure that we are not violating this Article of the Constitution.

MR. KATUREEBE:  Mr. Chairman, I do not see any contradiction because the finances of the commission even as a self accounting institution must still be approved by Parliament and that system is even from Clause (1) of the article he is talking about.

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you happy?

MR. RUZINDANA:  Yes.

The Schedule.

The Schedule agreed to.

The Title.
MR. BAKU:  Mr. Chairman, I have an observation I have to make on the Title of the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: Do we deal with the Title first?

MR. BAKU: Mr. Chairman, only to get your guidance on when I will be able to make my observation on the Title so that I would be on the alert.

THE CHAIRMAN: You want to make an observation on the Title? 

MR. BAKU: Yes, to move a Motion to change the Title of the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, we have dealt with the Schedule but you see, under our Rules you will not change the Title, this must stem from the provisions - (Interjection)  Yes! If you want to change the title, it should really stem from the provisions of the Bill.

MR. BAKU: Yes, Mr. Chairman, my observation is that the Title of this Bill is "The Referendum and other Provisions Bill, 1999"  and within the body of the Bill we had a foreign element which was clause 15 of the Bill which our governing Parliament would approve as the democratic representative system.  That is why I thought it was  logical to add the phrase: "and other provisions".  Now that we have deleted this particular clause and the Bill is addressing the referendum in particular or a referendum in particular, I was going to move that the phrase "and other provisions" should be deleted so that we have it as "The Referendum Bill, 1999" to be precise and not go address matters which are not being addressed any longer within the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: Before we go there, we had stood over a provision, I would like us to dispatch that one first.  On clause 13(6)(b), we had requested some hon. Members to deal with it and report to us.  The hon. Okumu Ringa.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, you mandated hon. Owiny Dollo, hon. OGALO and myself to work on a common text. We worked on a text and the chairman now has it, maybe, he will read it.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. chairman, this is with regards to what?

MR. OGALO:   Mr. Chairman, this is with regard to 13(6)(b) and 14(6)(b). 

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, you proceed.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, as mandated earlier this morning, I, hon. Dollo and hon. Okumu Ringa have agreed on this formulation for both of those that:  "Any speaker of a district council charged with a responsibility of communication of information under this section, wilfully or knowingly or misses to do so commits an offence  - and the rest follows.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that paragraph (b) of sub-Clause (6) of Clause 13 and paragraph (b) of sub-clause (6) of Clause 14 be amended in the manner proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to)

Paragraph (b) of sub-clause (6) of 13  and paragraph (b) of sub-Clause (6) of Clause 14 as amended agreed to.

MR. BAKU:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to move that "The Referendum and other Provisions Bill" as a title to this Bill be amended  by deleting the words "and other provisions" so that the title of the Bill reads "The referendum Bill, 1999."  

Tthe reason for this motion is that, first of all, when I looked at the Title of the Bill, it looked a bit clumsy when 'and other provisions' is added there. And when I looked through it, I discovered that the reason could have been that it is because some matters which are not directly related to the referendum were added to the Bill under Clause (15) of this Bill.  This Clause dealt with the issue of Parliament approving new democratic and other representative political systems which, in the course of debate has been deleted because the Minister had considered the proposal of the committee and he has undertaken to bring another Bill to address this matter specifically.  Therefore, this Bill now in fact deals only with referenda and matters related with referenda.  I will, therefore, move that to make the Title accurate, we should delete the words I have moved. I so move, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I take it that the hon. Member moving the Motion is proceeding under Rule 104 of our Rules of Procedure  in Committee of the whole House on a Bill and sub-rule (24) of that Rule states as follows: "If an amendment to the title of the Bill is made necessary by an amendment to the Bill, it shall be made at the conclusion of the proceedings detailed above, but no question shall be put that the title (as amended) stand part of the Bill, nor shall any question be put upon the enacting formula."  I take it that you are proceeding under that Rule?

MR. BAKU: Yes, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: So now you have made your proposal, you have moved a Motion where this Chair is not supposed to put a question but maybe let us hear what other Members  are thinking about it before I let you go with your proposal - (Interjection).  

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  Mr. Chairman, I wanted to draw the attention of my Colleague - I do not know how you will look at this.  Section 16 of the Bill refers to the whole of 74 in the Constitution and when you look at Article 74, sub-article (2), it talks about changing the political system by other means other than a referendum mainly by elected representatives of the people in Parliament and district councils.  So, I just wanted to give him that information. Maybe I may consider the amendment in the light of this, since that is also in the Bill.

MR. KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With due respect, I do not think hon. Obiga Kania's submission makes any material change to what hon. Baku has submitted.  To the contrary, he is emphasizing that this Bill is about referenda and that is his contention.  This Bill has not provided for the change of a political system in the manner he is talking about and, therefore, I think does not change the position of hon. Baku.  Thank you.

DR. NKUUHE: Mr. Chairman, I wanted a clarification from hon. Baku  because the Memorandum tells you what this whole thing is about  - about referenda, about petitions and about resolutions of Parliament.  Now, are all these really referenda?  Because I see that a resolution and a petition are different from a referenda!  So, in that case this becomes 'other provisions' then.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, is that really a major assault on the Bill?  Is it legally so fundamental that we should - hon. Baku, I think you should help us with the way forward.

MR. BAKU: Mr. Chairman, first of all, as I said, when you read  'The Referendum and other Provisions Bill', it sounds to me clumsy because other provisions, if they are not really related to  referenda, why should they be put here?  That is exactly the reason why the element which was foreign to referenda under Clause 15 was removed.  So what I am interested in is to be  precise, to indicate on the title of the Bill that this is a Referendum Bill.  Just like the other one, what we have repealed under Clause 31 was the Referendum Statute, 1994, just as simple as that - precise and to the point.  So, I thought we would be doing ourselves good service if we are also precise on the matter we are addressing.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, you know this Rule is rather strange.  I gave you an opportunity to talk so that you can find out what the feeling is.  

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, I like neatness any time and I am not so sure that everything in this Bill is nothing but about the Referendum itself therefore, acting on the principle when you doubt to do nothing, I think you better do nothing.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, when we went through the old Bill, the only foreign element was Clause (15) as far as the Committee could design; the only foreign element outside the referendum was Clause (15) so to that end really, if (14) is change of  political system under Article 74 and I think hon. Medi Kaggwa had ably explained that because Article 74, in fact, calls for a referendum whether you are going to call it through Parliament or through the district councils, eventually you end up with a referendum.  So really, (14) also deals with referenda.  In light of that, it is my view that I would really go with hon. Baku, that we could remove 'other Provisions' because I do not see any other thing outside that.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Chairperson, you are about to go further and argue that in any case, we have deleted Clause (15) which you say was a foreign element?

MR. OGALO: Yes!

THE CHAIRMAN: So, that makes everything else referenda, is that the argument?

MR. OGALO: Yes, Mr. Chairman.

MR. OWINY DOLLO: Mr. Chairman, thank you. I beg to disagree with a Learned Friend, hon. Baku and in disregard, I also disagree with the Chairman of the Committee.  Despite our removal or deletion of the original (15) in the Bill, we still have 'foreign matters' to use my learned friend's usage, in the Clause (14). In Sub-clause (4), "Upon Parliament passing a Resolution in support of a Petition in accordance with Clause (2) of Article 74 of the Constitution, the Clerk ..."  Mr. Chairman, if you look at Clause (2) of Article 74 of the Constitution, it does not refer to a Referendum, it refers to a change of political system by a means other than a referendum.  It refers to the change of political system by mere resolution as set out in Clause (2) of Article 74, and for this reason, Mr. Chairman, to use hon. Baku's argument, there is still 'other Provisions'.  

MR. BAKU: Mr. Chairman, after my attention has been drawn to Clause (14), I would like to acknowledge that there is some element of some foreign matter.  I therefore, withdraw my Motion to delete the words "other provisions".  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the Title becomes part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

The House resumed, the Speaker presiding

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Committee of the whole House has considered the "The Referendum and other Provisions Bill, 1999" and passed it with several amendments.  

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the Report of the Committee be adopted.  

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE REFERENDUM AND OTHER PROVISIONS BILL, 1999

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled "The Referendum and other Provisions Bill, 1999" be read the Third Time and do pass.  

THE SPEAKER: I put the question as read above.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE REFERENDUM AND OTHER PROVISIONS BILL, 1999.

(Bill read the Third time and passed)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have come to the end of what has been a relatively rough journey, and I would like to thank you for your patience and tolerance and above all, for your conviction and for your determination in the discharge of your duty.  The House will be adjourned to Tuesday, at 2 o'clock.

(The rose and adjourned to Tuesday, 6th July, 1999, at 2.30 p.m.)
