Monday 9th July, 2001

Parliament met at 11.23 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I regret to say that because of unforeseen problems, we could not start on time, but we shall endeavour in future to start on time. I request you to amend the Order Paper that you have to include a fourth item namely, “Constitution of the Committee on Appointments”. Thank you.

CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF THE PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE FOR THE POST OF VICE-PRESIDENT

MR. OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Mr. Speaker, we did approve the Rules of Procedure for this House which we said were the same Rules of Procedure for the Sixth Parliament. As a Member of the Seventh Parliament, I must confess to you that I have not seen these rules myself. I am a new Member of the Seventh Parliament and I do not know what went on in the Sixth Parliament. I would have assumed that immediately those rules were approved, as a Member of the Seventh Parliament, I would have been given these Rules of Procedure so that I go through them.  

Now we have decided to go into the very serious business of approval of the Vice-President and the constitution of Committees. I do not even know what Committees are there in the Seventh Parliament or what Committees were there in the Sixth Parliament. I am a new Member in the Seventh Parliament. May I request the Office of the Clerk, without undue delay, to really give each Member a copy of these Rules of Procedure that we adopted so that we acquaint ourselves? If we were given these rules over the weekend, we would at least have gone through them. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. RUZINDANA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to be clarified as to whether the previous speaker is not the hon. Omara Atubo who was in the Sixth Parliament and who was in the Rules Committee of the Sixth Parliament, and therefore should have a copy of the old Rules?

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, may I inform my good Friend, hon. Augustine Ruzindana, that I finished my term in the Sixth Parliament. I am now a completely new Member of the Seventh Parliament. I am looking for the new Rules of the Seventh Parliament, which I am supposed to be given and which I am supposed to be entitled to.  Thank you very much.

MR. WAPAKABULO: Mr. Speaker, I have been following comments made concerning the Rules of Procedure. First, Members are saying that there were Rules of Procedure for the Sixth Parliament and that there are Rules of Procedure for the Seventh Parliament. I find that very unfortunate because the Constitution does not say that each Parliament will make its own Rules of Procedure. 


I do not know where this idea of every Parliament having its own rules comes from. 

We have the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.  They were made by the Sixth Parliament however, along the way we discovered there were lacunas and inadequacies that had to be cured. 

The Committee on Rules interviewed a whole range of non-members and people like myself, by virtue of having been Speaker, and we made proposals for changes and corrections. Somehow, unfortunately those are being labelled Rules of Procedure of the Seventh Parliament. What they mean is that the Seventh Parliament will be the one to deliberate, consider and adopt these Rules but we should not create the impression, if I am correct, that every Parliament has its own Rules. Of course it may, but it is not what the Constitution says. That is why when we did say the Rules of the Parliament of Uganda, this meant that they are the Rules of the Parliament of Uganda as amended, modified, repealed or replaced by new rules as Parliament wishes. So, I just want to get your comment on that. Do we have power under the Constitution that every Parliament must come up with its own rules? I thank you.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The point advanced by hon. Omara Atubo in regard to what is in front of us is so serious that it should not be left hanging.  Each one of us present represents a section of the Ugandan community. The issue that we should have access to the law prescribed, namely, the Rules of Procedure for the Sixth Parliament, is very important. It is a violation of human rights of the highest order. 

For us here to assume to pass anything referred to which we do not know means that we have a debt before the people we represent, and this is a serious matter. So, I would like to beg those concerned that before we take action related to the choice or approval of the vice-presidency, which is one of the highest offices of the land, we should check what we are using to do that. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we should end this debate. The point is that you need copies of the rules that we are going to use. 




We decided on Friday that we were going to use rules that were being used by the last Parliament, and this is being worked out. At the end of the day, each one of you should have a copy. So, we can proceed. 

As far as the issue of the Vice-President is concerned, actually the Constitution adequately deals with this one.  Even without resorting to the rules, we will be able to conduct the business. 

Hon. Members, I have received communication from His Excellency the President on the appointment of the Vice-President and I will read it:  “In accordance with the requirements of Article 108(1) and 108(2) of the Constitution, I hereby appoint, subject to the approval of Parliament, Hon. Dr. Wandira Speciosa Kazibwe, Vice President of the Republic of Uganda. Please present the above names to Parliament for approval as required by the Constitution.”  And I hereby present this name to you for the necessary action.

MR.WAPAKABULO JAMES (Mbale Municipality): I thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity to present a motion in relation to the matter you have just briefed the House about, concerning approval of the appointment of the Vice President of the Republic of Uganda. But before I move that motion, I would like to congratulate you, although I have done so elsewhere, on your election to the leadership of this House as our Speaker. I personally look forward to working with you in a similar manner that we did when you held another office of Deputy Speaker. The manner in which you are able to lead us, I am sure, will make this house a big success. I also wish to congratulate your Deputy, hon. Kadaga, similarly, for having been elected to the office of Deputy Speaker.

Now, I am glad to move the following motion. It is a motion for Resolution for approval of the appointment of Vice President of Uganda. “I move that pursuant to Article 108(2) of the Constitution, this House approves the appointment of Dr. Speciosa Wandira Kazibwe to the office of the Vice President of the Republic of Uganda –(Interruption)

MAJ. KAZOORA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I am not opposed to the motion but I think natural justice demands that we talk about the hon. Member being proposed. I am seeking your guidance whether it is proper if we should proceed when that hon. Member is in the House.

THE SPEAKER: I think he is just moving a motion and the motion will not be competent until it is seconded. When we open debate and she may be here, but maybe she will choose to go away. Let us get the motion and see how to proceed.

MR.MUTULUUZA: I am requesting the House to consider the issue of sharing the national cake. Just a few days ago –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member for Mawokota North let me explain how we are going to proceed. Hon. Members, we are in a constitutional exercise of approving the nomination of a person that has been named as a Vice President for the new Government. She is still a Vice President under the previous appointment but apparently the President wants to renew this appointment. By the Constitution, the nomination cannot be effective until Parliament has approved it by a majority vote. 

What is being done now is that somebody is moving a motion that the name be approved by this Parliament for appointment as vice President. The motion will have to be seconded by another Member and the member will justify why he/she thinks we should approve, then there will be a debate, obviously, for those who support and those who may not support the nomination. It is during that debate that the issue of sharing the cake or what not will come. So, I think for the time being, let us allow the Mover to move the motion and we proceed.

MR.WAPAKABULO: I thank you Mr. Speaker for that clarification. I will again move the motion so that Members hear it and choose either to support me or not. That “pursuant to Article 108 Clause (2) of the Constitution this House approves the appointment of Dr. Speciosa Wandira Kazibwe to the Office of Vice President of Uganda.” I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: the Woman Representative for Kitgum district seconds The motion.
MS.AKWERO ODWONG: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I too wish to congratulate you and the Deputy Speaker upon your election to the offices of Speaker and Deputy Speaker respectively. I second the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Could you now justify the motion, hon. Member?

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, with due respect to the Mover of the motion, I thought at this particular time it would have been prudent for the person whose fate we are discussing to possibly decide on her own to go out so that we are free to discuss the matter. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Well, the motion was being moved and apparently those who are moving the motion are in her favour. Do you think she should not hear things in her favour? Does Her Excellency the Vice President want to be here or not? Otherwise you are a Member of Parliament who is entitled to sit in the House. 

MR.WAPAKABULO: Mr. Speaker, maybe the most important point at this juncture is for the House to know whether - since she is around - whether she accepts so that we can proceed on.

DR.WANDIRA KAZIBWE (Kigulu South, Iganga): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I want to start by putting on record my congratulations to you and your Deputy for having been elected to steer this august House.  

I am called Dr. Speciosa Wandira Kazibwe, Member of Parliament for Kigulu South County – Iganga District.  Currently I am the Vice President of the Republic of Uganda and I do accept the appointment which President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni has made of my being appointed Vice President of the Republic of Uganda and I do pray that the august House considers it and gives me their vote.  Thank you - (Laughter).

Mr. Speaker, in the interest of my eyes roving and frightening people from praising me and not praising me, I would request that the House bears with my presence during the time when the Mover of the motion and the Seconder of the motion to whom I am deeply indebted for having the trust in me to perform this noble duty of being Vice President, make their contributions.   
After they have spoken, I will move out so that I do not actually frighten you with my smiles.  Thank you very much.

MR. WAPAKABULO (Mbale Municipality): Thank you sir.  Now with that clarification and acceptance, I will proceed to justify my motion. 

Mr. Speaker, what are the Constitutional requirements relating to the appointment of a Vice President and the qualifications for the Vice President?  Since this is a fresh presentation, I want us to go through the Constitutional requirements so that we are sure where we are going.  

“The President shall, with the approval of Parliament - that is 108(2) - by a simple majority, appoint a vice President.”  The debate is on the Floor of this House because of the wording of this particular clause.  Others simply say “with the approval of Parliament” and those appointments are sent to committees before they come back.  But here the Constitution is saying this Parliament by simple majority.  So the decision in my view and I think you have already guided us sir, has to be made in this House.  There are other Constitutional requirements are in the same Article 108.  Clause (1) provides for the office of Vice President.  Then Clause (2) provides for the appointment.  I have just read it that this Parliament must approve the appointment. 108(4) Sets out the qualification of the person to be appointed Vice President of Uganda.108 (4) says: “ The qualifications prescribed for the office of President by Article 102 of this Constitution shall apply to the office of the Vice President.”

If you go to 102, what does the Constitution say: “A person is not qualified for election as President unless that person is-
(a)	Citizen of Uganda by birth.” 
Now if you look at Chapter 3 Clause (10)(a) of the Constitution, you will see what categories of citizenship we have.  There is citizenship by birth: “every person born in Uganda, one of whose parents or grandparents is or was a member of any of the indigenous communities existing and residing within the borders of Uganda as at the first day of February 1926 and as set out in the third schedule to this Constitution.” 
Those tribal groupings are set out in the Constitution and if you read in the 3rd schedule, you will see Basoga number 25 - Laughter).  Basoga is scheduled as one of those tribal groupings and when I read the details of Dr. Speciosa Wandira Kazibwe, she was born of Constantine Wandira and Late Kabina Naibere Kadama of Budwege, Bukoyo Parish, Bulamogi – Iganga District of Busoga.  So she is in the first category of Ugandans by birth.  

The other categories are by registration; you have lived in Uganda for a long time although you are not a Ugandan initially but then you can apply and be registered. The other one is by naturalisation and Parliament has yet to set the rules. If it has already done so please forgive me. So the requirement that she must be a citizen of Uganda by birth is clearly established in Article (102).
(b)	“not less than thirty-five years and not more than seventy-five years of age”.   
These are Constitutional requirements. Again from the bio-data of Speciosa Wandira Kazibwe, she was born on the 1st of July 1955, which means that she turned 46 only on the 1st of this month and therefore, she satisfies that particular requirement as to age.
(c)	“a person qualified to be a Member of Parliament of Uganda.” 
Now of course there you know that, Dr.Speciosa
Wandira Kazibwe is an honourable Member of 
Parliament for Kigulu South in the district of 
Iganga. Therefore, we do not have to go into 
further details as to whether she qualifies to be 
a Member of Parliament because she is already 
a Member of Parliament.  You agree with me. 

So having now satisfied the House on those Constitutional requirements and the fact that you have properly seized on the matter, the rest is essentially a question of the attributes of Dr. Speciosa Wandira Kazibwe.  And for lack of time sir, I will not be very detailed but I would like to point to the fact that by educational attributes, Dr. Speciosa Wandira Kazibwe has been to the best of our schools: Namagunga if I may start there.  Then Makerere University where she did a Bachelor of Medicine and Surgery and qualified in 1979.  She has done a Masters in Surgery awarded in 1987 and she has done a lot of other post education, postgraduate seminars and courses in various places in Washington and other places.  I do not want to go into great details. Her educational background is soundly rooted.  

What about Leadership qualities?  Dr. Speciosa Wandira Kazibwe seems to have been a leader at every point where she has interacted with others right from being a Class Monitor at the Primary School - (Laughter).  She assumed leadership of such institutions as Chairperson and President of the African Women’s Committee on Peace and Development since 1997 to-date, or like her membership of the Development Assistance Arm of the Canadian Government since 1992 to-date.  

The leadership qualities of Dr. Speciosa Wandira Kazibwe have exhibited at all levels of endeavour including being the President and Member of the Executive Committee of her school clubs in netball and soccer and traditional music, flower arrangement, home economics and the French language.  So, you can see that at all levels, those leadership qualities have been exhibited.   
They have been so exhibited that by the way, some of us have been using her example. 

When some of us started politics of the Movement, we began it in a very small way at university and even secondary schools. In 1989, some of us were elected to Parliament, including a young surgeon who had come from a rather deprived area of Kampala called, Bugolobi – Middle East as a Member of Parliament or NRC.  She beat us all to the Office of Vice President in 1994, having had only five years of serious service within the leadership echelons of the Movement.  So, you can see that even her leadership qualities were quickly identified. To come to Kampala, she become Deputy Minister in Industry and Technology, within a short time, Minister for Women in Development and Gender, two years from that, Vice President of the Republic of Uganda in 1994.  

I do not have to go too far but she has in her leadership served the community.  She has served in the Constituent Assembly to represent the people of Kigulu South, in Parliament from 1989, first for Kampala, then she has served in that leadership capacity in her constituency, and she is now Chairperson of the Busoga People’s Forum – the Forum that is writing the charter for Busoga in accordance to the Constitution of Uganda.
I have talked about leadership qualities and service record.  She has served, as I said, in various capacities and she continues to serve as Vice President of Uganda and a Leader of our people.  The women who have come into the leadership of Uganda look to her also as one of the leaders who has served to give them the standing that they have in our community today.  She continues to serve in many international capacities.  I do not want to go into the details of them because I have already mentioned them but she is a Member of the UN Commission of Forestry, Member of the World Water Commission, Member of the World Hunger Project Board and she has had many leadership awards given to her in the international capacity like the peace award of 1999, the African Entrepreneur Award of 1998 and the leadership award of 1995.

Given this background, then one looks, Sir, at what is it that we look to our nominee to do?  The job of the Vice President of Uganda is described in Article 108 (3).  It says: “The Vice President shall -deputise for the President as and when the need arises and perform such other functions as may be assigned to him or her by the President or as may be conferred on him or her by this Constitution.”  

The job of Vice President - deputises for the President, but also the President may require the Vice President to perform certain functions.  

Also, this Constitution itself imposes on the Office of the Vice President certain functions.  Some of them may be latent like, in the event of the absence of a President for whatever reason, the person who acts is the Vice President, and in certain circumstances, the Vice President takes over the Office of the President of Uganda.  So, this office has got its own constitutional duties imposed, as well as those that may be given by the President which means that the Vice President of all the Assistants to the President, is Principal Assistant to the President.  If the President says, “Work with me, advise me and carry errands for me”- therefore, what this letter from the President is saying, the appointment is that “I have worked with hon. Dr. Speciosa Wandira Kazibwe, Member of Parliament for Kigulu South as my Vice President.  I have worked with her since 1994 in that capacity.  
I would like to continue working with her in that capacity” and all that he is doing, he is requesting us to give him that right to continue working with her.  

Therefore, Sir, I would like to beg this hon. House that we accede to the President’s request and give him the person he has identified among us all as being the person he would like to continue working with as his Principal Assistant and Principal Advisor.  The attributes of the person are clear, the request of the President is clear, and I would like to say that our response should be to grant that request so that the President continues to work with the person of his choice.  Sir, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MRS. AKWERO ODWONG (Woman Rep. Kitgum): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have seconded the nomination of hon. Dr. Speciosa Wandira Kazibwe basically because of her deliberate and untiring work for the total unity of all the people of Uganda.  We very well know that she has continued to use this unity as the corner stone of our policies and leadership as evidenced through her illustrious political carrier. Hon. Wandira Kazibwe’s frankness in dealing with matters concerning national interest is unmatched and this makes her the best nominee for the post of Vice President.  Members, I think you will agree with me! 

Most importantly too, is the need to recognise and appreciate the crucial contribution we women have continued to make in the social, political and economical affairs of our Country.   What other better way to honour and acknowledge the importance and vibrancy of 51 per cent of our population who are women other than appointing hon. Kazibwe as the Vice President?  

Hon. Members, your support and approval for the nomination of hon. Kazibwe to the post of Vice President will effectively handle the gender angle, if there is any, because I know by virtue of her qualities, we need not argue any further.  She has made an indelible mark in the struggle for the emancipation of women, empowerment of women, the youth and the girl-child education, and she has been a strong advocate for the environmental issues, social justice and equity, and gender balance. 
We know that the office of the Vice Presidency also carries with it additional responsibilities which responsibilities hon. Wandira Kazibwe has effectively managed during her past work.  This, she has shown during her international recognition and responsibility that she was given.  

Allow me, Mr. Speaker, because we need not to be shy about some of the posts she has held, some few minutes so that I may read out, for purposes of recognition and appreciation, the qualities that she has exhibited.

Our nominee has been the advisor to the IDRC, the Development Assistant Arm of the Canadian Government from 1992 to date.  She has been the Member of the Advisory Board of the International Food Policy Research Institute from 1995 to date.  She has been a Member of an eminent group of advisors to the Secretary General of the United Nations on the development of Africa; she has also been Advisor to the Executive Director of the United Nations Fund for population activities. She has been an advisor to the Executive Director of UNICEF. She has been and still is the chairperson/president of the African Women’s Committee on Peace and Development from 1997 to date. She has been a member of the UN Commission on Forestry, a member of World Water Commission, and a member of the World Hunger Project Board. 

She has also had some leadership awards: She has a Sales Medal in acknowledgement of her long-standing work in favour of food security and agricultural development. This was awarded to her in 1998. She also has a Peace Award, which was given to her in 1999. She has the African Woman Entrepreneurs Award of 1998 and a Leadership Award of 1995. Of course, her work experience will definitely have a great bearing on what she will do as the Vice President of this country, if we approve this nomination.  

Let me briefly say that she has been a Member of Parliament since 1989 to date. She was a Deputy Minister of Industry and Technology from 1989 to 1991. She was a Minister of Women in Development, Culture and Youth from 1991 to 1994. She was a Minister of Gender and Community Development from 1994 to 1996. She was a Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities from 1994. She was also Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries from 1996 to 1998. 
She also held ministerial portfolios in the following Ministries when substantive Ministers were unable to execute their duties – mark my words - when substantive Ministers were unable to execute their duties. She held the portfolio of Minister of Lands, Water and Mineral Development in 1992. She held the portfolio of Minster of Public Service in 1994 and Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries in 1993. And we all know that she has been Vice President of this country from 1994 to date. 

I know for sure that our hon. colleagues already know and are prepared to give their approval. I just wanted to read out this illustrious political career for our consumption and guidance. As I take my seat, I know that you will give this nomination your due support and approval. I beg to second the motion.  Thank you.

MR. NDEEZI ALEX (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mine is not a contribution but a motion. I wish to move a motion under rule 63(1) of our Rules of Procedure. For the benefit of the Members who do not have a copy of the rules, please let me read it: “After a question has been proposed in the House or in a Committee of the whole House and debated, a Member may move that ‘The question be now put’, and, unless it appears to the Speaker that the motion is an abuse of the rules of the House or an infringement of the rights of any Member, the question that ‘The question be now put’ shall be put immediately and decided without amendment or debate”.  

I have no sense of hearing, but my eyes are very sharp. I can judge the mood in the House. It appears that we are debating what is obvious. It is obvious that hon. Wandira Kazibwe is already the Vice President or will soon be the Vice President. I have also considered the fact that you also have other urgent matters to consider. I therefore beg to move that the question be now put. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, a Member has moved that the question be put. This means that it concludes the debate.  But I have seen very many people who want to contribute, and you see only two people have spoken to the motion, the Mover and the Seconder. Even before the motion was put, somebody indicated his opposition on the matter. So, it will not be fair for me to put the question now and close the debate. The debate is now open.

MR. MABIKKE MICHEAL (Makindye East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to add my voice to the voices of those hon. Members before me, to congratulate you and your deputy upon having been endorsed unopposed as Speaker and Deputy Speaker respectively. 

Turning to the motion on the Floor right now, this House seems to be very satisfied with the constitutional and leadership requirements of the person being nominated as Vice President. We have read the Constitution, and we have been told of the positive leadership qualities of the nominee, and indeed many others could have been left out, like her being a dining prefect, and many other positions.  

The people of Makindye East have asked me to withhold my approval of the subject person unless we are satisfied with the following: We need a Vice President with very high moral character and integrity. The people of Makindye East are not satisfied with the moral strength of the person being proposed as Vice President. We are all aware that a few years ago, when hon. Kazibwe was serving as Vice President and Minister of Agriculture, lots of money was wasted and misappropriated under a project she supervised – (interjection). I will not take the information, Mr. Speaker.   Can you rule on this one and protect me?

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR. MABIKKE: Mr. Speaker, if billions of the tax payers’ money could have been lost under the nose of the Vice President and acting Minister of Agriculture then – (Interruption) 

MR. BAMWANGA: Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Member on the Floor in order to refuse information regarding the candidate who is being discussed in this House? In the first place, he was not in the Sixth Parliament where the candidate was discussed – (Interjections)- I would like to make it clear that the Vice President was exonerated in the Sixth Parliament and some of us were there. So, is it in order for the speaker on the Floor to refuse information so that he can be able to debate from an informed position?  

THE SPEAKER: According to the rules regarding information, it is up to him to accept information or not. But when it comes to a matter which you think cannot be substantiated, then that is a different matter. So, if your point of order is that he has refused information, he is entitled to accept or refuse information.

MR.MABIKKE: Mr. Speaker, thank you so much for your very wise guidance. To summarise that point, we are not satisfied that Dr. Kazibwe has got the moral strength to fight corruption. We are not satisfied that Dr. Kazibwe has got the moral will to fight incompetence and mismanagement. Secondly, you are well aware that the Vice President will stand in the shoes of the President in his absence. The President of the Republic of Uganda is the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces; he is the chairman of the UPDF High Command; the President of Uganda is the Minister of Defence. My people are not satisfied that Dr. Kazibwe has got the capacity to stand in the shoes of the Commander-in-Chief, of the chairman UPDF High Command and also of some other roles, military and otherwise. We would not like to have a Vice President who is merely a “paper tiger”. We would like a person to take charge -(Interruption)

PROF.KAGONYERA: Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Member on the Floor in order to use non-parliamentary language? 

THE SPEAKER: He is out of order. Withdraw the statement and proceed.

MR.MABIKKE: Mr. Speaker, I would like to withdraw the word “paper tiger” but I think, Mr. Speaker, -(Interruption)

MS.NAMUSOKE KIYINGI: Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the hon. Member on the Floor. He said that he and the people he represents do not believe that hon. Dr. Speciosa Wandira Kazibwe can stand in the shoes of his Excellency, the President in as far as being Commander-in-Chief is concerned. Can he perhaps tell us why he and his people think that Dr. Speciosa Kazibwe cannot stand in these shoes, because we know that she has been standing in these shoes since 1994? Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

MR.MABIKKE: Thank you very much, hon. Kiyingi, for asking FOR that clarification. By way of clarification, there is a very glaring example in this country and on record that the Ugandan troops were committed to Congo without approval of this Parliament. The Vice President, as an hon. Member of this House and being second in command, failed to articulate the circumstances under which the UPDF forces were committed to Congo. That is a clear clarification that a senior civilian -(Interruption)

MAJ.GEN.TUMWINE: Mr. Speaker, we are aware that many Members might not be aware of the UPDF Statute and concerned that as we contribute here, we should bear in mind what the Constitution says and what those regulations say, is the hon. Member on the Floor in order to start questioning that decision that was a subject of discussion in this Parliament and other forums and bring it in connection with the appointment of the Vice President without quoting the law that was violated either against the Constitution or against the UPDF Statute? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, can you substantiate as to when hon. Dr. Wandira Kazibwe failed to explain the circumstances under which Ugandan troops went to the DRC?  Because your debate is related to the nominee, it is not related generally to the deployment of troops in the DRC.  That will be a different subject. Your contribution should be directed against or to the candidate rather than general Government policy.  

MR.MABIKKE: Mr. Speaker, there appears to be no rules. I would like to be availed a copy of the rules of the Sixth Parliament and that is why sometimes I stand -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member for Makindye East, the House is not debating the deployment of troops in the DRC.  Currently, the House is only dealing with the suitability of the Member for Kigulu South for her nomination as a Vice President. So, since this is not a general debate but a specific debate on the issue before us, you should restrict your debate to that issue, namely, Dr. Wandira Kazibwe being nominated a Vice President. If you think she is not suitable for one reason, it should be because of her, not because of general Government policy or faults.

MR.MABIKKE: Mr. Speaker, thank you very much indeed for your guidance. I am going to strictly stick to the debate on the Floor.

THE SPEAKER: But I have given you sufficient time. Maybe I give you about three minutes to wind up so that the others can contribute.

MR.MABIKKE: I am winding up, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, by way of substantiating on the clarification sought by hon. Maj. Gen. Elly Tumwine, Article 2(10) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda is very clear.  2(10) (d) is very clear on the manner the national troops can be deployed -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, this is exactly what I have told you. As of now; the debate is not on why troops were deployed in the DRC.  We are not debating a policy on Ministry of Defence, we are talking about a candidate for Vice President.  May be the Vice President, Dr. Wandira Kazibwe was not responsible for Defence, then why ask her about matters pertaining to deployment of troops?  So, let your contribution just be on the candidate not on General Government Policy.  Unless she is the one who initiated the policy and the policy was faulty.

MR. MABIKKE:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker, by way of summary, I think I made three grounds against on which we are yet to be satisfied that hon. Kazibwe can really stand in the shoes of the President in his absence. 

Lastly, we have observed, we have read and there have been many reports on some of the President’s men and women who are not manageable except in the presence of the President.  I would like to quote a clear example that of Maj. Roland Kakooza Mutale -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is it not this matter really -(Interruption)

MR. MABIKKE: Allow me to get this point, Mr. Speaker?
THE SPEAKER: You see, hon. Member, I think you are making this a general debate. You will get time when we shall have a general debate, and during the time of general debate you will be able to talk about many things, but this is a specific debate on a candidate.  A candidate, who has been named, so please wind up.

MR. MABIKKE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The whole point being raised is does hon. Kazibwe have the guts, has she got the stamina, has she got the moral strength and will to act in the absence of the President? Unless I am satisfied that hon. Kazibwe has those attributes, I will withhold my approval.  Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER FOR GENERAL DUTIES IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Kagonyera): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am Mondo Kagonyera, I represent Rubabo County in Rukungiri District; but for a few more hours also, I will also double as Minister for General Duties in the Office of the Prime Minister.  

 I want to start my contribution to this debate by congratulating all the Members of this House who have been elected to serve in the 7th Parliament. I want to congratulate specifically my colleagues who have come back from the 6th Parliament, the survivors.

I would like to extend my personal and our peoples congratulations to you and your deputy. My former colleagues in the Prime Minister’s Office congratulate you on your elevation to the very high but taxing and responsible offices you occupy.  If this House will, I would also like to extend my congratulations to the Vice President on her being re-appointed by His Excellency the President, to the high office of Vice President, subject of course to approval by this House. 

I ask my colleagues to move without delay and approve the appointment of Her Excellency, Speciosa Wandira Kazibwe as Vice President of the Republic of Uganda.  I have reasons, for supporting the motion moved by hon. Wapakhabulo; and I would like to state some of them.  

I need to be protected from the hon. Member for Kashari, hon. Kazoora.  Hon. Kazoora is a Member of Parliament, he is at liberty to participate in the debate with your permission. He is reminding the House that he actually came back on a “No Change” basis.  So, there is no contradiction.

Hon.Kazibwe has performed her job as Vice President with distinction. We have a saying in Runyankore/Rukiga that someone, who is not wrestling with another person would like to implore you to finish this guy so that you can proceed.  They do not realise how difficult the task is. I would like to plead with my colleagues in this House to realise that the job of Vice President is not an easy job at all and therefore, the member occupying that job as a human being can and will often make mistakes.  

I would like my colleagues here, those who feel that the Vice President does not measure up to the task, to tell this House how often in their own lives they have miserably failed to perform their duties.  Those who are infallible we exhault them, but we as human beings, we make mistakes and therefore it is human for the Vice President, especially the sitting Vice President, to have made mistakes in the process of performing her duties.

I would like now to speak on behalf of members of the Executive who have had the pleasure to work very closely with Dr. Speciosa Wandira Kazibwe. Most of the time She has been Chairperson of the Cabinet, and let me tell Members here that Dr. Kazibwe has led that Cabinet with amazing success. Yes, she has! We have held meetings that I - ­(Temporary Power Black-out). Oh, my God. Mr. Speaker, with your permission, I will continue but I cannot read my notes. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was speaking about the Cabinet. For the few years I have been in that Cabinet, I have been very close to Her Excellency the Vice-President. I want to attest before this House that she has led that Cabinet with distinction. We have made very far-reaching decisions affecting policy and the running of the Government of Uganda and I dare say that the Prime Minister who is unable to be here has requested me to tell this House that Dr. Kazibwe has led the Cabinet with distinction.  

Members should appreciate that every Minister performs their functions and duties on behalf of the President. The President actually is a Minister of every Ministry; all Ministers perform on his behalf. So, in fact if the President does not tell you to do something, you may not do it including the deployment of troops in Congo that an hon. Member has been talking about -(Interjection). Hon. Aggrey Awori has had his time; this is mine - (Laughter). 

If I may talk about the personality of hon. Dr. Speciosa Wandira Kazibwe, this is a woman who, in spite of the high office she has occupied, has always been part of our society. She mixes with everybody, young and old, women and men. Therefore, this woman is so close to the people that she has got everybody’s ear, listening to them and responding appropriately to the needs of our people.

Hon. Kazibwe is a very healthy person. That is something they have not talked about. She is a very healthy person. She is very energetic and therefore she is fully prepared medically to perform her duties as a Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda -(Applause). She jogs very regularly. As a matter of fact, she can hardly miss a day without jogging five kilometres. Yes, she does it!  I would like Members, especially those who do not know her to be comfortable with her ability to perform her job.

I would like to speak with profound appreciation about hon. Kazibwe’s distinguished service to this country with independence of mind. I want my colleagues to know that I hate sectarianism and hon. Dr. Speciosa Kazibwe has distinguished herself as a non-sectarian Ugandan, and a Ugandan indeed. She is not a victim of tribalism, neither is she a victim of religious sectarianism, and I must say that Ugandans are plagued with the two. So if you can find leaders who are not victims of those two diseases, these are people we must appreciate as leaders of this country.  

The Vice-President has not only distinguished herself in this country, but she has also distinguished herself outside the boundaries of Uganda. She has actually sold Uganda with tremendous effect outside Uganda. Wherever she has represented us, everybody has appreciated and the Members should recognise this. 
Lastly, it is not, as some people may think, an easy job to appoint leaders. Members of this House should appreciate the task that the President has got to perform. To go among 22 million Ugandans and seek out only one person to recommend for appointment as a Vice-President is not an easy job. Those of you who know some mathematics will appreciate when I say the variables involved are infinite, so that if you must take into account all these variables, you need the rest of eternity to arrive at a solution. So, what does one do?  One must move quickly and decide on the basis of a few variables, who should be appointed. Therefore, I wish to request my colleagues to move expeditiously and approve the President’s appointment of Dr. Speciosa Wandira Kazibwe, Member of Parliament for Kigulu South as Vice President of the Republic of Uganda for the next five years. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it seems there are so many people who are interested in contributing to this debate. I would like to give them opportunity to do this. You have seen there is power fluctuation and at one time we may completely lose it. So, I suggest that your contribution should be limited to five minutes. I am sorry I have not registered names of the new Members and it is not proper to say ‘you’, but you will excuse me if I do so. 

MS.NAMUYANGU KACHA (Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of Pallisa district, I congratulate you upon being elected to the high office of Speaker. Similarly, I do the same to the Deputy Speaker, hon. Kadaga. 

I want to join my colleagues in supporting the appointment of Dr. Wandira Kazibwe as Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda. Dr. Kazibwe is a person of integrity; she is a hardworking lady. During the time she has served this country as Vice-President, hon. Members you will agree with me that she has been dedicated and has united us as Ugandans. I feel that as we said “no change” to the President, we should do the same to her because she is really very social.  

Hon. Members, I have never seen hon. Dr. Kazibwe angry with anybody. You normally get a smile on her face. As one of my colleagues said, she is a very social person and I believe that she is going to steer this country for the next five years if we support her.  

I also want to bring to the attention of the hon. Members that as women of Uganda, we feel honoured when a woman is occupying the post of Vice President and I appeal to all of you to support her appointment.

Lastly, since we have been limited by the time, hon. Members have already demonstrated by electing a male Speaker and a female as Deputy Speaker. So I am only appealing that let us do the same to those two big offices. I thank you very much and I call upon you to elect Dr. Wandira Kazibwe as Vice President of the Republic of Uganda. Thank you.

MS.BYANYIMA WINNIE (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you Mr.Speaker. I congratulate you on your election as our Speaker and the Deputy Speaker upon her election. I also congratulate my colleagues who have been elected to this august House. I am Winnie Byanyima Member of Parliament for Mbarara Municipality to fight the fruitless and worthless efforts of some Members of this House.  

I will support the appointment of Dr. Speciosa Wandira Kazibwe as Vice President of our country. I would not be telling the truth if I did not point out that she had problems with her performance during the last five years. Indeed, we all make mistakes and we can learn. I know that the hon. Member for Kigulu South is a great learner.  I went to school with her, we were at Mount St. Mary’s Namagunga together. If she applies her mind she can learn, and if all of us take our lessons, I know she is one of the best people to learn her lessons.

I would like to use the word ‘urge’ which has become very popular in our Movement circles. If she becomes the Vice President as I hope this House will approve, I urge her to take the woman constituency very seriously and to serve it diligently. I urge her to pursue the course of justice for all people of Uganda regardless of their ethnicity, their religion, the agenda or age to pursue that course relentlessly and pertinently. I would like to urge her to protect the best image of Uganda, its cultures at all times and everywhere. 
I also would like to send a message to His Excellency, the President, who has nominated her. This is the last term of the President according to our Constitution, therefore, it is the time that he should be grooming or preparing the way for a successor. I ask the President to take this matter very seriously. If the Vice President is on his mind as a successor, then I think it is time he started considering relinquishing several responsibilities to her so that she grows in stature so that she can gain experience if indeed one day she is to step in his shoes. 

I am proud of the fact that women are being appointed to very senior positions; it makes me happy but I am always concerned that gender does not become an issue to exploit, but that gender equality becomes firmly rooted in our political culture. We have very many vices and deputies right from the top to the village level. It is almost now a standing practice that when a leader is chosen, the vice is a woman but some recent research reveals that most of these women deputies are never really deputies. The opportunities never seem to arise.  The people who occupy the real positions never seem to have time off for the deputies to have a hand at the job. And on the few occasions when they are not at their jobs, they will assign the responsibilities to other people so that the women vices do not seem to be gaining in experience on the job. 

So, I ask the President to emulate President Mandela who in his last term progressively relinquished the responsibilities to his Vice President, who then stepped in his shoes. So, if the Vice President, hon. Speciosa Kazibwe is the person who will be our next President, I would like to see this transition. If she is not, then he should reconsider; he should think about an appointment that is most substantive, that will in turn become for us a smooth transition to new leadership at the top level.  
I wish the Vice President good health and success in all her endeavours. Thank you Mr. Speaker.


MR.MWONDHA PATRICK (Bukooli North, Bugiri): Thank you Mr. Speaker. Allow me to join my colleagues who have already congratulated you and your Deputy. I would like to implore my colleagues that when the President was nominating Dr. Wandira Speciosa Kazibwe, he was not nominating an angel. He was nominating a person, with all the failings and successes of a human being. I would like to say that it is not possible that she could have scored 100 per cent but I think she scored a good 70 per cent.  

The duty of this 7th Parliament is going to be very crucial to this country. It is this Parliament that must mould tomorrow for Uganda. In doing so, we will need to tap goodwill from wherever it can come from, and I think the experienced hand of Dr. Kazibwe will come in handy in that respect. The Movement will not do it alone, the parties will not do it on their own. We will have to put our heads together and build a new tomorrow for this country. 

I would like to say that there has been a way of inverting the processes. My Friends from Mbale Municipality and Kitgum listed the achievements of the Vice President but some of them were an acknowledgement of a woman Vice President coming on the world scene and we do not want to deny ourselves that role as a country.  We have been acknowledged. She has been appointed on so many international committees and she is serving on so many forums in the realm of the world that we do not want to deny the country the stance we have already taken. 

With these few words, and coming from Busoga as I do, I would like to say, without contradicting my colleague Mondo Kagonyera that we believe in ancestry. We believe in the working of those who were here and gone before us, and I represent them adequately in this House. I want to anoint her and bless her in her higher office. Thank you.

MRS.BAKOKO BAKORU (Ayivu County, Arua): Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate you and hon. Kadaga for being elected as Speaker and Deputy Speaker of this House. The people of Ayivu who were privileged to host hon. Wandira Kazibwe several times in the last years when she was a Vice President would like me to say that they support her candidature as Vice President of this country.  

As a Vice President, Dr. Wandira Kazibwe has moved even to the least developed and disadvantaged parts of this country and stayed with the people. For example, Karamoja and Arua to mention just a few, and her work cannot be underscored. All of us in this House know that hon. Kazibwe is a very committed person. She is diligent and she is effective in her work. She has the talents and we can not deny that. Also, as woman she has been the pride of Africa as a Vice President. She has been the example of democracy for the whole world to see in an African region.  

We have also heard from our colleagues on the Front Bench how tough hon. Kazibwe can be sometimes when she is chairing the Cabinet. This shows us very clearly that we have a woman of substance, who can be the Vice President of this country and we have never seen any crisis in this country when she has been the Vice President, especially, when the President is out of this country.  So nobody can tell me that she cannot wear the shoes of His Excellency the President when he is out and when she becomes the President of this country acting on his behalf.

Finally, we have been impressed by the concerns of hon. Dr. Kazibwe especially for the youth and the women of this country. If you went out there, you will find the women saying they want Dr. Kazibwe as the Vice President.  You will hear the youth saying ‘we want Dr. Kazibwe as the Vice President of this country’. I have had the privilege of attending conferences on women waging peace and women as partners for peace on the negotiating table, and we have walked with our heads very high as Ugandan delegation outside this country because Dr. Kazibwe has been the President of the Committee on Conflict and Peace in the African region in OAU.  Finally, I urge Members of this House to vote for Dr. Kazibwe unanimously. Thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR. ODONGA OTTO JR. (Aruu County Pader): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker and congratulations. It is unfortunate I had no time to consult my people because the list was almost an ambush but I am privileged to think on their behalf. 

In my culture, when someone is dead, you read the good things he did. You do not read the bad ones. I am not here to read the bad things of a living person, but I appeal to Members of Parliament not to idolise the relation of the Vice President of this country. I am not here to talk about the valley dams projects but I appeal to Members of this House that the Vice President Wandira Kazibwe survived huddles during the valley dam project scandal unlike her counterpart Kivejinja. So it will not make sense to talk about those things here. I will then make two appeals.  

As my Counterpart from Kitgum said, Wandira Kazibwe is not the best, but can be the better for this House. So when we support her, we should not take a position as hatred, we should take it as a warning signal that the President should stop a one man’s show. People want to see something different. As for Otto Odonga from Aruu County, representing people who live by chance and by design, I second Wandera Kazibwe, but our warning signals and positions should be documented to let the President understand that next time we will also want to see someone different. Thank you very much.

MS. AMONGI ONGOM (Woman representative, Apac): I would like to also add my voice to the series of voices to congratulate you and your deputy upon your unanimous election.  

We have heard arguments for and against hon. Wandira Kazibwe for the appointment to the Office of Vice President. In light of other business coming on the Floor, I would like to move that the question be put. Thank you.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: I am not going to put this question in the normal way because the Constitution provides that it is by majority vote and simple majority. When they used ‘simple majority’, it means I have to really count and say, ‘by simple majority, the motion has been carried’. In the circumstances, you will be required to cast your vote, saying “yes” or “no”, and then we shall tabulate and get the results. This will be by secret ballot, I suppose.

MR. KUTESA: Mr. Speaker, in most of our rules and in the Constitution, when we are to use secret ballot it is explicitly stated. In light of the fact that we have other business at hand, and in light of the fact that hon. Speciosa Wandira Kazibwe is one of the luckiest people to have had her epitaph written before she is dead - I have never heard anybody being spoken about like this while alive, I cannot see why we cannot use show of hands. Since people have spoken their minds openly, I cannot see why we cannot use show of hands so that we can do this expeditiously because there is no legal impediment either in the rules or in the Constitution that compels us to do it by secret ballot. I would like to suggest that we do it that way. I therefore move that the decision of the House on the election of the Vice President be done by show of hands.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, we did vote for the President in the general election by secret ballot, and I think this was a good precedent. Mr. Kutesa should not derail this House and should not bring what was in his mind in the Sixth Parliament here. I would rather go by your ruling, Mr. Speaker, that we do vote for Her Excellency the Vice President by secret ballot. I want to declare to this House that although I did not speak, I will vote for her and I support her appointment.  

The reason for secret ballot, to me, is basically to set an important precedent for this House in the manner in which Members can take a decision without fear or favour. Those who were lucky to be chosen did speak for or against, and they spoke their minds, and we know where they stand. I want to assure you that in the early squad of appointment of Ministers in this House, I was lucky to be appointed together with hon. Kazibwe, and I have always enjoyed working with her but I think that it is important for us to go by your ruling. This august House is voting for a person for the very important office of Vice President and it will set an important precedent for this House. Let us go by secret ballot. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I suggested secret ballot so that somebody does not say that he or she was intimidated and so forth.  Since I prepared the ballots and the box is also here, let us do it.

MR. BAKKABULINDI: Mr. Speaker, if you look at Article 108 of the Constitution on the election of the Vice President, it talks about a simple majority. I seek your good guidance because we have got only one candidate. Now, assuming only 50 people vote by secret ballot and the rest do not vote, will that make any sense? I am of the view that if there was a required percentage, we would go by secret ballot but now since it is by simple majority, it does not matter whether we raise hands or not. It is wastage of time to go by secret ballot.

MR. WAPAKABULO: Sir, I am the mover of this motion. I know that there is anxiety on the Floor, and I do agree with your ruling, but this is a very important decision to be made. If there are some people who feel uncomfortable in putting up their hands, let us not be seen to bring undue pressure to them. Let this House make a decision in secrecy, with the secret ballot, and let the result be the true result. I go by your ruling.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The procedure will be as follows: the Clerk at Table will read out your name, you will come and pick your ballot paper and then go and cast your vote. The Clerk will issue you with a ballot paper and you may come back through this way so that there is no traffic jam.

MR. WAPAKABULO: Sir, I take it that simple majority is subject to quorum. So, we have to decide first. Will the ballot tell us or how shall we decide whether there is quorum.

THE SPEAKER: I am satisfied that the House has a quorum.  Now, the simple majority means those who have cast their votes. It is not the majority of the entire House, but those present. After they have cast their votes, we shall say, “no” or “yes.”

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have no intention of derailing the House to any extent but I think it would be prudent for you to state the nature in which we are going to cast our votes.

THE SPEAKER: I will read “yes” to mean approve and “no” to mean disapprove. I think we shall follow alphabetical order. This will help me know the names of the hon. Members.  I would like Rev. Bakaluba and the Member for Lira Municipality to be in charge of counting the votes.

(The Voting exercise was carried out)

THE SPEAKER: Now that we have completed casting our votes, the hon. Members for Mukono and Lira Municipality will take charge. Since it may take sometime for them to tabulate the votes, I suspend the proceedings until 3.00 p.m. when we shall come back and know what has happened.

(The Proceedings were suspended at 2.15 p.m. for the counting of the votes to proceed)

(On resumption_)
 
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the first place, I want to thank the hon. Member for Lira Municipality and the hon. Member for Mukono North for counting the votes and making a report, which I have received. I have got a signed report from hon. Cecilia Ogwal and Rev. Bakaluba Mukasa. 

This morning before we suspended the Proceedings, we had to vote on a motion by the Member for Mbale Municipality. This was to approve the nomination of Dr. Speciosa Wandira Kazibwe, Member for Kigulu South as Vice President of Uganda. We carried out the exercise in accordance with Article 108 of the Constitution. The results are as follows: The Total number of Members of Parliament who cast their votes was 262 and three of the votes are spoilt votes -(Laughter). Maybe we shall do something about this. The votes against were 30 and votes in favour were 229 - (Applause) 

In the premises, the nomination has been confirmed and approved by Parliament and we shall communicate this to His Excellency the President. I thank you very much for having participated in this exercise.  

Hon. Members, you must have read the Constitution. There are many Articles which provide that certain appointments by the President must be approved by Parliament. This was not the case before this Constitution, but with the 1995 Constitution, that is the case. So, during the tenure of the last Parliament, it was decided that we couldn’t all sit here to do the needful. (Dr Wandira Kazibwe entered the Chamber. Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the Vice President and Member of Kigulu South, I think the kind of welcome you have received must have suggested something to you this morning. Your name was subject of debate in this House, but I am happy to report that your nomination has received overwhelming approval by this Parliament. Congratulations and we wish you a successful tenure of office.  

I understand Her Excellency the Vice President and Member of Parliament for Kigulu South wants to say something about this exercise.

THE VICE PRESIDENT (Dr. Wandira Kazibwe): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for your indulgence on this matter. I would like to start by thanking you for presiding over this exercise, and I would like to thank your Deputy for also being in attendance as Parliament debated my nomination. I want to thank hon. Wapakabulo, who moved the motion and hon. Odwong Jane for seconding it. I also want to thank all of you who verbalised your support and translated it into the ballot. I want to thank those who verbalised their lack of support, and also those who reflected their feelings by not electing me. I also want to feel sorry for those three spoilt votes. I am sure they were my votes – (Laughter). I want that on record in the Hansard of this august House while Members are still here after giving me this overwhelming support. 

First of all, I want to assure those with misgivings about my performance. I want to tell you that lack of knowledge in sometimes a most wonderful thing because once I know that I do not know something, then I know there is always room to learn. I want to tell you that I am always learning, and the survivors who were part of the Sixth Parliament know that this is a reality.  We learnt a lot together in the Sixth Parliament when I was Vice President and I am ready and willing to learn more with all of you, Members of this Seventh Parliament. We are implementing a new democratic era in our country, and it is only rights for us to all continue to learn from each other.  

I also want to say that my commitment to a number of issues, both in this House and in this country, will remain unwavering. I will continue to say that I will remain committed to my last breath to the issue of emancipation of women. I will remain committed to the issue of ensuring the education of the girl child. Notwithstanding those two issues, I want to say that it is in this commitment that I believe that when women are emancipated and the girl child is educated, we shall have Ugandans who, right from their homes, will know about everything that matters to them. That goes for men and women, boys and girls. 

I must say that in working on this specific agenda which I took on because of my own personal experiences in life from childhood, the differences in approach to handling these problems should only enrich the success or the path that we shall use to reach the end or achieve our goal. 

I want to say that one of the areas I failed to perform in, which none of you I am sure mentioned is as Minister for Women in Development and Minister for Gender and Community Development. I failed to sensitise and educate the Sixth Parliament on what gender really is. I feel very uncomfortable because of that failure and when I hear people failing to understand what affirmative action is all about. I believe that together we shall continue to educate ourselves. I also believe that whoever will continue as Minister responsible for Gender will work with you, Mr. Speaker and your Deputy, to enable us educate this Seventh Parliament and get views from them on how we can truly achieve gender equality and gender equity in our country.  

I want to say that I will continue to be committed to the youth cause in this country. As a young person, I was a youth leader and I know the obstacles that I went through during Amin’s era, to establish the role of the youth in the management of our country and the participation of youth in the development of the country. I will continue to commit myself to that cause and I will call upon all of you, hon. Members, to help me, and the ministries responsible to continue with a very useful programme that has already started being implemented in a good number of your constituencies.

I also want to assure you, hon. Members that I do have guts because I have really been through fire even in this very House, and I stood for what I believed in and the records prove that I do have guts.  But even before I came to the House, as a young person I did have guts.  I was one of the two youths in Makerere who led the demonstration against Idi Amin – something nobody could ever think of.  Our actions resulted in black Tuesday. I never ran out of the Country, I continued to struggle for people’s rights.   So, I do have guts.  
The other reason I want to assure Members that I do have guts and I can step in the President’s shoes as per constitutional requirement is that I am a Surgeon.  As a Surgeon, if I believe that part of you is going to kill the rest of you, I will just cut it off to save the rest of you - (Laughter).   I have done this and I have living testimony of my work in Mulago when services were non-existent.  I used my knife judiciously and with a lot of guts and I saved many Ugandans. So I believe from my experience of this job, I do have the guts to continue doing what you have just endorsed this afternoon. 

Mr. Speaker, I will work with all of you; I will work with everybody in this august House to help the President implement his manifesto in each and every one of your constituencies. I will work with the interest groups to ensure that their role in helping the President to implement his manifesto is executed with precision and foresight.  I therefore, again want to thank you.  But I want to ask this august House to pray for me because indeed I am just a human being, and I will ask for your support.   I will need to continue trotting the country up and down. You know the condition of our resources as a country but in working together as a team, we shall be able to overcome.  I thank you for this overwhelming support and it is also your responsibility to ensure that you help me to translate your support for my being Vice President into results which will be seen through action and better life for our people, the people who are called Ugandans.  I thank you very much and may God bless all of you!  Thank you. (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much!  Now, hon. Members, as I was explaining earlier, it was decided that instead of the entire House sitting here to consider appointments by the President, be those of Ministers, Ambassadors or Judges, that we do this through an Appointments Committee.  So, rules were made to create this Appointments Committee. 

When these rules were made, the number of Members sitting on the Appointments Committee under the chairmanship of the Speaker was 50 and the composition – the breakdown of this 50 was as follows: We had 39 districts, so each district would appoint somebody to sit on the Appointments Committee. Then we have these other groups – the women were given six Members in addition – these could be a representative for a district - but women were given six Members. UPDF was given two Members and other groups, the Youth, Persons with Disability and Workers, each was given one Member totalling 50. This can be found out in rule 129.  

So, now time has come for us to constitute this Appointments Committee but one thing I have detected from these rules is a new development – development in that when the rules were made, we had 39 districts but as I speak now, the districts have been increased to 54.  

MS. ZZIWA NANTONGO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Congratulations, Mr. Speaker and your Deputy!  Considering what you have just explained, I wish to move a motion -  (Interruptions), Mr. Speaker, may I seek your protection?

THE SPEAKER: You are protected, you are entitled to move a motion if you have one.

MS. ZZIWA NANTONGO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to beg the hon. House to allow me move a motion.  This motion which I want to move is under our Rules of Procedure, rule 8 and I will take the opportunity to read it to some Members who have not had the opportunity to look at it.  The Rule goes: “Any Member may, with the consent of the Speaker, move that any rule may be suspended in its application to a particular motion before the House and if the motion is carried, the Rule in question shall be suspended for the time being.” 

Mr. Speaker, the rule I want to suspend is rule 51 and I beg for your indulgence to read it: “A Member may move that any of these Rules may be amended by giving not less than five days’ notice”.  Mr. Speaker, since what you have raised is a very important issue, I want to move that rule 129 be amended in order to accommodate the new districts which have been established.  That is why I am moving on the Floor.  If the august House allows, I want to invoke rule 8 to suspend rule 51, and then if the House allows, I beg to move that rule 129(1) be amended by deleting fifty and inserting sixty five.  If I can read exactly how it is constituted in the rules, it goes “The Committee on Appointments shall comprise the Speaker – there in the rule there was fifty members that is why I am proposing to delete that fifty to make it sixty five - Members, elected by the House from the following-“ 

I am also moving that under 129(1)(a), “Thirty nine Members” be deleted and it be substituted by “fifty four Members, consisting of one Member from each district.”

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  The numbers of districts as of the 1st of July this year were 53 but there were three districts that were put on hold because of financial reasons to commence operations this July.  Those were, Kanungu, Nakapiripirit and Kaberamaido. When you add the three, we have 56 districts in the Country.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So it is agreed that districts now are 56 instead of the 39 we had when these rules were made.

MRS. ZIWA:  Hon. Speaker, with that information may I now move that rule 129(1)(a) be amended as follows: We delete 39 and insert 56 Members consisting of one Member from each district.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion Seconded?  Then I think I have to explain.  Hon. Members, as I told you yesterday we adopted these rules but now we are constituting an Appointments Committee.  We have found out that the districts we had were thirty-nine but now we have fifty-six. The intention of the rule as it was is that each district is represented.  Now if we do not amend this particular rule, then we would find a problem of which district to exclude from this Appointments Committee.  Now she has referred you to rule 51. 

Rule 51 empowers any Member to move a motion to amend any Rule of procedure but that particular rule requires a five days notice before you move an amendment.  That would mean that if she wants to move this motion she has to give us a five days notice, but we want to act. However, the rules provide under rule 8 that you can bring a motion in the House to suspend a certain rule.  Now in this particular case, the motion is beseeching you to agree to suspend the requirement of five days’ notice so that the amendment can be brought now.  Is that clear?  So now the motion is that we suspend rule 8 so that she can bring the amendment.

MR. LUBOWA (Budiope county, Kamuli): I would like to be clarified. This morning, hon. Wapakhabulo did guide us that the rules we are considering are not specifically for particular Parliaments.   We have used them for a long period.  Now why do we have to consider the number right now of say fifty-six or thirty nine instead of simply saying representation from every district?  Because tomorrow there could be other districts coming up!

THE SPEAKER: It is okay so that when tomorrow we create another district, we do not have – (Interruption)

MR. WACHA: Mr. Speaker, there is no serious argument against amending but I would have suggested that instead of amending, we suspend those parts of rule 129 which restricts district representation to thirty nine and allow for representation per district.  We will not have amended the rules but suspended those so as to deal with this particular problem now.

THE SPEAKER: No, why do we suspend the rule? Because we want to adjust to the changed circumstances. If we suspend it means that after we have done this exercise we go back to it.

MR. WACHA: My problem is that these are not going to be permanent rules.

THE SPEAKER: They are not going to be – (Interruption) 

MR. WACHA: I am assuming that we are going to adopt others.

THE SPEAEKER: No, the understanding is that we adopt these rules as our rules but of course without tying our hands, in that when circumstances warrant, we can always visit any rule and amend it.  So now suspending means we do this exercise, but then afterwards we go back to the same rules, which are no longer suitable to the changed circumstances.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Mr. Speaker, I think hon. Ben Wacha does not have a copy of the rules, so for once, he has walked into some trap because if we suspend rule 129, then where do we get the authority to establish the committee?  The authority to establish the committee is under 129.  What the Speaker is telling us is that if we rely on rule 8 which gives us power to suspend, then we suspend the requirements of rule 51 which prescribes a time of not less than five days so that we can proceed now. And in proceeding now, we vary the numbers that appear in rule 129 and continue to rely on rule 129 as varied because if we suspend 129, then we have no rule to apply.  So we vary it but not suspend so that it is the authority upon which we apply to appoint the committee as varied. Thank you.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, if the amendment effected by hon. Zziwa is not restricting us to any specific version of the rules, then we are creating more complexity because under which specific rules are we carrying out this amendment?  

THE SPEAKER: We have two motions, the first one is to evoke rule 8 and suspend the provisions of rule 51, which is of time for giving notice.  We first deal with that one. Then we shall hear the amendment that she wants to make.  

Now I put the question to the motion that we suspend the operation of rule 51, which requires five days.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: So the rule is suspended.  

MRS. ZZIWA: Thank you very Mr. Speaker, and thank you hon. Members.   I beg to move that rule 129(1) be amended by deleting fifty and inserting sixty-seven.  I have to let the hon. Members know that a committee must have a constituted number; it must be specified as a number as per our rules.   So that is why we have to go by numbers not just saying a Member from a district.   We have to specify the number.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion that we amend rule 129 for the number of fifty we put sixty-seven.  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Does that complete the amendments?


MRS. ZZIWA: Mr. Speaker, the rest remains as stated. The marginalised groups or the interest groups will have the same representation, which they have been having on this Committee.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: So, there are no more amendments. Therefore, in view of what we have done, we are required to constitute the Appointments Committee. Since you have heard that districts are being represented, for the time being we cannot do it here. It will require Members from the respective districts to go and sit and select one person from among themselves. It could be any Member from the district to represent them in this Committee. The results will be brought here for the House to confirm. How long do you think this may take you, hon. Members?  Maybe I should adjourn the House until tomorrow -(Interjections)- so, I will suspend the proceedings because Members of the UPDF, for example, will have to sit and select. So, I will give you 30 minutes.

MR. MUSUMBA: Mr. Speaker, I stand on a point of information. In anticipation of these developments, Members did study the rules and Members caucused in their districts and I want to inform you that Members are ready to give names now. We are ready to proceed.

THE SPEAKER: Whereas the Member from Kamuli District may be conversant with what has happened with Kamuli District Members of Parliament, I do not know whether he is aware of what has happened with Masaka District, where I come from. But I think to be fair, let me give you some 20 minutes.  So, proceedings are suspended for 20 minutes.

(The proceedings were suspended at 3.41 p.m.)

(On resumption_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is how we are going to proceed: We shall start with the 56 districts. The Clerk will read out a district and the representative of that district will stand up and give us a report on their choice. I shall put a question to that choice because we have to approve each name. After that we shall go to the interest groups, that is the Women and the others, and they shall do the same thing.  
APAC DISTRICT:

MRS. ONGOM (Woman Representative, Apac): The great people of Apac District met and unanimously agreed that the great hon. Anang-Odur Tomson represent the district in the Appointments Committee.

THE SPEAKER: Can we see hon. Tom Odur? I now put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to)

ARUA DISTRICT:

MS. BAKOKO BAKORU (Ayivu County, Arua): I actually have the list for the West  Nile region, but I will start with Arua.  Arua is Bakoko Bakoru Zoe.

(Question put and agreed to)

BUNDIBUJYO DISTRICT:

MR. MAATE ROGERS (Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We, the three Members from Bundibugyo District agreed that Dr. Kamanda Bataringaya becomes our representative to the Appointments Committee.

(Question put and agreed to)

BUSHENYI DISTRICT:

MR. NDUHUURA RICHARD (Igara County East, Bushenyi): I nominate Col. Kahinda Otafiire.

(Question put and agreed to)

GULU DISTRICT:

MR. MAO NOBERT (Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Gulu District unanimously proposed hon. Jacob Oulanyah, MP for Omoro County.

(Question put and agreed to)

HOIMA DISTRICT:

MS. BYENKYA BEATRICE (Woman Representative, Hoima): Our submission will be ready by tomorrow.

IGANGA DISTRICT:

MR. MUKAMA FRANCIS (Kigulu North, Iganga): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The great people of Iganga District which you very know very well, have agreed that Dr. R. J. Bulamu represents that great district in the Appointments Committee. 

(Question put and agreed to)

JINJA DISTRICT:

DR. NABWISO Bulima Wilberforce (Kagoma County, Jinja): Mr. Speaker, the people of Jinja have nominated hon. David Migereko as our representative.

(Question put and agreed to)

KABALE DISTRICT:

MR. RWENDEIRE ABEL (Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The parliamentary group from Kabale unanimously nominated hon. Steven Bamwanga, Member of Parliament for Ndorwa West, to the Appointments Committee.

(Question put and agreed to).

KABAROLE DISTRICT

MS. KIRASO BEATRICE (Woman Representative, Kabarole): Mr. Speaker, the Members of Parliament from Kabarole District have agreed that hon. Adolf Mwesige represents us on the Appointment’s Committee

(Question put and agreed to).

KALANGALA DISTRICT

MR. BADDA FRED (Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. All the MPs of Kalangala have unanimously decided that hon. Timothy Lwanga, representative of Kyamuswa, represents the district.

(Question put and agreed to).

KAMPALA DISTRICT:

MR. SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I take this opportunity to also congratulate you on acquiring that seat, but Kampala District has certainly chosen Kennedy Lukyamuzi Mutuuzaliiso for that seat.

(Question put and agreed to).

KAMULI DISTRICT:

MR. KIZIGE MOSES (Bugabula North, Kamuli): The representatives from Kamuli District have met, and after prior consultations with our constituents, we have unanimously agreed on the hon. Isaac Isanga Musumba, representative for Buzaya County.

(Question put and agreed to)

KAPCHORWA DISTRICT:

DR. ARAPKISSA YEKKO JOHN (Kween County, Kapchorwa): The Members of Kapchorwa unanimously elected Dr. Steven Chebrot as their representative to the Appointment’s Committee.

(Question put and agreed to)

KASESE DISTRICT:

MR. KITHENDE KALIBOGHA (Bukonjo East, Kasese): We have unanimously elected and wish to present to you Mbalibulha Christopher Kibanzanga as our representative.

(Question put and agreed to).

KIBAALE DISTRICT:

MR. BAGUMA ISOKE (Buyanja County, Kibaale): Mr. Speaker, we met and agreed on the name of Dr. Kasirivu Atwooki to represent Kibaale.

(Question put and agreed to).

KIBOGA DISTRICT:

MS. NANKABIRWA RUTH (Woman Representative, Kiboga): Mr. Speaker, all the Members of Parliament from Kiboga sat and agreed on Eng. Kaweesi Ndawula.
(Question put and agreed to).

KISORO DISTRICT:

MR. NTACYOTUGIRA PHILIP (Bufumbira North, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We four Members from Kisoro have unanimously agreed that hon. Annet Mukabera represents us on the Committee.

(Question put and agreed to)
.
KITGUM DISTRICT:

MR. ORYEM HENRY OKELLO(Chwa County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After a unanimous agreement, we, the three Members of Parliament of Kitgum District, have unanimously accepted to nominate Jane Akwero Odwong as our representative.

(Question put and agreed to).

KOTIDO DISTRICT:

MR. AEL ARK LODOU (Dodoth County, Kotido): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Members of Kotido District have unanimously elected hon. Aachilla Rex to represent us on the Committee.

(Question put and agreed to).

KUMI DISTRICT:

MR. AMURIAT OBOI (Kumi County, Kumi): Mr. Speaker, having consulted widely with my colleagues, we wish to nominate hon. Amongin Aporu as our representative on the Appointment’s Committee.

(Question put and agreed to).

LIRA DISTRICT:

MRS. MARGARET ATENG OTIM (Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and the House at large. We have unanimously agreed that hon. Atubo Omara represents us.

(Question put and agreed to).

LUWERO DISTRICT:

LT. KINOBE (Katikamu North, Luwero): The Members of Luwero parliamentary group unanimously nominated Prof. Victoria Mwaka.

(Question put and agreed to).

MASAKA DISTRICT:

MR. ALINTUMA NSAMBU (Bukoto East, Masaka): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I represent Bukoto East Constituency in Masaka District. Actually, when you are coming to your constituency, Mr. Speaker, you will require a visa from my constituency. We have all agreed that we present or I have the honour to present hon. Lule Mawiya Umar to represent us on the Committee.

(Question put and agreed to)

MASINDI DISTRICT:

MR. OWORI AMOOTI OTADA (Kibanda County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Members from Masindi sat and unanimously agreed that hon. Kabakumba Matsiko Abwoli be nominated to represent us on the Committee.

(Question put and agreed to).

MBALE DISTRICT:

MR. RICHARD MUKULA (Bunghoko North, Mbale): The Members from Mbale District have agreed and nominated hon. Oliver Woneka, women representative of Mbale District to represent us on the Appointment’s Committee

(Question put and agreed to)


MBARARA DISTRICT:

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (Ibanda County North, Mbarara): Mr. Speaker, the Mbarara representatives caucused and agreed that hon. Mary Mugyeni Rutamwebwa, Nyabushozi Member of Parliament represents us on the Appointments Committee.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.
(Question put and agreed to)

MOROTO DISTRICT:

MR. OGWEL LOOTE  (Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Mr. Speaker, I would like to report that Moroto district is supposed to have three hon. Members, currently two are battling out recounts in Moroto court.  Therefore I am the only one present, and I could not nominate myself -(Laughter). Mr. Speaker, I therefore seek for your advice.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MOYO DISTRICT:

MRS. MINDRA EUGENIA (Woman Representative, Moyo): Mr. Speaker, the people of Moyo and West Nile recommend hon. Amasi Pataki to represent Moyo district on the Appointments Committee.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MPIGI DISTRICT:

MR. MUTULUUZA PETER (Mawokota County North, Mpigi):  Mr. Speaker, we are four honourable members from Mpigi district and we have unanimously appointed hon. Kityo Mutebi Henry to be our representative.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MUBENDE DISTRICT:

MRS. SINABULYA SYLIVIA (Woman Representative, Mubende): Mr. Speaker, the Members of Parliament from Mubende district, have agreed to present hon. Kasole Bwerere Lwanga Edward to represent them.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)
MUKONO DISTRICT:

MR. WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): The representatives of Mukono district have agreed to present hon. Mukasa Anthony from Buikwe South, as our representative on the Appointments Committee.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

NEBBI DISTRICT:

MR. OMACH FRED (Jonam County, Nebbi): Mr. Speaker, I am chairman of the Nebbi Parliamentary Group. The Nebbi caucus has unanimously elected hon. Engineer Simon D’Ujanga on the Appointments Committee.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed

NTUNGAMO DISTRICT:

MR. RUKUTANA MWESIGWA  (Rushenyi County, Ntungamo):  We from Ntungamo district have unanimously agreed to nominate hon. Herbert Nuwagaba Muntuyera to represent us.

THE SPEAKER:  I now put the question.

(Question put agreed to)

PALLISA DISTRICT:

MRS. KAFIIRE JULIET (Kibuku County, Pallisa): The Members of Pallisa district have caucused and decided that Louis Opange will represent them on the Appointments Committee.

THE SPEAKER:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

RAKAI DISTRICT:

MRS. NAMUSOKE K. KYAMA (Woman representative, Rakai):  Mr. Speaker, we the people of Rakai have caucused and agreed to have hon. Mathias Kasamba, Member of Parliament for Kakuuto as our representative on the Appointments Committee.

THE SPEAKER:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

RUKUNGIRI DISTRICT:

BRIG.  JIM MUHWEZI (Rujumbura County, Rukungiri):  Mr. Speaker, the Members from Rukungiri district have agreed to have hon. Winfred Matsiko as our representative on the Appointments Committee.

THE SPEAKER:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

SOROTI DISTRICT:

MR. ANYOLO SAMUEL (Soroti County, Soroti): Mr. Speaker, we the Members of Soroti district met and agreed that Alaso Alice, Woman Representative for Soroti district represents us on the Appointments Committee. 

THE SPEAKER:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

TORORO DISTRICT:

MR. OBBO HENRY (West Budama County North, Tororo):  Mr. Speaker, we have agreed to nominate hon. Dorothy Samali Hyuha to represent us.

THE SPEAKER:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

ADJUMANI DISTRICT:

MRS. ERIYO JESSICA (Woman representative, Adjumani): Mr. Speaker, we the people of Adjumani district are disadvantaged to have only one county and therefore we are only two in this House. The first is Brig. Moses Ali and I am Eriyo Jessica, the District Woman Representative.  We agreed with him that I get nominated on the Appointments Committee.  And as West Nile, we also agreed unanimously that for Adjumani district I go on the Appointments Committee. 

THE SPEAKER:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed

BUGIRI DISTRICT:

MR. MULENGANI BENARD (Bukooli County Central, Bugiri):  Mr. Speaker, after serious consultations from Bugiri district, we unanimously agreed to appoint Patrick Peter Ochieng, honourable Member of Bukooli South.

(Question put and agreed to)

BUSIA DISTRICT:

MR.MAYENDE SIMON (Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Mr. Speaker, the Busia caucus agreed to have hon. Aggrey Awori to represent us on the Appointments Committee.

(Question put and agreed to)

KATAKWI DISTRICT:

MS.AKELLO GRACE (Women Representative, Katakwi): Mr. Speaker, the Katakwi district team agreed that hon. Benedict Etonu, Member of Parliament for Amuria will represent us on the Appointments Committee.

(Question put and agreed to)

NAKASONGOLA DISTRICT:

MR.MURULI MUKASA (Nakasongola County): Mr. Speaker, we have agreed that hon. Margret Komuhangi represents Nakasongola on this committee. Thank you.

(Question put and agreed to)

SEMBABULE DISTRICT:

MR.KUTESA SAM (Mawogola County, Sembabule): Thank you Mr. Speaker. The entire Parliamentary Group of Sembabule district has unanimously resolved that hon. Hanifa Kawooya for Sembabule district be our nominee to the Appointments Committee.
(Question put and agreed to)

KAMWENGE DISTRICT:

MS.MEHANGYE IDAH (Woman Representative Kamwenge): Thank you Mr. Speaker. The Kamwenge team has selected hon. Capt. Charles Byaruhanga to be the Appointments Committee.

(Question put and agreed to)

KAYUNGA DISTRICT:

MS.NANSUBUGA NYOMBI (Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Unfortunately, as you are all aware, we do not have a Woman Representative from Kayunga district, but the three of us who are present have unanimously elected hon. Madada Kyebakoze Sulaiman of Bbaale County, to represent us on the Committee.


(Question put and agreed to)

KYENJOJO DISTRICT:

MR.KATONGOLE BADRU (Kyaka County, Kyenjojo): The Members of Parliament from Kyenjojo district have nominated hon. Dora Byamukama of Mwenge South as our representative on the Appointments Committee. 

(Question put and agreed to)

MAYUGE DISTRICT:

MR.KUBEKETERYA JAMES (Bunya East, Mayuge): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. The people of Mayuge district have unanimously agreed to nominate hon. Isanga Lukia Nakadama, Woman Representative, Mayuge district to represent us on the Appointments Committee.

(Question put and agreed to)

PADER DISTRICT:

PROF.OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Mr. Speaker, mindful of the great Acholi tradition and the very young nature of our district, we have unanimously given the first committee to our youngest representative from Pader district, hon. Odonga Otto Samuel.
(Question put and agreed to)

SIRONKO DISTRICT:

MR.WANANZOFU SIMON (Bulambuli County, Sironko): Thank you Mr. Speaker. The Parliamentary group from Sironko has unanimously elected Gaboi Wambi Kibaale representing Budadiri East Constituency.

(Question put and agreed to)
WAKISO DISTRICT:

MRS.SENINDE NANSUBUGA (Women Representative, Wakiso): The hon. Members of Wakiso district have unanimously nominated Dr. Byatike Matovu of Entebbe Municipality.

(Question put and agreed to)

YUMBE DISTRICT:

MR.OLEGA ASHRAF (Aringa County, Yumbe): Mr. Speaker, Members of Parliament from Yumbe have agreed that hon. Nusura Tiperu represents us on the Appointments Committee.

(Question put and agreed to)

KABERAMAODO DISTRICT:

MR.ORECH MARTIN (Kalaki County, Soroti): Mr. Speaker, the new district of Kaberamaido as of now has got only two Members of Parliament; that is hon. John Eresu and myself. I am afraid my colleague was not available for consultation and as a result we have not got a person appointed. I request that you give me opportunity to try to contact him tonight and then I will be able to report tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: My understanding is that, there is a proposal that hon. Martin Orech – (Interjection) – Is that the consensus?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes!

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Martin Orech.

NAKAPIRIPIRIT DISTRICT:

MR.LOLEM MICAH (Upe County, Moroto): Thank you Mr. Speaker, the three Members for Nakapiripiriti district have nominated hon. Lokeris Paul as our representative on the Appointment’s Committee.

(Question put and agreed to)

KANUNGU DISTRICT:

MR. AMAMA MBABAZI (Kinkizi West, Rukungiri): The Members of Parliament of Kanungu District met and decided to nominate hon. Mbabazi Kabushenga to represent Kanungu District.

THE SPEAKER:  I put the question 

(Question put and agreed to)

PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Speaker, people with disabilities and Members of Parliament in this House will be represented by hon. Hood Katuramu, Member representing the Disabled in Western Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE YOUTH:

MR. DANIEL KIDEGA (Youth Representative North) Thank you so much Mr. Speaker.  On a long consideration of Gender and ability, the Youth Representatives in this Parliament have brought forward Namayanja Ruth representative for the Youth of Central Region to represent them in that committee.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question

(Question put and agreed to)

REPRESENTATIVE OF WORKERS:

HON. PAJOBO BRUNO: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  The Workers have unanimously elected Brother Charles Bakabulinde to represent them.

THE SPEAKER:  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE UPDF:

COL. FRED BOGERE: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  The UPDF team has sent Maj.Gen. Elly Tumwine and Col. Elly Kayanja.

THE SPEAKER:  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

WOMAN REPRESENTATIVE NORTHERN REGION:

MRS. AANIMU ANGUPALE: We the District Women Representatives for Northern region unanimously elected Dhugira Esther Opoti to represent us in the Committee.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

WOMAN REPRESENTATIVE EASTERN REGION:

MRS. MUNYIRA WABWIRE (Busia District): We women from Eastern Region agreed that we present hon. Kasule Justine Lumumba from Bugiri District to represent women in that region.

THE SPEAKER:  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

WOMAN REPRESENTATIVE CENTRAL REGION:

MRS. BUMBA SYDA (Nakaseke District): The Women Representatives from Central Region have unanimously agreed to present the hon. Margret Zziwa of Kampala District to represent them.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  I put the question

(Question put and agreed to)

WOMAN REPRESENTATIVE WESTERN REGION:

MRS. MASIKO: (Rukungiri District): The women from the Western part of Uganda have agreed that the lady to represent them on the Appointments board is none other than hon. Mwesigye Hope.

THE SPEAKER:  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

WOMAN REPRESENTATIVE MID-WESTERN REGION:

MRS. BINTU JALIA (Masindi District): The Women Representative of Mid Western Region unanimously agreed to nominate hon. Beatrice Byenkya from Hoima District to represent them on the Appointments Committee.

THE SPEAKER:  I put the question

(Question put and agreed to)

WOMAN REPRESENTATIVE NORTH EASTERN:

MRS. KAFIIRE RAINER:  Mr. Speaker, the Women of North Eastern Uganda have unanimously agreed that hon. Getrude Kulany represents them on the Appointments Board.

THE SPEAKER:  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  So we have now constituted the Appointments Committee and this is to give notice to the Members that the committee will start functioning tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.   You will be advised when you come on the venue of the meeting.  And from tomorrow running to Wednesday, it has been decided – may be it is proper that we run through these Rules of Procedure so that people are conversant with rules to facilitate an orderly debate.   

Therefore, as from tomorrow afternoon through Wednesday, we shall be having this exercise because the Appointments Committee will be meeting in the morning, but in the afternoon we shall be having this exercise, which will be facilitated.  Well that is against the rule and therefore you are all invited to attend this exercise.  You will be told again the proper venue for this meeting.  
In the circumstances I adjourn the House until – (Interruption) 

MS. BAKOKO BAKORU: Mr. Speaker, I am seeking your guidance, the number in this House has risen so much and you can clearly see that when all the members come here, we do not have enough space.  It is very hot.  The room is not air-conditioned and we also fear that we do not have enough sanitary facilities for the House.  Mr. Speaker, can you guide us on how we can be assisted in this situation and proceed before we have an outbreak of some problems? 

THE SPEAKER: I think in the circumstances, if we have to work on this, it requires Capital Development but what I can offer at the moment is to regret the inconvenience which members are undergoing.  So I adjourn the House until 10.00 a.m.  Thursday.  Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 4.46 p.m and adjourned until Thursday, 12th July, 2001 at 10.00a.m)









