
Thursday, 15th July, 1993

(The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala).

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

The Council was called to order.

(The Council was adjourned for 15 minutes).

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE TRADITIONAL RULERS (RESTITUTION OF ASSETS AND PROPERTIES BILL, 1993

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. A. Mayanja):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled ‘The Traditional Rulers (Restitution of Assets and Properties) Bill, 1993, be read a Second Time.  In moving this Motion, I want once again to express the gratitude of the Government to Members of this House.  The gratitude of the Government and the whole nation to Members of the House for the Statesman-like manner in which they unanimously passed the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, yesterday. (Applause)  Mr. Chairman, the object of the present Bill is to implement the provisions.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, yesterday we did pass the Amendment of the Constitution; particularly Amendment to Article 118.  I am aware that the Attorney General would like us to debate the Traditional Rulers (Restitution of Assets and Properties) Bill, which is directly emanating from Article 118 of the Constitution or the Statute - the Bill that passed yesterday.  Mr. Chairman, I believe that what we passed yesterday is not yet know, because the President has not yet assented to the Bill that we passed yesterday and therefore, unless the Attorney General can assure me that the President has assented to the Bill that we passed yesterday.  Therefore what we are doing now is illegal and unconstitutional to the extent that we are amending or giving effect to a provision of the Constitution that is not yet known.  To that effect therefore, Mr. Chairman, I am raising a point of order to that effect.  Thank you. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Attorney please, give information about this issue.

MR. A. MAYANJA:  Mr. Chairman, the information is that - I hope my hon. and Learned Friend does not want to give his cake and eat it.  It is true that the Bill we passed yesterday has not been assented to but it is equally true that it will be assented to. (Laughter)  There is no order that I know which prevents this House from discussing and passing a Bill that is contingent upon the passage of another Bill.  Obviously, if we pass this Bill and the President does not assent to the other Bill, then this Bill will not take legal effect -(Applause)- but we can pass this Bill contingent upon the other Bill being assented to.

THE CHAIRMAN:  It is quite in order.  Proceed. (Applause)

MR. A. MAYANJA:  Mr. Chairman, I am very delighted with your ruling and I am to see my hon. and Learned Friend in a happy mood. (Laughter)  He is equally delighted that his attempts to derail us at this late hour have not succeeded. (Applause)

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Chairman, I am a believer in culture and I support what is before us in national interest.  In raising this matter, I am very conscious of legal implications and I do not want something that is going to be done in a hurry, which may in future give us problems.  Is it in order for my Learned Friend to impute improper motive when I have none.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  It is not in order, proceed please.

MR. A. MAYANJA:  Mr. Chairman, the object of the present Bill will be to implement the provisions of the new Article 118(A) of the Constitution introduced by the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 1993 which we passed yesterday.  It will be recalled that Article 118(A) which was proposed by that Bill to be inserted in the Constitution, empowers the Legislature to provide for the return to the Traditional Rulers, their cultural and traditional assets and properties which were confiscated by the State when the Institution of King or Rulers was abolished under Article 118 of the Constitution by the Government of the time.  The present Bill is also intended to give legislative effect to the resolution of the National Resistance Army council of 3rd April, 1992 and that of this Council of 30th April, 1993 when sitting as a Political Organ, to the effect that steps should be taken to return to the Traditional Authorities concerned, their cultural and traditional assets and properties in accordance with the Law of Uganda.  

Since the passage of the Bill yesterday, it seems to be really that all the political arguments had been exhausted.  When we discussed this Bill and that is to say, we discussed the rationale, the moral imperatives for returning these properties to their rightful owners when we sat in the other place as a political organ on the 30th of April.  We recorded our consensus in a resolution.  The purpose of this Bill is merely to give effect to that resolution.  I will therefore, in the rest of my speech, confine myself to explaining the detailed provision of the Bill.  I am not going to talk - try to justify or in other words, just try to explain what it means and how we have tried to achieve; to carry out the wishes of this House as contained in that Resolution.

Clause (3) of the Bill seeks to transfer these assets and properties to the Traditional Rulers subject to the limitations contained in that Clause.  A Traditional Ruler to whom any asset or property, which is land, is transferred under that Clause is only to have the same estate or interest which the Uganda Land Commission had in respect of that land at the time of transfer.  Let me hope I will read more and explain. 

In the case of Buganda - no, before I do that - I want to explain to the House that the land which was taken away from - for instance, the Kabaka, the Namasole and so on, in Buganda was mailo land - it was subject to mailo land tenure and the Statute in force at that time.  When that land was confiscated, it was vested in the Uganda Land Commission and then later on Parliament applied to that land ‘The Public Land Act 1969, Section 39 and 40.  Now, the effect of applying those Sections to the land that had belonged to the traditional rulers was to convert that land into freehold land, to convert it from mailo land to freehold land.  That is the Tenure under which Uganda Land Commission is holding the land today.  

Now, we have made two provisions that I would like hon. Members to follow carefully.  The first provision we have said that, when the land is returned to the Traditional Rulers, they shall hold it for the same estate, that is, they shall have the same rights as the Uganda Land Commission has been having in respect of that land.  The purpose of that, is to safeguard the transactions which the Uganda Land Commission had carried out in respect of that land from the time that they got possession of it or ownership of it to the time that it will be transferred back to the Traditional Rulers.  Otherwise, the Leases and other interests that have been committed or created by Uganda Land Commission will not be safeguarded, but secondly, we have said after that we are going to de-supply the Public Lands Act, Section 39 and 40 from that land when it has been returned to the Traditional Rulers.  The effect of that will be that the land will revert to its mailo tenure status.  That means that what the Traditional Rulers will get ultimately will not be freehold land but they will get mailo land which is now a 99 year lease as provided by the Land Reform Decree 1975.  I thought I should explain that point.  It requires very close reasoning to follow it.  I will therefore, repeat it, I have not yet explained it in my words.  

In the case of Buganda, Clause 3, seeks specifically to transfer to the Traditional Rulers of Buganda the ownership of the assets and properties listed in the Schedule to the Bill.  These corresponds to the Cultural Sites which this council lifted in its Resolution of 30th April, 1993 when the Council in that Resolution directed that Government should take steps to return to the appropriate Cultural Authority of Buganda, in accordance with the laws of Uganda.  Hon. Members did inquire yesterday whey there is one list and that is the reason.  

There is a Schedule to the Bill detailing the lands that will be transferred to the Traditional Authority of Buganda when this Bill is passed but there is no similar list or Schedule with regard to the other Traditional Rulers.  The reason being as I explained yesterday it is because the Government has not yet held discussions or negotiations with those authorities.  When the Government carries out those negotiations and an agreement is reached, whatever is agreed upon will be transferred to the traditional authorities concerned in accordance with this law.  Now, at the time when the cultural and traditional lands were confiscated to Uganda Land Commission, the titles were converted by the Public Lands Act No. 13 of 1969 into Freehold Title.  

The aim of Clause 3, therefore, in giving to the Traditional Rulers the same estates that the Uganda Land Commission possessed, is to save leases and other grants that have been made in the meantime by the Uganda Lands Commission.  The Traditional Rulers will in effect have them as mailo land, subject to the modifications made to such titles by the Land Reform Decree of 1975 since the relevant provisions of the Public Lands Act make these titles Freehold namely Sections 39 and 40 are being de-supplied to those lands by Clause 4 of the Bill.  

In the case of other confiscated assets and properties of Buganda, that is, in case of those in respect of this agreement has not yet been reached.  In respect of those which are not in the Schedule but which may be agreed later and also in the case of all un-returned, confiscated assets and properties of the other Traditional Rulers namely of Ankole, Bunyoro, Toro and Busoga, sub-Clause 4 and 5 of Clause 3 of the Bill provided for negotiations between government and the relevant Traditional Rulers for their return as agreed in such negotiations.  Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to repeal the Special Pensions Former Rulers and Constitutional Heads Act of 1967 that was passed in pursuance of Article 118 of the Constitution.  

The Clause in sub-Clause 2 transfers to the Traditional Rulers, for the avoidance of doubt, any asset or properties that was previously confiscated from them.  The transfer will however, be subject to negotiations under sub-Clauses 4, 5 and 6 of Clause 3 as I said, expect in the case of the Buganda Assets and Properties listed in the Schedule to the Bill which are transferred immediately without the need for further negotiation with the Government.  I hope I have made the provisions very clear, and I tried to do so in the Memorandum to the Bill.  They are written very clearly but after the Bill was published, I was approached by some hon. Members and they informed me that in Clause 3, sub-Clause 4, on page 3, second paragraph which says, ‘In the case of Traditional Rulers, other than the Traditional Ruler of Buganda, the Government may hold negotiations...’ they advised that the ‘Government shall hold negotiations with the Traditional Rulers.’  I think this is quite justified and I want to indicate at this stage that if you are an honourable bringing such an amendment, that such an amendment will be acceptable to the Government.  Mr. Chairman, with those remarks, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the Bill entitled ‘The Traditional Rulers (Restitution of Assets and Properties) Bill, 1993, be read a Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE MINISTER OF STATE IN PRESIDENT’S OFFICE (Mr. Kintu Musoke):  Mr. Chairman, I stand up to support the Motion.  Before I do so, I would like to make some remarks which I should have made yesterday but which are still appropriate, that I had heard Colleagues, particularly from Bushenyi and from Kasese expressing great fears as if this Bill which we have here and the one which we passed yesterday was making an automatic installation of Traditional Rulers in those areas.  And I wanted to advise them that in case of Buganda, where there appears to be a consensus on the return of the Traditional Rulers and their assets, it has taken about five years to build up that consensus, and therefore, those who may want to take advantage of this Bill in their areas, will have to similarly build the consensus if they want.  And, therefore, there is no fault with this Bill, the onus to build the consensus is contained in the words ‘if people so wish’, so those who are interested must make their people wish, as we have done in Buganda in over five years, building up this consensus which we enjoy here today.

Secondly, we in the President’s Office want to thank, I will add our voice to the Attorney Generals, on how statemanly the Members tackled this issue.  Because we believe that for as long as we do not solve these successive issues, like the return of ‘ebyaffe’, the more our people’s attention will be diverted away from real issues of national concern, development and unity.  So we believe seriously that we should get rid of these issues, remove these obstacles, so that people can now - people’s energies can be directed into proper national issue of development and unity.

Again in case of Buganda, I want to allay the fears of our nationalists from outside Buganda, to the effect that we, the nationalists of Buganda are with them.  I want to assure you that the reigns of leadership in Buganda have passed from the traditionalists and now we are in the hands of nationalists who had been declared traitors by our fellow Baganda in the past.  We are now in the reign of the leadership with this country and there will be no turning back, we are too far out going to retreat.  So be assured that Buganda, under this new leadership now accepts Uganda as a whole and Buganda as a part.  There will be no return to a state within a state that was the cause of the 1966 crisis.  We shall never be party to the 1966 resolution asking the Government of Uganda to vacate the Buganda territory, that is the new leadership in Buganda.

I was fortunate to be closely associated, through His Excellency the President, with negotiations of those items that we are going to discuss, which appear in the Schedule.  The people of Buganda on receipt of the Army Resolution in Gulu, drew out a long list of what they called our confiscated properties and rights.  These are contained in a very long document that I have here, and it was left to the Ssabataka’s negotiation team and Government negotiation team to look into that list, and see how applicable it was to the Army Resolution that was passed in Gulu.  

So, what appears in the Schedule to this Bill, which I think is most important now, because the Attorney General has explained how the other Bill is the list which we arrived at after very, very intense negotiations and spells out completely what actually were cultural sites in the case of Buganda.  Now, if this Bill returns these to the Baganda when it becomes a statute, then the only clear way for the other territories, for the other areas where there were traditional leaders is to negotiate in accordance to the requirement of their own areas.  The list, as I said, was long and what we came down to were those that were the minimal required which we defined as cultural sites in terms of the Army Resolution in Gulu.  

If we go straight to the Schedule, there is Bulange and for those Colleagues here, hon. Members who do not know, who may not know where Bulange is, it is the house where the Kabaka used to appear to his people and to meet his people and administer and give orders to rule the country.  It used to be inside the Lubiri and by those things should be there.  It used to be inside Lubiri, but because of the dynamics of society, the growth, many people were coming up, it was decided to take it out of the Lubiri and built outside, but otherwise, it used to belong part and parcel to the Lubiri.  

I was old enough when the decision was taken to take it out of the Lubiri, there was a lot of dispute amongst the Baganda traditionalists who almost refused to allow it to go out until of course, the then Kabaka Mutesa stood his ground and said, for development, let us agree to change and remove Bulange out of Lubiri, otherwise, it was part and parcel of the Lubiri.  Then, the Lubiri itself is of course, the residence of the Kabaka, the official residence of the Kabaka where there was a house called ‘Twekobe’, where actually Kabaka resides.  There were two ‘Twekobes’, the old Twekobe and new Twekobe, and there were the offices of government, and there were other smaller houses there and so on.  So, this was truly a traditional site, and we agreed on that.

Then we went to the Butikiro, of course, there was no Kabaka without a Katikiro and the house where he resided was very near there, and it is there now, it is being used by an organisation, but we agreed that it should be returned, but people who are there can continue to rent it, if they want to and so we have no objection, but it can be returned as a cultural site.

Then there was Buganda Court, the building along Kabaka Njagala - the Buganda High Court.  Again the Kabaka is to supervise justice within the Palace, within the Lubiri.  Even that Court used to be there in the Lubiri but because of development, change of society, because of traffic and so on, it was found necessary to get it out of the Lubiri and build it outside, but it is part and parcel of the Lubiri.  Then, there was Kabaka’s official 350 square miles of land, as you remember before the British came here, before the advent of colonialism, the Kabaka was the owner of all land, on trust of the people of Buganda.  When colonialism came in then, the people were supposed, part of the land became crown land and the other became mailo land, the mailo land was gazetted between the Kabaka and his chiefs, so that the Kabaka who once upon a time was owner of the land, now became one of the land lords in equality with his chiefs.  

So it is this land which came to Kabaka as part of the colonial division between mailo land, crown land and so on, but we are returning to Kabaka and the intention of it was to give him means of livelihood, because at that time, there was money coming from it.  As it is now, it is occupied by people who own ‘bibanja’ who own leases and we have received assurances from the powers that be; the traditional leaders, that nobody will be disturbed.  All the leases and all the bibanja will continue to pertain as they are.  We have received the assurance.  

The same goes to the Namasole’s land, and I think we have got the legal assurances, then the same goes for Nalinyas’ land, then of course the Kabaka’s lake, this is self explanatory, then the houses of Muwanika and Omulamuzi.  These are people who served the traditional ruler.  These are attached to the land, and that is the land adjacent to Lubiri where Ministers houses used to be, it is automatically part of the Lubiri.  Of course all Basekas’ tombs, they are very many - the chief of them is at Kasubi, but they are very many scattered in this country called ‘Busiro,’ the name is derived from ‘Masiro’, that is the place where most of the Kabakas were buried.  Therefore, they are so many scattered all over, they are very good cultural sites, they are very good for tourism, but they are scattered all over the place.  Now they are dilapidated because they are not being looked after and they are just huts where people were buried.  They do not have land around them, they are just those huts and tombs and so on, they are scattered all over Busiro county.  

Then there is Buganda Works Building at Kabaka.  This is the building that was for the maintenance of the Lubiri and Bulange, all those buildings.  That is where the maintenance man - I do not know how they call him - they used to call him ‘Pillai’ but I think we call him 'works supervisor'.  So this thing is attached to Lubiri, attached to Bulange, because it is used for maintaining Palaces, you cannot maintain them without this place.  Then Basiima House, which was a private house, but on his death, he donated it to the Kabaka and it was intended to be transformed into a Museum for the traditional artifacts of Buganda.  So, we also agreed that it goes away.  Then the Nalinya, if you want to know the name of Nalinya, Nalinya is a lady who succeeds to the throne with Kabaka, his sister; so this name Nalinya - they were also granted land for their prosperity.  

So, the purpose of this, is first of all to return these things for their cultural purposes.  Secondly, to allow these institutions to acquire income from them so that they no longer have to fall back to beg from the State or from Local Government for their maintenance.  Many of these now are income generating, and can be used for maintaining these institutions if they are well used and there is accountability and no corruption.  As I said, I was privileged to discuss these things with Ssebataka’s team, and the President and this is the minimum list we could provide out of the long list that they had and therefore, I urge Members of the NRC to accept this.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to support.

MR. BITAMAZIRE (Mwenge County, Kabarole):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, to allow me to air my views on behalf of Mwenge about this very, very fundamental issue affecting the lives of all Ugandans.  I support this Bill on major fundamental belief.  Fundamental beliefs in the sense that discussion of property by the State is fundamentally wrong, whether it affects a traditional ruler or a simple citizen.  It is in that line of argument that in the course of my argument, I will be also asking Government to look into other areas of ebyaffe, not only in traditional rulers but with ordinary people as well.  

The issue of State confiscating property is what we call State violence.  It is State inspired and it is uncalled for, because when it started in 1966, people argued oh, this only affects Buganda, but eventually, all of us became victims, eventually all of us were killed, eventually all of us were rounded up.  So what started up as a partial beginning to one particular area, eventually all of us; the whole country was involved.  So, it was not good for some people to say this only affects Buganda, so we are okay.  At that time, I am sure in 1966, some areas were jubilating when the Kingship was abolished, when the properties were confiscated.  But what happened when Idi Amin came in?  It extends as far as Arua, it extends as far as Rakai, it went as far as Mbale.  So I am calling upon citizens of Uganda this hour that it is always very important to tackle issues very, very comprehensively, instead of saying as far as this affect Toro, so they are not a party.  You never know or if you say this affect a certain area, we are not party, you never know.  

Therefore, I would like to say in another area that, I think the State is an organ, the State has a mind, the State has a conscience and for us we may not be part of the Government if the State operates or performs badly, it is up to them to clear the image.  When I was a young boy, when I heard about the word Government, it was looked at with sanctity.  We thought government was always a good thing, almost 100 per cent perfect.  Around the colonial period, during that time of early 1966s, we thought government was really something almost celestial, if I could say, something very, very higher, something sublime, but eventually it turned out to be wrong.  Now, who was responsible for this change to bad name?  It was the previous regimes.  

So, for me when I blame government, it is government to clean its name.  So we can as well say government is all bad.  So, it is that incumbent regime to clear its image and I am very glad that NRM has taken care to clear the image of Government, so that government is being looked at as something very useful to society as something that is very positive and has a role for each and everyone in the country.  This is the first time to me I see this kind of change of heart, it is in this line that the NRM having realised that, I think are clearing the image of not only this Government but for the future governments.  So this step really is correct to a State.  A State has responsibility, so it is trying to bring this consciously, it is conscious of this, so they are trying to clear this good thing for ever, once for ever, that Government has no bad intentions Government can perform a good job.

Let me also now talk about the other fundamental problems where Government has wronged, and they said the first instance was on the Traditional Rulers.  But history has also shown that Government has also been unfair to the ordinary man.  It has also confiscated property of the ordinary man, I would ask Government after this Bill, they should also move another Bill where Government should also return the property confiscated from the ordinary people of this country.  Because we are not debating only because we are part and parcel of Traditional Rulers, but I think we are doing this very objectively to cover everybody.  

Therefore, I would like to read this - allow me to read this Legal Notice No. 1 of 1986, Amendment Decree, which affects the ordinary man, whereby it says like this; paragraph 12 which was amended like this Section two.  It says ‘this is for the ordinary people of Uganda; ‘No civil suit, action or other proceedings whatsoever shall be instituted in any court, of recovery of damages or compensation against Government or a Local Administration on account or in respect of any torturous act or mission for any breach of a statutory duty by Members of Government Security Forces, Police Force, Prison Service or Intelligence agencies by whatever name called, or by Chiefs, Local Administration, Police or other officials of any Local Administration resulting in (a), assault of or injury to or loss of life of any person.  (b) Arrest, imprisonment, confinement or detention of any person in any manner what so ever.  (c) Seizure, Youths or testration of or damaged property of what so ever description, where is such act or mission occurred within the period beginning on the first day of November 1978 and ending on the 26th January, 1986.’  Now, this is for the ordinary people.  

So, on this note, I am calling the Attorney General in future also to look into this because many people have lost a lot of property in the transition between 1966, when we were approving this - in 1966 when this happened on Traditional rulers - up to January, 1986 a lot of things have been done also on the ordinary man than beyond.  This would be doing Justice or will be correcting the conscience of the State, so that we can clear our name and say, we are not legislating only for the Traditional Rulers but we are also legislation for the entire country Uganda.  I am saying this because I was once a victim, my Land Rover was taken openly by the Government in 1982, and by this law, I cannot sue government nor can I hold negotiations. (Laughter)  

Having finished that, I think I better talk specifically about the Bill.  Mr. Chairman, the return of property and assets to Traditional Rulers is a welcome move, because we would like to correct this bad picture that Government has inherited for many years as I have said.  But I would just want to give a background to Toro assets and properties.  First of all, I would like to inform you, Mr. Chairman, and the whole House that I am part of the Toro negotiating team to carry on this function to present ebyaffe of Toro.  And I was appointed by Rukirabasaija Omukama of Toro.  Like in Buganda, Toro has also similar set up, because all these kingdoms as you know were set up along similar lines.  Our demands on the cultural sites, mostly the Kalizika, that is the former Palace of Omukama, Mucwa, which is the same as the Bulange, we have got Royal Tombs, we have got land and buildings and several other assets I cannot go in details, but only I would like to say that our team is ready, we are waiting to meet the Government, we are ready.  

I would like to say, in brief that when Toro is negotiating for ebyaffe, it is not true really to say these properties or assets are just meant for just cultural.  Toro is aware that these are assets of Uganda that will be utilised to full capacity for the whole country, we are aware of that.  It is not a question of saying these assets are going to benefit the only narrow community of Kabarole, it is much beyond.  And one of the cultural roles of Omukama is really to look after the entire community immediate and beyond, and one of the roles of Omukama is to look after orphans, we call him Omukama funzi and he has been protecting this role ever since.  In 1957, I would like to inform you and the whole House, Mr. Chairman, that the late Omukama Rukidi invited people from Kabale to come and occupy the whole of Kibale country free -(Laughter)- Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. TURYASHEMERERWA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, not all the Bakiga in Kibale were invited by the Omukama.  Some of us bought land from Kabarole actually from Batoro, we were not given free land by Omukama.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. BITAMAZIRE:  Mr. Chairman, thank you.  I thank the speaker for the information but then, you are not partly what I am alluding to, I am alluding to those people who came early in the 50s before you were born. (Laughter) 

You know very well that in the early 1920s, there were many British farmers coming from South Africa after the first world war, coming from Australia, coming from Kenya who were looking for land especially for tea and you know Toro is one of the best Tea growing areas South of the Sahara, and one of the biggest, estate South of the Sahara is from Kabarole, that is Mwenge.  Mwenge Tea Estate is the biggest South of the Sahara, it is a fact.  This would have meant that if the cultural role of Omukama had not bound him - I do not see what would have stopped him to call Lord Darwella and buy the land.  I do not think the Omukama would not have been able to sell to British firms or any firm that was interested but he did not.  Instead, he gave it free to Rwandese refugees who came in 1950s and of course, as I said to many other Ugandans who came to Toro.  So when we ask for ‘ebyaffe’ - it is ‘Ebyeitu’ in Toro - when we ask you for out things in Toro, they are really meant to serve a whole human race as far as I am concerned. (Hear, hear!) 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed please.

MRS. SSEBAGEREKA: Point of information. Supplementary information, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform the House through you, that the role of Omukama of Toro us a uniting role that during his tours in Kabarole District he had the Bakiga and Banyarwanda who were invited by his father who gave him gifts and recognized his role and they have been also inculcated in the culture of Toro and they accept the Omukama as their King.     
                                                    
MR. BITAMAZIRE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I thank the speaker hon. Mrs. Ssebagereka for that complimentary information.  Now, I was perturbed yesterday to a certain extent when the tone of Debate that came from my Colleagues was more temperamental than a case of compromise.  My Colleagues seem to have said that it might bring out an uprising, and Mr. Chairman, I would like to assure this House through you that I stand here holding an olive branch to all our friends in the region that Toro will never carry out any act of aggression against anybody because as far as I am concerned, we have in the past forged a great, great cooperation for the last 10 years, we have been having regional meetings in Kasese.  For example, when Kasese people were attacked, we physically from Kabarole moved into mountains to go and try to assist our brothers to fight the rebels in 1990.  I remember the DA with myself went straight to the mountains to hon. Muhindo’s Constituency and made an onslaught in the mountain supporting our brothers on this very, very fundamental issue that the people of Bukonjo are part and parcel of us and nobody is going to agrees them -(Interruption and Laughter)    

MRS. BWAMBALE:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to give information to the hon. Member holding the Floor that the people of Kasese and Bundibugyo - the NRC Members here from Kasese and Kabarole we enjoy a warm relationship together.  We embrace each other for that matter and we shall continue to do so and convince our people to do so provided that the people of Kabarole can conform to what hon. Rwabyomere said yesterday.  That the Toro Kingdom is for the Batoro, then we respect that each one of us belong to our own tribes and we are not subject to another tribe then, we have no objection -(Hear, hear!)

Secondly, the second information during the negotiations for the Toro Kingdom, if we can recognise that that Kingdom covered the present District of Kabarole, Kasese and Bundibugyo so that the composition of the negotiating team is adjusted accordingly to include them, okay, then we shall be together.  There is no objection about it.

MR. BITAMAZIRE:  Mr. Chairman, -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up.  Order please.   

MR. BITAMAZIRE:  Mr. Chairman, let me try to wind up.  I think what hon. Loyce said is exactly what also we are always saying that Toro will have to treat the people of Bundibugyo and Bukonjo on equal basis.  We have said that as equal partners.  

Now, I come to the technicalities of the Bill that I can wind up my contribution.  The whole issue of this Bill was to place a mechanism or a way or a method of trying to restore the confiscated assets and properties, that was basically the substance of this Bill.  But unfortunately, when it came to the drafting, we seem to have gone to the paraphernalia.  We did not go to the centre.  For example, Section 3 paragraph 4; instead of giving exceptions we have said, Government shall constitute, Government shall appoint, Government shall put a structure whereby we can see the transparency of all mechanism.  But this seems to have escaped the drafters, the people who really formed up the Bill because now you can see, for example, we are about to talk about ‘with exception of Buganda’ that is a bit clumsy, it is a bit incongruous as far as I am concerned.  Because we should have said ‘Government shall put in place a mechanism’ and then we would say, ‘any act which has already been done before the coming with this Statute would have been deemed to have actually been done in the same way’.  But now you can see how we are being forced to go the other way round.  So, I think we lost sight of the central them, that is to put in place the transcendent mechanism of how you start from a to b to c to d until the property is handed to the rightful hands.

I would also like to say that, we also forgot to put in sight what might happen - because this is a returning, it is a business transaction.  It might raise legal queries, and it might raise a number of other issues to go to court.  Because we do not know the law.  I was trying to say, we should protect these transactions properly so that it does not raise a number of injunctions from courts, from various interested parties and eventually we find that we are being bogged down unnecessarily.

So, those were my humble contributions and I would like again to appeal to you for Government to look into the possibility, as it said earlier, to extend to the wanainchi to return the properties - no matter how small, whether it is a spoke of a bicycle, whether it is a mortal, whether it is a small property he has, let us put in place a mechanism where he can also negotiate.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE (Historical Member):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman and I would like to start by saying that peace be with you.  I am saying this because I am happy with the atmosphere that we are enjoying here and I am saying this because it has always been our wish that time will come when Ugandans will have an atmosphere of tolerance, of respect for each other and of dignity and I realise that in this House as we debate these Bill which would have been very complicated under the previous circumstances, we are able to tolerate each other, we are able to listen to each other, we are able to recognise the views of the others even if we do not support them and as we debate this Bill, I would like to say that this is landmark in principle on recognising the freedoms of the peoples of Uganda however few the people might be because one of our goals in the NRM struggle which has been mainly characterised by tolerance, accommodation, involvement and participation was to reach a point when we should be able to make sure that every Ugandan has the right to express his views and he does it freely.

As we talk about this Bill, I would like to say that I would like to inform you of my two hats and give reasons that have led me to contribute to this Bill.  First as a Chairman of the National Cultural Centre which is in charge of promotion of culture in the whole country and as an artist who spent time researching on the history of the cultures of Uganda and one who met a lot of problems in trying to find information.  On that same hat, we have been trying to look for ways of teaching our young generations what happened in the past.  Now the most important thing in education is not what you read in theory but what you can see physically.  There is very little in that respect of promotion of our culture that we can look at.  So in that respect, I would like to bear that in mind.

On the hat as the Chief Government negotiator with the Traditional Rulers, we finished with the people of Buganda and the Government decided, as you know.  I have expressed orders to continue with the others, Toro, Ankole and the others and the experience there is that the negotiating team of the Government side is there to listen and present to the other side all the possible complaints that are likely to result from the society.  So that the feelings, the interests, the rights of the people that might be affected by some of these properties are taken care of and I would like to assure Members in this House that, it is important to have the confidence that Government is not in any way trying to suppress anybody, if anything, it is trying to find an amicable position.  And in our negotiating team, we took every effort and every chance to put to the other side what are the possible likely things - bad things that are likely to come out.  

I would like to say that in this Bill, to me, the most important thing which should be pointed out and which was the consideration of the Army Council in Gulu, is the last sentence of the resolution which says; ‘provided that this does not interfere with the security of the country’.  Now that one, I think to me, that is why I said peace be with you because if Sir, everybody is cautious of that fact, if everybody is cautious of the fact that whatever property I own as an individual or as a corporate does not create a situation that is going to bring about insecurity and affect other people who are not with me then life -(Interruption)

MR. LATIGO OLAL:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, on a happy note, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the floor who said, he is the Chairman of the Cultural Centre in Uganda that about 1800 something or 1900 the historians know Mwanga the King and Kabalega were arrested in Lango District, in Kangai in hon. Levi Okodi’s constituency, we have erected a senior secondary school there and we have also built two monuments 200 metres away where they were interested.  I would hope that the Cultural Chairman will inform the Attorney General who will inform the Kabaka to build a big monumental centre there -(Laughter)- and you can see, as we sat and we listened carefully, we support him tremendously because they are of cultural and economic value to Uganda and to Lango District for that matter.  Thank you very much.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think the information is a clear indication of what happens if there is security.  If there is security and therefore, if there is peace, that is when the people start doing all the things that they would like to do with all their energy.  Those who want to engage in culture are enthusiastically welcomed in culture, those who want to write books can for sometime - for at least from now people can now start writing books.  

But history, just like the hon. Member has just said, it is recently that they have now reminded themselves that there was something good that was done here and therefore, let us have a monument there. The only monuments that we have presently, the main ones are the ones that were left by the colonialists.  For time immemorial, our people have not put up monuments in remembrance of our own culture and our own contributions.  We have a war memorial just at the City Square, we have Fort Lugard - we have Lugard’s Fort in Gulu and others like that.  But you will find that most - if not all, of the traditional sites, monuments and antiquities are either in a sorry state or are not there at all.  

That is why I was saying that it is good that they are now at a stage when we can now look back without being tarnished with whatever could have happened because what I realise and I see in this House, is that, why people opposed some of these things is because of the bitter memories of what people experienced in the past.  But what has taken place is that, although those memories are there and some of them are still fresh, time has come when we can come together and prepare a new course and say that this was a fact, it was bad but it happened, let us put it there and record that it was a bad thing.  This one was good, it was there and it happened, let us record it as a good thing and let the future remember it.

What I am bringing out here is that what this Bill is trying to do, is trying to lay a foundation for our future generations, not our generation alone.  A future generation will look forward, will look behind and see what happened in the past.  If I were to quote from the different books that are still rotting in the reference section in the library about the different cultures of Uganda, most of the people in this House would be as if they are hearing things for the first time, many people.  The reason is because there is a continuous dying culture that is not protected.

In connection with this Bill and about properties, first in the case of Buganda, you might have heard that, for example, somebody donated a whole house to be made into a museum about the culture of Buganda but because of the bad government, we have no record and proper record of the culture of Buganda, in spite of being in the centre.  Even when somebody had sacrificed his own property I think those should be the feelings that we should think about.

Now, when it comes to taking into consideration what is the weight of Basima House to the Government or to the public, if we looked at national interests which of the two is more national, the one that will be exonerated by generations and generations, centuries and centuries in future or just an administrative centre.  

So, I would like us to debate this Bill knowing that what we are doing - the properties that might be given away as long as they are not going to hurt the individual rights of the people, they are for investment of the nation as a whole to be able to have a history in a presentable way like other countries have done.  If you travel in all Western countries they have made sure even where a battle took place, that place was protected and made a public land for the people to remember that a battle took place here.  Some of the things that we did not have to think about apart from the traditional properties are some of the things like those tanks you see that are hit along the roads.  It would be good to make a monument of such a tank or APC so that our future generation sees where we have come from.  They are not just told that there were APCs that were used by Ugandans and they were killing each other, just in theory, they should see it.  So some -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed please.  Have you finished?

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  No, I have not finished, Mr. Chairman.  What we should do in fact, is that we should try to look at ways and means in every district, in every culture, if there is something that we would like to remember, let it be discussed in the RCs and look for areas where they say, we think this can be a cultural thing, it is in the interest of that particular area and of the nation as a whole and then make arrangements to acquire that piece of property so that people start having a culture of historical relevance and historical context.  

It is in this spirit that I support this Bill and see that the interest of the people of Uganda are taken care of by government wanting to know the details, what is involved, how many people are there, how many people are on these 350 square miles, how are they affected, how did they go there?  It is not just this House that we received a lot of assurances, like hon. Kintu Musoke has given and others like Sabalangira Mulondo who assured us that the people are going to be protected and they are not going to be victimised.  Those were some of the things that really would make - that we would like to hear.  And when you hear people saying that in Toro, in Kasese they are saying, let us respect each other, but let each one have the freedom to protect what is his.  

In the protection and maintenance of these assets; there is nobody whether as a government or now who can look after these assets better than the people who have a state in them.  An example is Kasubi.  Kasubi is the only thing that is purely traditional and preserved.  Recently, they had started also destroying it by using things that are not traditional.  But is the only one because what happened there, the Ministry of culture agreed that the ladies who used to be in that house should be the ones to be maintaining in turns.  But all the other things including the National Museum that was just run by people who were employees are run down and are in a sorry state.  

So, it is important that people should be the ones who should guard what they value, and we should support them to give them freedom, to give them support.  And if we are to invest in Uganda - I am about to bring a Bill that should institute what you would call ‘an Arts Council’ which should be given a special budget for the preservation, promotion and encouragement of culture and art in the country, which is done by all governments in other countries.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to say that -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up.  Wind up please.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Some of these assets could be privatised for better management.  I would like to give an advice that for those who are going to make these assets - posses these assets should run them on a very high standard level so that they are not only a pride to that particular culture but they are a pride to the whole region, Uganda, East Africa and Africa as a whole.  I support the Motion and I will not contribute further.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Butime please.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Tom Butime):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  You may not have got very many Members from Toro putting pressure to contribute.  Because for us we were the only people with a crowned King and others would like to have theirs crowned and therefore we definitely wish them a success.  So we are not putting a lot of pressure, ours is around and he will have to resume just his throne instead of going through the other formalities which others have got to go through.

I also want to say that in the case of Kasese, Kabarole and Bundibugyo Districts, since 1986 up to 1993, we have had a very good working relationship between those three districts.  And we have held meetings for development, for security and others.  It is only last time when some Members were contributing that I got a bit worried with the tone during their contribution, and I was wondering whether all that we have been doing may not be destroyed by this very, very important Bill.  That is why I would like to appeal to emotions of some of the Members from the three districts, that the passing of this Bill should not interrupt the good relationship that has existed between these districts. (Applause)  Because I was here when hon. Mbura-Muhindo was contributing and I could see, he had a lot of fire, anguish, then at times I thought, he is not the one I knew, but apparently, he is the same.  

So, I really do not think that we should have any problem when this Bill is finally passed.  I am sure that people of Kabarole will continue to do normal business in Kasese, the people of Bundibugyo will continue to have free access through Kabarole District to Kampala, the Members from Bundibugyo, NRC Members will continue to have a rest in Fort Portal before they continue the following day to come and attend NRC Meetings.

Kingdoms have boundaries.  And Toro Kingdom can have a boundary.  But traditional sites and properties cannot have boundaries.  And, therefore, if there are properties of Toro Kingdom of the Omukama of Toro in Rwebisengo, in Bundibugyo Town, in Kasese, in Hamukungu, in Katwe, in Katwe Salt Lake, those are properties and sites and automatically to go the owner. (Laughter)  But since, Mr. Chairman,

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.  Information from hon. Mbura Muhindo please.  

MR. MBURA-MUHINDO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform my very good friend hon. Butime, holding the floor of the House that he says, we have had a very good relationship during the NRM period and that is very true.  And that was true because every one of us was independent of the other.  Now it is this very issue that had brought us into conflicts.  Otherwise a common Mukonjo and a common Mutoro have no problem.  The problem is not there.  The problem was brought by the colonialists through divide and rule where we were made subjects.    

Two, when you say properties which belong to the Kingdom - now the Kingdom comprises the three districts and therefore whether we are in Kasese or Bundibugyo, we have shares in those properties because they used to collect taxes from the people to put up those properties.  And therefore we are shareholders also. And that is why we are saying that whatever they put in Kabarole, we are not asking for compensation, whatever is in Kasese, that is also ours; we just do cross-accounting. (Laughter)               
                                                                                   
Now, for example in Katwe.  There is a lake that gives salt.  And that lake is earning the district administration about 40 per cent of the revenue.  And somebody says, a property in Katwe.  I would like to be informed.  Did the King create a salt lake in Kasese that was never there? (Laughter)  That lake, from time immemorial was in Kasese.  and the lake to belong to a man who came to suppress the people and took it over, and you say that is a property of an individual.  It defeats common sense (Hear, hear!)                                 

THE CHAIRMAN: Additional information from hon. Mrs. Bwambale please.        

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Mrs. Bwambale):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me to give further information on this subject.  Because it is through such deliberations that we are going to come to an amicable solution to this problem.  My information is on the salt lake property.  You will recall hon. Members, that during the closed session I did raise the same point, seeking clarification from His Excellency whether Lake Katwe was a cultural site or an economic site?  And His Excellency did clarify that the Salt Lake does not lie under the descriptions of a cultural site, it is indeed an economic site.  Now because of its economics attraction, in 1975, when Stanley passed Kasese District - Oh! It was not called Kasese -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  1875, not 1975.

MRS. BWAMBALE: 1875 - Did I say, 1975?

AN HON. MEMBER:  Yes.

MRS. BWAMBALE:  I beg your pardon and I withdraw.  In 1875 - when he did pass in that area, he was fascinated and he found people actually working in that area and those were the natives of the place who were working in that area.  A few years later, I think it was 1889, the Omukama of Toro started expanding his territory and came under the name which the Bakonjo called ‘Abalisuula’ that is Rukonjo, I do not know how to translate it.  They came and conquered by force of arms the natives who were mining salt at Lake Katwe and drove them to the mountains where some of them still exist today.  So, Mr. Chairman, to say -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order from hon. Bitamazire please.

MRS. BITAMAZIRE:  Mr. Chairman, the speaker on the Floor is giving the fact that the migration into the mountains by our brothers Bakonjo was a recent phenomenon when it started as long ago as in the 16th century when there was a massive movement of people right from the Nile up to the South Africa.  Is she in order?

THE CHAIRMAN:  She is quite in order for her expression.  Proceed please.

MRS. BITAMAZIRE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your protection and for his strengthening my point.  So the people moved to the mountains and the Omukama expanded his territory and by force of arms occupied this economic site.  Now this is where we want negotiations so that we can agree on how these economic sites are going to be settled.  But my brother hon. Minister of State to claim that that is a cultural site as of now, is premature.  That is the information I am giving, and it is not acceptable -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order, please.  Proceed please.

MR. BUTIME:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I must emphasise that the relationship between the people of Kasese District, Kabarole and Bundibugyo is extremely cordial.  And all these exchanged here are also cordial and in good faith and fraternal.  But there is an economic site that can become cultural, and it can also become a property.  There is no point in anything being a property if it has no economic value.  Is it not?  So it can be a tourist attraction and becomes a property.  So that is why I am maintaining that places like Katwe Salt Lake plus the buildings there, the palace at Hamukungu, parts of the buildings in Katwe Township -(Interjection) 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Information from Elly Karuhanga.  Proceed Elly please.                                                                                                                         MR. ELLY KARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to inform the Minister of State for Internal Affairs and through my information and through you, Mr. Chairman, maybe even get more information from him about his statement about cordiality of people in that area.  It is my information that in fact the area referred to, the Salt area, the last Lake area, is a place occupied traditionally by people called the Basongora, who have been marginalised to the extent that they have run out of the area and that the harassment has come from one of those tribes being discussed here. (Laughter) And the Minister of State for Internal Affairs responsible for bringing peace, amity and a good government, should really take this opportunity to tell us the fate of the Basongora and their rights in that area which, not only was taken by the National Park and gazetted, but even the little part that was left, they are being taken out of as cotton growing is becoming a very quick replacement and this is in line with the government policy.  I have a lot of Basongora in Nyabushozi who would like very much to go back to Lake Katwe.  Thank you. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.  Proceed please hon. Butime.


MR. BUTIME:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  The point which hon. Karuhanga is raising, that point, Mr. Chairman, there is -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Do you accept that information?

MR. BUTIME:  Yes, I accept the information.

THE CHAIRMAN: Give your important information.        

MR. KARUSOKE:  Mr. Chairman, I would like through you to inform this august House and to remind my brother hon. Butime that the Omukama of Toro, Rukirabasaija Olimi Kaboyo is very, very embracive and he wants very much to unite the people of these three districts.  He signified this by getting his official wife from Bundibugyo. (Applause)  It will be very absurd for the people of Kabarole whose Omukama has very, very intentions for the people of Kasese and Bundibugyo to come round and insist that -(Interjection)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member who has got social contacts with the Omukama to begin to convince us before he declares that he already has personal interests with the Omukama?  Is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is quite in order.  Proceed please.

MR. KARUSOKE:  Mr. Chairman, I have personal interest with the Omukama, I am stating facts that the Omukama is very embracing and he is not interested to see that the people of the three districts are falling apart.  He would like to see all of us go together.  And I am sure if he knew the sentiments and feelings of the people of Kasese and Bundibugyo about the properties he holds there, he would not insist as much as some of us are insisting here.  I would, therefore, like to suggest that in the negotiating team, the people of Bundibugyo and Kasese should be part and parcel.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed hon. Butime.

MR. BUTIME:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I will be very fast and finalise.  But just a piece of information to hon. Karuhanga, Mr. Chairman through you, is that the President appointed a Cabinet sub-Committee chaired by hon. Kisamba Mugerwa, myself, hon. Kazibwe, the IGG, the PS, Office of the President, to go to Kasese District, study, recommend, propose an answer to the problem of the plight and some kind of land conflict between the people whom hon. Karuhanga refers to as Basongora and other people in that district in areas of the whole district.  And that Committee finalised its work and we are waiting to see the President and present that Report to him.

Finally, I want to say that you can see how much work Maj. Gen. Tumwine has to rationalise, find an answer to all these problems.  And I feel maybe that it is going to be correct for the Members from Bundibugyo District and Kasese to be together with the negotiating team from their former Kingdom so that they can sit and negotiate and find an answer to some of these properties and traditional sites, especially, those which are outside the current Kabarole District.  There are other sites in Kampala, and there is one of the properties -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Point of order from hon. Steven Kavuma please.

MR. KAVUMA:  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Minister and other Members who have been speaking, to engage this hon. House in the act of negotiating for properties and cultural sites when in fact the Bill has a provision that for those areas and properties where negotiations have not taken place, negotiating teams will be appointed after this Bill has been passed.  I think, today we should be concerned with the principles of the Bill and pass it and then negotiating teams put in place to look at the details of these properties.  Is it in order, Mr. Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Let him proceed.  Proceed hon. Butime please.  You are in order.

MR. BUTIME:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Because I think hon. Kavuma is not really very much with other properties other than these around the area where he comes from.

So, finally, I would like really at the end of it all to thank the Attorney General for trying to solve this fundamental problem.  And I am sure that after this Bill has been passed and negotiations in other districts and kingdoms have been finalised, there will definitely be more harmony in those areas than the bickering and whatever has been going on.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now call upon the Mover to wind up.  The Attorney General please.

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja):  Mr. Chairman, I wish to thank my colleagues in the House for the support that they have given to the Bill.  I just want to comment on two things.  First, that whereas the negotiations between the Sabataka’s Council and the Government was concerned with traditional sites only, this Bill is not confined to cultural sites.  This Bill goes beyond that if it is passed.  So it is possible to return other things like an economic site or a house or a drum or a spear.  Two, I want to emphasise that when the land is returned to the Traditional Rulers where there is an agricultural land occupied by the people, the people will not be affected because the law does not allow it.  The land will be returned subject to the law.  And, the important thing here to note is that the law in this respect requires amendment.  I understand that Committees have been set up, studying this matter and their recommendations will be brought before this House to consider the whole question of land tenure -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Point of order from hon. Moses Ali.

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  Mr. Chairman, I want to know whether it is in order for the Attorney General to continue winding up without commenting on the information we have that compensation was paid to the tune of 250,000 pounds.  And this information was revealed by hon. Lt. Col. Serwanga Lwanga in this House, and he said, he has the list.  So, as we are trying to correct the past mistakes we should do it in transparency.  The Attorney General should tell us, was there compensation at all?  If so, for what property?  And if so what are we going to do with this property if now we are returning, what is going to happen with the 250,000 pounds that was belonging to the taxpayers?  This, I think -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Moses Ali, that is a question and not a point of order.

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  I am asking whether it is in order, Mr. Chairman.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  It is not in order.  Continue hon. member.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja):  I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me to proceed and I will do so.  I am not aware of any compensation that was paid to the Kabaka of Buganda.  We are talking about returning properties to the Kabaka of Buganda.  I am not aware of any pounds that were returned or paid to the Kabaka of Buganda or to the former Kingdom of Buganda and if anybody has got information on the matter, it will be considered during further negotiations.  That is all I can say about it.

Just one brief word about hon. Bitamazire.  This law, he wants this government to assume liability for the acts or for the brutality carried out by the Amin’s Government, Obote Government, Tito Government.  If that were so, it would mean that the taxpayers of Uganda whom he wants to protect would be paying money to pay compensation in respect of that.  Now, I do not think that is right and I think that the amendment to the legal Notice which provided for immunity to the Government from liability in that respect, in respect of activities carried out by those brutal Governments was right.  Mr. chairman, since we want to get on, I really do not think that there is anything more I need to comment upon and, with those words, I beg to move that the Bill be read a Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Bill read a Second Time).

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE TRADITIONAL RULERS (RESTITUTION OF ASSETS AND PROPERTIES) BILL, 1993

(Clause 1 agreed to).

(Clause 2 agreed to).

Clause 3

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I stand to make one simple amendment just to give effect to our laws and bring simplicity to these Rulers.  I would like to add the following after sub-Section (3), sub-Section (2) which should read as follows ‘Notwithstanding anything in this Statute, all regalia shall vest in the Traditional Ruler in accordance with sub-Section (1) of this Section without the need for negotiations’. 

 One of the reasons why I would like this is that I understand that on the 24th there will be coronation of the Kabaka and when I look at the Schedule, I see that none of those regalia is provided for and since I see that in Section 1, in Section 3(1) you are restoring all assets and properties previously confiscated by the State, I would like to give effect to this so that if there is any regalia they would like to have, there is no problem with it.  If we do not do that it will not be a good thing and also there could be other things, I think the important thing for us to ensure in the negotiations - I would like to make sure that in this House we make sure that negotiations take place about land and buildings of the former Rulers, those who have not yet negotiated but the other things are inconsequential and are not of concern to this House.  Because in some parts we have heard some friends of ours from Kasese, they would like to distribute some properties, some buildings.  But I think in as far as regalia is concerned, I do not think this House is interested in somebody’s shirt or trouser or shoes or something like that.  Thank you.  

MR. KAIJUKA:  Mr. Chairman, with your permission, if I may make a comment on hon. Karuhanga’s suggestion, on the face of it, it looks a straight forward amendment and I think in case of Buganda, the way negotiations have taken place, I see no problems but in cases where you are talking about assets including the regalia in other places, I think we should not try and do a job that we are not prepared for.  I suggest that we add that amendment to the Schedule that is at the back and deal with Buganda case and leave the rest of the problems that are involved in other areas to the Negotiating Teams because I can assure you that I think in the interest of respect for each other, I believe these areas will come to some amicable negotiations vis-a-vis these assets but the minute we try to smuggle in some items at this stage, we may cause more problems than we are trying to solve.  Therefore with the approval or agreement of hon. Karuhanga I hope that at some appropriate stage we could take care of that problem appropriately.  I thank you.

MR. KAYONDE:  I support hon. Karuhanga’s amendment.  We have really agreed in principle that one of the fundamental reasons why we are re-instating these assets and properties is that culture is going to be enhanced by the return of these things and regalias are part and parcel of the culture.  For instance, you saw on the paper that the Ssabasajja of Buganda was inaugurating the drums.  Now, these are very important things as far as the Baganda culture is concerned and I would expect also regalias of others to be returned.  So we should separate properties, assets and regalia and regalia should not really be conditional.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I beg to support hon. Karuhanga’s amendment and I just want the House to share a little experience I had.  Some of us who are broadly Ugandans by birth because some of us cannot trace exactly where our blood originates, we have accepted that we should be nationalists although we have our tribes.  I went to the Museum to look for what was popularly known as Nakayima.  This was a wonderful portrait during colonial times depicting the Kingdom of Bunyoro and the families that - members of the royal family of Bunyoro and this Nakayima was one of it and some could trace how Mubende and the tree called Nakayima there came to be where it is.  Mr. Chairman, when I went there they told me - because I think I come from Nakayima’s blood, I was tracing my roots - they told me Nakayima had been taken away -(Interruption)- Yes, you go to the Museum they say Nakayima had been taken away.  

So, I think, if we have, as a principle, said we give those things which are material, if we have been concerned about Bulange which is so valuable, now what about such small things like the drums, Nakayima and so on?  Let the people who have value for them keep them because to them they may not only mean ordinary skill, a drum you take just to be a drum by a Museum worker this drum may mean a lot of importance to the drum makers.  Having said that, let us go free, why do we hold on tiny things that are of less importance to the Parliament here when we have agreed on the principles?  I think I would not envisage a negotiating team to negotiate for Nakayima’s return to Mubende or to Bunyoro.  I think we should let this go because it does not prejudice negotiations in other areas but those negotiations should be of material things but not small cultural symbols and I think the duty of Parliament is so taxed that we should not involve ourselves with the mats, the mikeeka, and so on.  I think these automatically should revert to the cultural owners.  I thank you, Sir.       
                                                                                                                   
MR. ELYAU:  Mr. Chairman, I would just want to find out from the Minister who was on a negotiating team why that item was not included here on the Schedule?

MR. KINTU MUSOKE:  Mr. Chairman, when we were negotiating for these things and we were drawing up a list we tried to establish the whereabouts of the regalia of the Traditional Ruler of Buganda, we were not able to establish them and we did not want to include these things that were not in existence.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja):  Information.  Mr. Chairman. In addition to that, I was asked as Attorney General about those matters and I gave the advice that you see, Sir, they were negotiating in terms of the Gulu Resolution, now the Gulu Resolution spoke about cultural sites and in my opinion a regalia is not a site so I said the reason why they were not included is because they are not sites.

MR. BARIGYE:  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for giving me the Floor.  I am very grateful to the Learned Attorney General for his information because this shows exactly why the regalia should be returned automatically as proposed by hon. Karuhanga.  The negotiations are actually needed with respect to land and buildings where all the various deferring opinions have been expressed.  While I have the Floor, let me clarify one point. Recently one of the local newspapers misrepresented that I went to the Museum to collect my drums. (Laughter)  

I want to assure you that I am not a mad man and I know the law, I never did such a thing and this was purely a fabrication of those responsible for that newspaper for reasons best known to them.  I went to the Museum at the request of Government officials who took me there to identify what regalia was there and on the first occasion some officials of the Museum deliberately tried to hide some of the regalia and even lie to us but on the second occasion, they eventually brought out everything and this adds to the urgency of this matter being resolved as proposed by hon. Karuhanga since there is no controversy about items like drums and shoes and what have you.  Land and buildings should be negotiated for; while these things are regarded as triviality for some people, some of these drums, the drums, for instance, of Ankole or rather what has been called my drums, those drums are over 700 years old and they are decaying and getting ruined in the Uganda Museum, in stores where they are in dust, my family looked after those drums for 700 years. When they were taken, they were in perfect condition and now some people suggest that the Museum can look after them properly, they are decaying so they should be handed over without further ado.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja):  Mr. Chairman, the amendment reads; ‘Notwithstanding anything in this Statute, all regalia shall vest in the Traditional Ruler’.  Now, if hon. Karuhanga were to agree that we add all regalia ‘where it exists’.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I really have no objection about the Attorney General’s amendment.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja):  Subject to that amendment, this amendment would be acceptable to me. (Applause)

(Question on the amendment put and agreed to).

Clause 3 sub-Section 4

MRS. BWAMBALE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two amendments.  The first one, I am one of those people who pressurised that the word ‘may’ was a weak one and ‘shall’ in that Clause is stronger.  I wish to move an amendment that ‘Clause 3 sub-Section 4 to read like this; ‘In the case of the Traditional Rulers, other than the Traditional Ruler.’ (Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  We have already finished that one.  We are on Clause 4.

MRS. BWAMBALE:  Yes, that is the Clause.  Clause 3(4)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Yes, move it.

MRS. BWAMBALE:  Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman for that acceptance.  It is very important that we strengthen Clause 3(4) by substituting the word ‘shall’ for the word ‘may’ in the second sentence in that sub-Section.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Mr. Chairman, I stand to oppose the amendment on the ground that you cannot force the government even where there is no need to negotiate, where there is no conflict why should we or why must there be ‘shall’.  So, I think the whole thing should be done in the spirit that we have processed everything here.  I do not see where, if there is need, for the government to take the interest of the people why it should not negotiate but where there is no need on grounds of some of the Clauses that we have passed here there might be no need to negotiate.  So, I think ‘may’ is a good legal term.

MRS. MATEMBE:  Mr. Chairman, thank you.  I wish to support hon. Bwambale because the operative word ‘shall’ puts an obligation on the government once requested to do it but if you say ‘may’ and somebody like hon. John Barigye requests for negotiation, then the government may or may not and yet if you say ‘shall’, once he requests for negotiations the government is duty bound to do that.  The reason why I want to support that is we should not appear to show inequality in these sensitive matters because if you say ‘may’ it means the government is not putting equal weight or emphasis on the other areas which want to get ebyaffe.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja):  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I accept the amendment.

(Question on the amendment put and agreed to).

MRS. BWAMBALE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me for a second amendment in this same Clause, Clause 3 sub-Section 4 where it gives the mandate for the government to hold negotiations with a Traditional Ruler concerned with a view of returning the assets.  I would like to insert that negotiations will not only be with the Traditional Rulers, in Buganda it is okay because it is only government which confiscated their properties but in other areas where it is those people who confiscated the properties, and in view of what the hon. Karusoke brought up to say that people in his constituency -I took it very seriously - may want to opt for going to Toro Kingdom, we should - I am requesting humbly –(Interruption) 

MR KARUSOKE:  Point of order.  Is it in order, Mr. Chairman, for hon. Bwambale to force words into my mouth that I never spoke?  I never in any way suggested that the people in my constituency would like to go back to Toro.  I never said that at all and is she in order to say so that I did say so?

THE CHAIRMAN:  It is not in order.  Proceed hon. Bwambale.

MRS. BWAMBALE:  Thank you very much.  I used the word ‘might’.  Some subjects might want to be involved.  I therefore propose that it is not only the Traditional Rulers but inserting this sentence after that ‘in case of controversies subjects of a Traditional Ruler may be represented in the negotiating team’. We were not given the time to submit our written amendments because the programme and the Order Paper came out today and not very early today that this Bill would be wound up.  It is in that spirit that I am moving this amendment and requesting the Attorney General to give it a consideration.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja):  Mr. Chairman, I do not think I have quite understood the meaning and the purpose of the amendment and because of that, I am not able to accept it.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay, repeat your amendment that you want to put forward.

MRS. BWAMBALE:  The subject of my amendment is to include the affected people in the negotiating team as it is here.  It is only the Government and the Traditional Rulers Team that can be engaged in the negotiations.  I hope it is clear now.

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  Mr. Chairman, I stand to oppose the amendment purely on the ground that the Traditional Ruler’s Team will surely consist of his subjects.  So, why repeat what is obvious?  I do not see the need for inserting that because if you say this subject should be included in the thing, surely the thing will consist of Traditional Rulers.  What will that really mean?

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja):  Mr. Chairman, I wish you could allow my Colleagues to help me.

((Clause 3 as amended negatived).

(Clause 4 put and agreed to).

(The Schedule put and agreed to).

(The Title put and agreed to).


MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja):  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to).


REPORT STAGE

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to report that a Bill entitled: ‘The Traditional Rulers (Restitution of Assets and Properties) Bill 1993’, was considered by the Committee of the whole House and was passed with one amendment.

ADOPTION OF THE REPORT

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja):  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to).

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja):  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I beg to move that the Bill entitled ‘The “Traditional Rulers (Restitution of Assets and Properties) Bill 1993 be read a Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Title settled and Bill passed).

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN:  And with that, we have come to the end of today’s sitting, we adjourn until Tuesday next week at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.

(The Council rose at 5.15 p.m. and adjourned until 2.30 p.m. on Tuesday 20th July, 1993).

