Tuesday 17th July, 2001

Parliament met at 11.15 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have delayed in starting this business for almost an hour, but this was not intended. We had a problem on how to handle some of the business on the Order Paper. As you may see, there is an item for reading certain Bills for the First Reading. We had to find a way of doing it. 

As you know, currently there is a Minister of Finance but the Minister of Finance is not a Member of this Parliament because he has not taken the oath to be an ex-officio Member of Parliament. But there was a business to be handled by the Minister of Finance. So we have been working out how to do it and we have found a solution. But I want to assure you that from today, when we adjourn the House to 10.00a.m or to 2.00p.m, we shall be starting business at that time.  

With regard to the Order Paper, we shall not be doing this on ad-hoc basis daily, but on every Thursday, you will be told how we shall transact business in the following week so that this matter is solved.

Hon. Members, last time I talked briefly about your welfare; that I was aware of the circumstances in which you are after those tough campaigns that led you here. I made some explanation, which apparently might not have been understood by some Members. I want to repeat that, definitely, Parliament is concerned about your welfare, especially that aspect which I need not mention. But you know when we started Parliament, it was the time when the new Financial Year was starting. And when a new Financial Year starts, there are certain financial procedures that are not only taken by Parliament itself, but also the other organs of Government, to start operating. 

For instance, the Accounting Officer has to be appointed. Although we have the Clerk to Parliament who normally acts as an Accounting Officer, but there must be, on an annual basis, a formal appointment of him. Certain accounts have to be opened in Bank of Uganda and many other things. But I have been assured that this week the needful will be done and, therefore, your case will be settled.

Also, there are certain bodies which are charged with the task of looking after your welfare; one of them is the Parliamentary Commission. This is a statutory body, which was set up by an Act of Parliament. Currently, it has a skeleton membership in that other Members who must constitute it have not yet been appointed. But soon we shall be sitting with the skeleton membership to start discussing some of the issues and then subsequently you will participate in an exercise of constituting the Membership that is lacking. 
Another body that is also charged with your welfare is the Business and Welfare Committee, which you have not constituted yet. But I assure you that your welfare will be looked after so that you can concentrate on your work. 

You do not have offices, although we have now regained our premises. The Minister of Justice and the Attorney General’s Chambers have moved from the wing they were occupying. That means we have more space for you, though we cannot utilise this space currently because of lack of furniture. But again, we are looking into ways of acquiring furniture so that we can have offices to operate from. Thank you.

DR.OKULO EPAK (Oyam South, Apac): Mr. Speaker, may I also congratulate you and your Deputy upon your election to that position since I am speaking for the first time. I also congratulate all of us for the hard struggle that has brought us back to this august House.

If I heard you correctly, you said there is a skeleton staff or officials of the Commission. Does that imply that Members of Parliament who were appointed to that Commission who have come back are validly able to continue in that position, or should we assume that that position expires with the previous Parliament, and therefore these people will not be able to continue as Commissioners or you meant the typical staff of the Commission in the Civil Service? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think you can really find out when Members cease to be Members of the Commission. Apparently, you are referring to the Backbencher Commissioners, but the Act itself is clear about that. There are some Members who in their own right are Members of this Commission. The Speaker is the Chairman of that Commission, the Clerk is there, and the Prime Minister is a Member. So, there are some Members of this Commission. But as I said, very soon you will be able to fill the vacancies that may exist on that Commission.

DR.LYOMOKI (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. First of all, I want also to congratulate you on your election to that office and also my Colleagues for being elected to this House.
My clarification actually follows the same line of your argument that, in the course of this week something will be done concerning our welfare. But constitutionally we have not yet determined the welfare and terms of this House. Shall we assume that the terms of the previous Parliament will be the ones to be utilised in determining the welfare for this House? What is going to be used in calculating our emoluments? I think the first point would have been to discuss it and pass a Resolution and then we determine our emoluments basing on what is due to us. I am aware there was a lot of constraints and weaknesses in the terms of the 6th Parliament, so I just wanted the clarification on that.

THE SPEAKER: Is my understanding of your observation that you want to reduce? (Laughter) I do not know, hon. Members, whether really the first business of this House should be our emoluments. I do not know what you told the electorate, but I think as far as the emoluments of the Members of Parliament is concerned, this is in the Constitution and the Constitution was invoked and the 6th Parliament determined the emoluments of Members of Parliament. But of course this was without prejudice to further revisiting of the issue. But as of now, we know what you should get but should you think that we reduce or increase, definitely, you will be given opportunity to deal with that issue. But for the time being we are using those emoluments that were determined by the 6th Parliament under the Constitution.

MR. LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. On a slightly different note, I was supposed to move a motion on a matter of public importance with reference to our Rules of Procedure 42(1). But when I look at the Order Paper, I am overwhelmed by the activities, which are bound to go on. Can I take it that tomorrow I will get priority consideration to move the same?

THE SPEAKER: I think what I should do is to advise you to read in detail the particular rule you have mentioned, then do the preliminaries and then we shall see.

MR. SEBALU (Busiro East, Wakiso): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I was also supposed to move a motion in relation to the Rules of Procedure with respect to the Committees but I need to be clarified. When I look at the Order Paper, I need to seek your indulgence and be advised how best I could proceed.

THE SPEAKER: You mean you took the motion to the Clerk?

MR. SEBALU: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: When?

MR. SEBALU: This morning.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay

MR. SEBALU: This morning we handled the details but it was even put in last week.

THE SPEAKER: What I can advise you, hon. Sebalu, is that if you have an urgent motion and because of time, because we have just started, there are rules that will assist you to move your motion at an appropriate time when we come at an appropriate item on the Order Paper. That is, if you have an urgent motion now to move and you think it is important to move it, you will invoke rule (8) to suspend certain need for giving sufficient notice. Then we shall proceed and then you move your motion. I have just looked at it. I think it is dealing with the committees that we are going to constitute. So when we reach that item, you may move that we make certain Amendments so as to cater for what you want to do.  

MR. ODIT (Erute South, Lira): Mr. Speaker, my concern is on the Bills being presented for the First Reading. You indicated that it took you about one hour to take a decision on how to handle the matter. Fortunately, you have now got a temporary solution. Can we get assurance that the solution you have taken will not give us some problem later on?

THE SPEAKER: I am sure of that.

MR. AACHILLA (Jie County, Kotido): Mr. Speaker, I have looked at the Order Paper, item (i) and I have tried to tally it with the Bills that I have in front of me but I have found out that some of these Bills are not available. Can I know whether we are going to have that or we shall have to leave others behind?  Thank you Mr. Speaker.
THE SPEAKER: I have no reason to disagree with you but should that arise, it will be remedied by availing you with the necessary copies.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

CUSTOMS TARIFF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Nsibambi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Customs Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2001”  be read for the First Time.

MR. BAGUMA ISOKE: Seconded.
   
THE SPEAKER: Well, though we do not have the appropriate committee yet, when we constitute that relevant committee, it will handle that Bill and report to the House as soon as possible.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE EXCISE TARRIF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof.A.Nsibambi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that, The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2001 be read for the First Time.

THE SPEAKER: Again this Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee dealing with Finance for studying and reporting to the House.  

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof.A.Nsibambi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2001 be read for the First Time.

THE SPEAKER: Again this Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee dealing with Finance.  
BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof.A.Nsibambi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that The Customs Management (Amendment) Bill, 2001 be read for the First Time.

THE SPEAKER: Again this Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee on Finance. 

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE FINANCE BILL, 2001

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof.A.Nsibambi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that The Finance Bill, 2001 be read for the First Time.

THE SPEAKER: Again this Bill is committed to the appropriate committee to handle and report to the House.  Yes, hon. Kazoora, you wanted to say something?

MAJ. KAZOORA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I just wanted to congratulate the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister for successfully moving these motions proving the point that we can do well with one Chief Minister. Thank you Mr. Speaker - (Laughter).  

MR. ERESU ELYANU: Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. These Amendment Bills have been tabled but I think it would be important that Members are given copies of the original Acts so that we can proceed. Otherwise, we have the amendments but we do not know what we are going to amend. May I know, by way of procedure, whether there is an arrangement in place so that we are kept abreast? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I will consult the Clerk to see how this can be done, and you will be advised.

FILLING OF VACANCIES ON THE APPOINTMENTS COMMITTEE

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you are aware that some time, I think last week, we constituted the Appointments Committee but it appears a certain district, I think it is Hoima, was not able to submit a name for this Appointments Committee.  I hope you have now dealt with the matter.

MS. BYENKYA BEATRICE (Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We did sit down and we came to the consensus that it should be Abwooli Kyahurwenda, Member of Parliament for Buhaguzi.

THE SPEAKER: That is the name that has been submitted to represent Hoima on the Appointments Committee. I will now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

CONSTITUTION OF SESSIONAL COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENT

MR. AWORI (Samia-Bugwe North, Busia): Mr. Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity, although we should be going on to the next item. You may have seen in the Press yesterday and today that anxiety is building up among the incumbents - (Laughter)- and as a Member on the Appointments Committee, I have been under tremendous pressure from people lobbying and trying to –(Laughter and Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Let him make his point and then you can seek for clarification.

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, it may sound like a laughing matter but definitely, there are people in this House who are very anxious. As a veteran Member of the Appointments Committee, and most likely a permanent Member until the end of the House, I would like you to tell this House the probable date so that people cannot start depleting our pharmaceutical houses of sleeping pills -(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, actually, other than approving the nominations made by the President, Parliament has nothing to do with the list. What I can only say is that when we adjourn today, I shall call upon Members of the Appointments Committee to deliberate on this and find a solution.

MS. BAKOKO BAKORU: Mr. Speaker, I was going to seek clarification from hon. Awori but since you said I was not supposed to, I did not, but I think I will now seek that clarification. It seems hon. Awori is one of those who are in the anxiety circle. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR. NKUUHE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank hon. Aggrey Awori for his concern but I thought that he had a pharmacy and was selling drugs. So it would be in his interest for continued anxiety so that people continue to make him richer.

MR.BITANGARO SAMUEL (Bufumbira South, Kisoro): Mr. Speaker, I would like to move a motion under rule 44(d) of the Rules of Procedure of this House. I am seeking the indulgence of this House to dispense with the provisions of rule 39.  Thereafter, I will seek your consent under rule 8 of the Rules of Procedure, to suspend rule 51(1). This is to enable me move a motion to amend rule 121 (1), which relates to the composition of the Members of the Standing Committees. I would like to substitute the word “fifteen” for “seventeen”.  

THE SPEAKER: Is your motion for suspending the Rules so that you do not give notice, seconded?

MR. WAPAKABULO: Yes, I second it.

THE SPEAKER: There is a motion to suspend the rule requiring notice before you move a motion, and this motion has been seconded. Could you justify why you want to suspend this rule?

MR. BITANGARO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For one to be able to amend the Rules of Procedure, you do not have to give notice under rule 44 - (Interruption). 

THE SPEAKER: Why are you asking us to suspend the rules that require notice? That is what I am asking. After that, you will move to the motion on increasing the number. I think that is how we should proceed. This means we have two motions, one is to suspend and then the other is your motion.  

MR. BITANGARO: Mr. Speaker, I would like to seek the indulgence of this House to suspend rule 51. I am seeking to suspend this rule to enable me change the composition of a Standing Committee from fifteen members to seventeen.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think the policy behind this motion is that the House is presently trying to constitute the Committees whose numbers were set by the Rules but he wants to increase the membership to a certain number, and that is why he is moving that we amend the rule. We had ceased on that Business.  I think that is what he is saying.

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the mover of the motion.  What is the hurry?  Why should we have to suspend the rule instead of following the normal procedure?  What is the urgency of increasing the number from fifteen to seventeen, and all other motions subsequent to that suspension of the rule?  We must have strong reasons to start meddling with our rules otherwise it becomes a normal exercise that anytime you want to do something, you just say suspend and you proceed!  Then what is the purpose of that rule if it can be suspended at will?  I think the hon. Member should satisfy us t we need to suspend that rule in order for him to proceed to move a motion without notice.  I thank you.

DR. LYOMOKI: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  The committees that we are going to constitute are Sessional Committees and the membership for this committee is twenty- five. It is only the standing committees that have a membership of fifteen.  So I wanted clarification from the Member who is trying to move the motion because we have not yet constituted the standing committees whose membership is fifteen. What we are going to constitute now is the Sessional Committees whose membership is twenty-five.  So I wanted that clarification, Mr. Speaker.

MR. BITANGARO: Mr. Speaker, I am aware that the next item on the agenda is “Formation of Sessional Committees” but for the amendment of Rules of Procedure, you can do it without notice. And because we are about to form the standing committees, that is why I moved this motion.

MR. WAPAKABULO: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I think the justification the Member is looking for is that when we determined membership of standing committees other than the two which are excepted under rule 121 to be fifteen, the size and membership of this House was at two hundred and seventy two Members.  But there has been a revision in membership upwards as a result of the creation of new districts hence the increase in other membership. The justification is that there was an adjustment in the membership of the standing committees to take account of the increased membership. Now since we are about to embark on the exercise of setting up the Committee on the Economy as a standing committee and other standing committees that are not excepted, there is justification for an increase in membership from fifteen to seventeen.   That is why I seconded this motion. I thank you. 

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Speaker I am not asking justification for increasing the number; that is the next step.  I am saying, why do we have to suspend rule 51?  Why do we have to move under rule 8?  Don’t we have enough time to move the Amendment in accordance with our rules, that is, to move a motion with notice? We are beginning to misuse this rule on suspension.  I am surprised that the prime supporter of this should be the hon. Wapakabulo, that we just go on suspending it at will whenever we feel like doing anything!  We have a number of days! The rules say “give notice for two or three days”.   We can do that.

MR. WAPAKABULO: Thank you and I am surprised that Oyam South is surprised because really, we are not being unconstitutional or outside the rules. My understanding is that this House must move with expedition in considering the budget and other matters related to the economy and my understanding is that we are actually behind schedule in relation to the Budget Act.  So to put in place a committee which should begin with expedition, it is that expedition which justifies the move to suspend so that we have this body present and we proceed to consider the financial and budgetary provisions and requirements of the country.  That is why I am supporting this and there should be no surprise or shock in Oyam South.  Thank you.

MR. MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Mr. Speaker, at the beginning of this meeting of this Parliament, we decided temporarily to use the rules of the House that are in place. I think we agreed that once the Sessional committees and the Standing committees are in place, one of the first exercises would be to review the rules in accordance with the new Rules of Procedure.   I thought that would be the right time for any hon. Member to go to the committees and make any proposals he wishes on the rules.    To me, I am not worried whether we are going to discuss the Budget immediately and therefore we need more people.  The fifteen people can still discuss the Budget and our rules permit any interested hon. Member to participate in the deliberations of a committee so that their inputs can be taken into account.  Therefore, I do not see any justification for suspending rules in order to increase the number of membership of a standing committee from fifteen to seventeen.  So, Mr. Speaker, for me I oppose the motion.  Thank you.

MR. KATUNTU (Bugweri county, Iganga): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I stand here to oppose the motion. These rules were made for a purpose.  I am very uncomfortable by the sort of precedent and the trend this House is degenerating into. Every small thing, we suspend the rules as if these rules were not made for any purpose!  We are setting dangerous precedents that even where there is no need you suspend the rules.  Why the hurry?  I do not want this 7th Parliament to suffer the hangover of the 6th Parliament.  There is a lot of ‘we suspend the rules’ because this is not the first time – (Interruption)

MR. LWANGA: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  The clarification I seek is on the hangover issue of the 6th Parliament.  Will you please clarify what hangover you are referring to?  Thank you.

MR. KATUNTU: I do not know whether hon. Lwanga needed a clarification because it was very clear.  You know the history of the 6th Parliament is on record.  I have been reading the Hansard. There was suspension of the rules even when it was not necessary.   That is what I am referring to. 

MS. NAMUSOKE KYAMA: Mr. Speaker, I wish to inform the hon. Member that the Mover of the motion was never in the 6th Parliament.  So definitely there cannot be a hangover.  Thank you.

MR.KATUNTU: Thank you for the information. The Seconder was in the 6th Parliament. The point I was trying to summarise is, let us not set a dangerous precedent where at each and every motion we suspend the rules. These rules were made for a purpose; let us take our time to internalise the type of Amendment, its advantages and get the opportunity to think about it before it is rushed to the Floor. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.MUZOORA KABAREEBE (Rwampara county, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am speaking for the first time in this House. I therefore take this opportunity to congratulate you and your Deputy for having been elected to that seat. I also take the same opportunity to congratulate the Vice President, the Prime Minister together with the Attorney General. 

What is causing this scenario is that the nature of our operation as we talk now is suspicious and pending. The Member is therefore right to call for the suspension of the rules because it is constitutional and acceptable by the Rules of Procedure. The Member may not be sure when the Order Paper will come tomorrow saying that the standing committee should be compressed when actually there is a requirement of three days’ notice. I think he is trying to do it a little earlier so that he is not caught unawares. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Wakikona for Manjiya makes a contribution, it is clear that we have a rule that allows suspension of the Rules of Procedure. Each case has to be taken on its own merit. So what one may question when a Member moves that motion is that there is no justification for reasons he is giving? Otherwise, any Member is free to invoke that rule. Therefore, he cannot be accused of bringing a hunger-over and so forth when the rules provide so. 
In this circumstance, I understand there are forms outside for Members to fill in to be Members of these committees and the number that is currently provided for in the rule is fifteen. I think the Member is saying instead of repeating this exercise because the number may prevent other Members putting their names, the number should be increased. Because they may think that the number of fifteen has been reached, therefore why do I attempt? You have to see whether there are merits in this proposal or no merits. Is it urgent or not? If it is not; then you will say no. If it is urgent, then you will say yes. Otherwise, there is nothing wrong with somebody invoking rules that are provided for in the Rules of Procedure.

MR.WAKIKONA DAVID (Manjiya County, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I also join others to congratulate you on your election to that big post of number three in the country. I am opposing the increase in number just based on technicalities. From what we have read under the able instructor of the Member for Mbale municipality, a private motion should not mean an increase on Government expenditure. I understand there is a small allowance paid to the permanent standing Members of the committee and under rule 93, that means an increase on Government expenditure. So that motion should not be moved by hon. Bitangaro.

MR.MUTUMBA: Clarification -(Interruption)

MR.WAKIKONA: I am obliged either to accept or decline. If it were a point of order I would accept. So under that arrangement, I pray that you rule that that motion is incompetent at this time and should not be allowed. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think I will make a clarification on that. Parliament was empowered by the Constitution to make its own Rules of Procedure and to determine rules of the committees. The Executive did not bring the numbers of these committees; it was an inside job. Therefore, if we think we need to increase the number of our Committee members, that can be done and it will not really be contravening Article 93, which I think seems to be in your mind. Otherwise, it would mean that when we want to set up committees and determine their numbers, we would have to ask the Minister of Finance or the Prime Minister to bring the proposal. No, we do it ourselves here. So, I do not think this would contravene Article 93. But if you think it is not urgent now - but why do I not put the question? 

The motion currently under debate is to suspend the rule requiring notice so that the Member can bring his motion then we shall address the motion and pronounce ourselves on it. I put the question.

(Question put and negatived)

MR.SSEBALU MIKE (Busiro East, Mpigi): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. Like other Members before me, I would like to congratulate you and your Deputy upon assuming that high office.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move - I hope my motion will not suffer the same fate; it is along the same lines. I beg to move, by invoking rule 8 to suspend rule 51(1) and 51(3) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to enable me move a motion which seeks to amend rule 117 relating to Standing Committees. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded, proceed.

MR.SEBALU: Mr. Speaker, the reason I seek to suspend the Rules of Procedure is simply because we are in the process of putting up Standing Committees. The list of Standing Committees is already out and yet a number of them have not been included namely, the Budget Committee, which is clearly provided for under the Budget Act and it is a procedural arrangement to have it included so that it can be operationalised. I think if we handle this business expeditiously, it will be in the interest of Parliament to have these committees included so that Members can register on the committees they want to serve on. I find this to be urgent and I beg the indulgence of this House to have them included.  Mr. Speaker, that is my reason.

MR.SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I second the motion. I also thank you very much since this is my first time to be given an opportunity to speak. The reason I support the motion – in fact it rhymes with what my colleague has said. Those Members who will miss out on the other Committees, because fifteen is a small number, will be enabled to go on the newly formed committees like the Budget Committee and the Local Government Committee. In fact we need some of these committees to reach out to other areas in ordinary life. Therefore, that is why I second that motion such that Members who will be left out can fall on the two committees. Thank you Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, if I can come in here, I think the list of Standing Committees is also out but the number of some Standing Committees was set up by the rules when the Sixth Parliament started. Subsequent to passing of these rules, Acts of Parliament were passed.  One is the Budget Act that created a Budget Committee of Parliament. But this was not in the rules.

So, when they put out the list of Standing Committees, they did not put out this particular committee; the same goes for the committee on Local Government Accounts Procedures and so forth. I think that is what he is asking why we do not have them on the list because the Acts themselves created these Standing Committees! I think that is what he is saying.  Can I put the question?

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Proceed with the motion.

MR.SEBALU (Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I beg to move a motion to amend Rule 117 by adding immediately after paragraph (g), the following Standing Committees: (h), The Local Government Accounts Committee and (i), The Budget Committee. Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Do we really need a debate? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: So, this means that another two lists will be required for members to serve on these particular committees.

MR.KIWALABYE (Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to begin by also congratulating you and your Deputy upon your being appointed to steer this House.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move a motion under Rule 8 of the Rules of procedure of Parliament, to enable me to suspend Rule 51(1) and Rule 51(3) of the Rules of Procedure to enable me move a motion to amend Rule 118(1)(b), (c), (d), (f), (g) and (j) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. Mr. Speaker I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by Member for Wakiso District but what do you want to do? 

MR. KIWALABYE: Mr. Speaker, we are in the process of constituting Sessional committees but as we all remember, we adopted rules of Parliament which pertain to the Sixth Parliament, well knowing that that was a temporary procedure pending our reading, study and internalizing the Rules of Procedure as amended by the appropriate committee of the Sixth Parliament.  

When I went through the Rules of Procedure as amended by that appropriate committee of the Sixth Parliament, I found that these Sessional Committees were restructured by that committee and I thought that since we are now in the process of appointing Members to this Sessional committee, it would be appropriate at this particular time to avoid a repetition of the exercise by adopting the restructured Sessional committees at this stage.  That is why I seek to amend Rule 51(1) and 51(3) so that we can appoint the sessional committees on the new restructured form, Mr. Speaker.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Although the problem is as raised by hon. Aggrey Awori, Government was restructured, that was last time. We do not know what Government we shall have tomorrow or the other day; whether they shall keep the same Ministries or not. Do you not think that maybe it is advisable to wait to see what happens, because the President is going to form a Government?  We do not know whether he is going to follow the old Government or not. We may be forced after one day or two to change again. Do you not think that we can wait for this?  I do not know, but the motion is that we suspend the rule to cater for -(Interruption).

MR. KIWALABYE: Mr. Speaker, in accordance to what you have explained, I beg to withdraw the motion.
MR. ERESU: Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure of this House. The rate at which we are suspending rules makes me feel that it would have been better for us to spend some time to scrutinize our rules, both the old Rules of Procedure and the Interim Rules of Procedure, so that we really come up with Rules of Procedure for the Seventh Parliament.

At this rate, we shall waste a lot of our valuable time suspending. May I, Mr. Speaker, by way of procedure, ask you within which time we could probably spend time to pass our own Rules of Procedure for this House?  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I have read the Draft Rules of the Seventh Parliament. Even that rule of suspending those rules is there. Do you foresee that when we pass those rules we shall never suspend the rules?  This is to cater for circumstances of the case. Since really you have the freedom, because you have seen there was a motion to suspend the rule and the House rejected it, so what do you fear?  These people are able to decide when to suspend and when not to suspend. Proceed.

CONSTITUTION OF SESSIONAL COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: Now we are going to approve the names as listed on -(Interruption).

DR. NKUUHE: Mr. Speaker, I seek your guidance, and I would like to take a cue from what you have already said. We are going to constitute Sessional Committees and I have looked at the list of Members on the Committees, and everybody is there. We know that within maybe a week or so, 70 or 60 people will be Ministers and they are already on those lists. Therefore, we shall have to go through the exercise again. Can’t we be patient and constitute these Committees after the President has had his day and selected his Ministers so that we can then select members of these Sessional Committees from those who are not Ministers?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, Parliament is carrying out its work of constituting its Committees. We have nothing to do with what His Excellency the President may do with the Executive. And there is no reason for me to assume that the President is going to nominate his Ministers from Members who are present here. He may nominate them from outside. When he nominates some from here, we shall adjust whatever we shall have done other than tying our hands because the other branch is not carrying out its work.

MR. SEKIKUBO: Mr. Speaker, before we go on with the names, it is my opinion that we get the details of the specialties of those Members because the Sessional Committees we are about to form are technical in nature. I think we would be more informed if we could have the details, the specialization and their levels, et-cetera.  

MR. BAMWANGA: Mr. Speaker, the reason the lists were pinned on the board was to allow Members of Parliament to show interest in certain Committees. By the time they made up their minds, they knew that they were well versed with the area of jurisdiction. So there is no point, at this time, to begin questioning people’s interests in those Committees. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think that is clear. Let us proceed.

MR. ONEK (Lamwo County,Kitgum): I would like to repeat the congratulations to all of us, including the Speaker, the Prime Minister, the Vice President and everybody else. Actually, I am wondering whether to move a motion or to seek amendment of rule 116(2). It states, “The Vice-President or a Minister shall not be a member of a Standing Committee or Sessional Committee; and if a member of any such Committee becomes the Vice-President or a Minister, he or she shall cease to be a member of the Committee.”  

My view is that this will actually rob the Committees of some Members who may have knowledge, but then they are placed in the Executive.

MR. ERESU (Kaberamaido County, Soroti): May I inform the Member holding the Floor that, Committees of Parliament are Committees of Parliament. In other words, Parliament is an arm of Government in its own right, with its own functions and duties. When Parliament forms itself, it does not have to have Members of the Executive included in it. If that happened, it would be a failure in the separation of powers.
MS. ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A few minutes ago, you said that you might not be able to discuss the amendment on the Sessional Committees because we do not know which Ministries will be there. I am now wondering because a few days back, we said that to make work efficient, we needed a Cabinet that is enlarged which would make the House move and have regional balance. Now I am finding it difficult to understand the trend of things when we talk about Sessional Committees. 

Are the Sessional Committees attached to Ministries? If they are attached to Ministries, could you please clarify to me which Ministries will be there tomorrow morning as we proceed to constitute Sessional Committees?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I do not know which Ministries, I am just acting on what has been existing. Should there be need to adjust, we shall adjust but presently we are acting based on the known. We cannot deal with the unknown.  When the unknown is known and requires adjusting or revisiting, then we shall do so.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, I think it will be undemocratic to stifle the views expressed by the Member of Parliament from Soroti. My impression from what she said is that the President of Uganda is coming out with a new Cabinet. Supposing the Ministries earmarked, which are assumed to be attached to those Committees we are going to constitute differ and many of them are new, what happens?

THE SPEAKER: We are meant to adjust to the changed circumstances.

MR. ONEK: Mr. Speaker, actually, the point I was raising is, if one is appointed on the Executive, his contribution to the Sessional Committees should not be obstructed by that separation. That is a proposal. I do not know whether you accept it. I leave it to you.

THE SPEAKER: If one is appointed a Minister, I assume he will be appearing before the appropriate Committee and he will be making an input to their deliberations. Therefore, he will be assisting the Committee. So, the Minister is not prevented from coming to the Committee. He will come to the Committee to justify his policy, his Bills and so forth.
PROF. KAMUNTU (Shema County, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I thought, the whole purpose of excluding Members of the executive from being on Sessional or Standing Committees is to ensure checks and balances between the Legislature and the Executive, and accountability of the Executive to the Parliament.  Therefore, if the Prime Minister or Minister became a Member of the Sessional Committee, he will have overlapped and undermined the spirit under which this provision was made.

I made this remark, let me repeat it.  Your elevation to the highest office of the Speaker was unanimous, there is no one in this House who did not give you that support - we have total confidence.  I am therefore going to ask, if you permit me, to ask the Prime Minister to congratulate you on our behalf because if you complete two hundred and ninety three Members each one congratulating you even for one minute, you will have taken two hundred ninety three minutes, which is almost 5 hours, of messages of congratulations to your highest office, and that is quite a lot of time. All I am saying is that you have total confidence of the House and if any one of us expressed it, he would be expressing the sentiments of everyone and saving time not to repeat it.  

My last comment is a clarification on the motion.  If you look at the substance we are debating, I do appreciate the fact that the whole purpose of requiring notices to be given is to give the opportunity to Members to cross check information on motions being proposed.  Therefore, it makes you better prepared by the time you come to the House because you have been notified. A suspension of Rules of Procedure undermines the effectiveness of Members’ contribution but when it comes to this specific issue of increasing the number of Members from fifteen to seventeen or from any number to this, whether we do it now or we do it when the President has met - the substance is not that significant, it is going to remain the same.  I would in fact agree that these small, small things which are not substantive, and not substantial in content, that we get rid of them right now and move to more substantive business.  Thank you very much.
THE SPEAKER: You see, the wisdom of the Members of Parliament will determine each motion as it comes. Therefore we cannot re-open what we have already determined.  As to what a Member says, really we cannot say we appoint so and so to speak for you, it is up to him.  You have made your point before and you have made it again, and therefore, Members will know it is not necessary but they feel it is necessary because there is no way you can appoint somebody to speak for two hundred and five members.

DR. LUKANGA NDAULA (Army Rep.): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  You have talked about the question of Sessional Committees and Ministers that may be appointed thereafter.  You said you do not know whether they will be outside this House or they will come from this House.  You have said it four times.  I would like to request you, Mr. Speaker, to close this point and I know that you will -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I have, and actually I am proceeding with business on the Order Paper and that is why I am holding this list.  

Hon. Members, I have seen the lists of Membership of various Sessional Committees.  According to our rules, each Member of Parliament other than the Ministers and the Vice President must belong to these Sessional Committees.  I have seen lists and the number of the Sessional Committee according to our rules is twenty-five. I have seen that in certain Committees the number is 16, 20, 18, 27, 24, 25,28,32 and 36 that is okay, there is no problem. Now, how do we proceed with these Committees with numbers in excess of twenty-five members?

MR. BAMWANGA:  Mr. Speaker, you can now see that it was only necessary to increase the numbers of the Standing Committee from fifteen to seventeen. We have not been able to fill the numbers of Sessional Committees and therefore it would appear that Members are still not yet decided or even prepared.  So, I propose that the list be pinned on the board so that those people who are beyond twenty-five members can make some kind of horizontal adjustment by going to other Committees and those who have actually not filled up to twenty-five can also make up their minds to fill those vacancies.  I thank you.

MR. ALINTUMA NSAMBU (Bukoto East, Masaka): Mr. Speaker, what I understood when we were filling in these forms was that the Committees would be filled up according to first come, first serve basis.  So, I just think that any one whose name came later would have to automatically seek other Sessional Committees.  Thank you very much.

MR. AACHILLA (Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the same note as my hon. Friend, you know, when we were filling these forms, we had enough time to consult ourselves and decide on which Sessional Committee to join.   Now, some people seem to have not decided up to now where to belong. That is why we find some Committees have sixteen and others have thirty-two. So we would go by the point that we have the excess number after 25 cut down because those people cannot decide to shift themselves or to go by themselves to other Committees.  Mr. Speaker, if we left more time that Members should now decide, this will delay us and we shall not continue.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

MR. SSEBAGALA (Kawempe North, Kampala): Mr. Speaker, I would like to seek your clarification, maybe there is a problem with the criterion that was used when those names were being typed because as far as I know, some Members who came earlier wrote their names but surprisingly, when the lists came out from the printer, some names had been shifted.  Those who had came first found their names beyond the 25th.  Therefore, I am not so much convinced.

THE SPEAKER: There was rigging?

MR. SSEBAGALA: I cannot call it rigging but especially for the new Members of Parliament, I have been made to understand that the new comers are very active so they came earlier but surprisingly their names were shifted to a point beyond the 25th.

MR. KIBAALE WAMBI (Budadiri East, Sironko): Mr. Speaker, from the point of information coming from the hon. Member from Kawempe North, it appears he is insinuating a bad motive and he is imputing bad practice. Is he in order to think that old Members of this Parliament who came back and the office of the Clerk might have been corrupted to the extent that they changed the names of Members?  Is this Member in order to impute such a bad motive?

THE SPEAKER: He is out of order to impute a bad motive that Members just wanted to take advantage of the new comers. I think he is out of order. But you proceed, other than that statement.

MS. NANSUBUGA (Ntenjeru North, Kayunga): For your information, please honorable Member Kawempe North; even old Members have been shifted.  You know what you call whatever - so it is not new Members as you call it. Thank you.

MR. SSEBAGALA: Thank you hon. Member of Parliament for having really sided with me. Because we must all agree that there was some kind of shifting of names of not only the new comers, but also even the old Members.  Thank you very much.

MRS. CHELANGAT KULANY (Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I also wish to extend my congratulations to you and your Deputy for the high office. I want to inform the House that actually Members have registered themselves to these Sessional Committees because of some peculiar problems they may have with their constituencies. So they want to articulate them there or they want some of these problems to be taken into account. So really, I think we should give Members again time to shift but taking into account that people have peculiar interests in those Sessional Committees

MS. BYAMUKAMA DORA (Mwenge South, Kyenjojo): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I would like to refer to rule 142 Clause (4), which reads that; “The composition of a Sessional Committee shall take into account gender sensitivity.” If it is supposed to take into account gender sensitivity, how will this be done if it is on first come first served basis?

Secondly, when I look at rule 143, it reads says that Sessional Committees shall have certain functions; for example to comment on policy matters, to make appropriate recommendations, to critically examine Bills and monitor performance and so on. Even if Members are interested in a particular Sessional Committee, how will they be able to do this if the basis on which they are appointed to these Committees is on first come basis, and not on a capability basis?  These are my points Mr. Speaker.

MR. DIDI (West Moyo, Moyo): Thank you Mr. Speaker for this opportunity.  I would like to congratulate everybody for having made it here and for those of you who have been elevated.  Mr. Speaker, you have just told us that -(Interruption).

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr. Speaker, I see the hon. Agard Didi proceeding to contribute on the Floor of the House in Sandals, as if he is selling mandazi somewhere down town. Is the hon. Member for Moyo West in order to dress the way he is and addressing you?

THE SPEAKER: If they are sandals he is out of order and I was not informed of the reason, but I have not been able to see. What should happen, is that he should inform the Speaker about his impairment so that he knows about it. But I have no doubt that what the hon.Member has told me is the position, so we proceed. But next time he should inform the Chair.

MR. DIDI: I thank you Mr. Speaker for your protection. I would like to inform my colleagues that in 1975 I was involved in an accident and I have one leg shorter than the other. So I have got surgical shoes. So what may appear to you like something which is against the rules is something recommended medically. But of course I am prepared to accept any ruling from you and to follow the Standing Orders. So thank you very much for that protection.

Coming back to the issue under debate, Mr. Speaker, since we all want to be Members of the Sessional Committees, you have just read the varying numbers where some people registered 14, 15 and 25. And since the House has been expanded to accommodate the motion by hon. Sebalu, where do we now get the total number of the House, minus people appointed Ministers and other positions - about 66 - and just decide the balance with a number of Sessional Committees?  

I did a rough calculation and it comes to something like 28 to 29, so that we all subscribe to 29 Members to each Sessional Committee. Now because people are expected to indicate where they want to serve - because we serve different constituencies, when we come here we are not coming here for an exam, so if somebody wants to be on the Committee on Agriculture, maybe that is something which his constituency cherishes best. This fellow should be allowed on that Committee therefore, on first come first serve basis, and let us give preference to the people who have indicated committees they would like to serve on because this probably takes into account the mission they have or the pledges they have made to their constituencies.

For the excess numbers, we should use the carry-over basis. If the number for a particular committee is reached, we carry over to the next committee. Maybe some other suggestions will come but I believe on that basis, we will be able to get the first 28 or 29 and the balance should be carried over. I thank you.

MR.WADRI KASSIANO (Terego County, Arua): I would like, before I go to the issue on the Floor, to differ very sharply from what hon. Kamuntu said earlier on. I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you upon the elevation to lead this 7th Parliament. I would also like to make a passionate appeal to you. In the last two weeks, many of us, especially, from the western end of the chambers, have stood up time and again - with due respect - it looks like you are more focused on the eastern part of the chambers. Therefore, I beg that in future those of us who are on this side of the wing should also be looked at.

Turning back to the issue on the Floor, I think we need to agree and bear in mind that a Sessional Committee is an arm of the Parliament that should assist the Government Ministries in implementing programs. Therefore, it calls for articulate professional input on the part of the Members of these committees. In which case, therefore, the professional interest of each hon. Member of Parliament as shown by which Sessional Committee he or she wishes to serve on is of paramount importance. 
That also goes further to underscore the attempt that my neighbour hon. Sam Bitangaro made this morning, to move a motion to amend the composition of the various committees. The standing rules stipulate that every Sessional Committee shall be composed of 25 Members. I think the spirit behind the formation of these committees was to invoke full participation of as many people as possible in this august House. And if we go by that, it will mean that by simple arithmetic, as you read out the composition of committees, some Members will be left out and, therefore, there is need for us, at a later time, to rejuvenate the motion that hon. Bitangaro had moved.  

At the same time, as Members had already indicated their interest to serve in the various committees, those interests should be taken into account but where there is opportunity of shifting people, their consent should be sought first because for example, if you took me, a professional social worker, to serve on the army and the military committees, certainly I have very little, if any, to contribute on that line. So, I feel that the opinion of the various Members should be sought if there is need to shift them from one committee to another. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR.NSHIMYE SEBUTULO (Mityana County South, Mubende): Mr. Speaker, since it is my first time to catch your eye, I also wish on behalf of the people of Mityana South to congratulate you and your Deputy on your appointment. On the same note, I also congratulate Her Excellency the Vice President, the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister and the Attorney General and my Colleagues, on their election to this House.

When you put the question after realising that some committees had less than 25 people and others had more than 25, you sought a solution from Members of this House. I suggest that for those who have more than 25 members, a line should be drawn and these lists should be put back on the notice board for Members who are below the line to see where they can transfer. With that we shall need an adjournment and on resumption, if you find that there are still committees with problems, then we can deliberate on only those with problems. 
You might find that on resumption the matter has been settled. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded? 

MR.BAMWANGA: Seconded.  

THE SPEAKER: You have heard that; should we do that? I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: I would now like to adjourn the House until tomorrow, 2.00p.m, but I would like to meet the members of the Appointments Committee at around 3.00p.m to deliberate on some matters. Thank you. The House is adjourned. 

(The House rose at 12.45p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 18th July 2001 at 2.00p.m.)

